 

 

 

Health Effects from Automobile Emissions 
 
The emissions from millions of vehicles add up.  These emissions are byproducts from the 
engine combustion process and from the evaporation of fuel.  Despite the ever-growing number 
of vehicles on the road, studies show that ten to thirty percent of vehicles cause the majority  
of vehicle-related air pollution.  
 
This fact sheet lists some of the air pollutants associated with vehicle emissions.  Because 
exposure to these pollutants can cause serious health problems, the U.S. Environmental 
Protection Agency has established air quality standards to protect our health. 
 
Carbon Monoxide 
Carbon monoxide is a colorless, odorless, poisonous gas emitted from the vehicle's exhaust as a 
result of incomplete combustion.  It interferes with the blood's ability to carry oxygen to the 
brain, heart, and other tissues.  Unborn or newborn children and people with heart disease are in 
greatest danger from this pollutant, but even healthy people can experience headaches, fatigue 
and reduced reflexes due to CO exposure. 
 
Ozone 
Ground-level ozone is the major component in what we know as smog.*  It is not emitted 
directly into the air but is produced in the atmosphere when gases called hydrocarbons combine 
with nitrogen oxide compounds in the presence of sunlight. In the body, ozone reacts with lung 
tissue.  It can inflame and cause harmful changes in breathing passages, decrease the lungs' 
working ability, and cause coughing and chest pains.  Even healthy people are found to be 
sensitive to ozone exposure. 
 
which filters out harmful solar radiation. 
 
Sulfur Dioxide 
Sulfur dioxide is emitted when fuel containing sulfur is burned in diesel engines.  Sulfur dioxide 
exposure constricts air passages, creating problems for people with asthma and for young 
children, whose small lungs need to work harder than adults lungs. 
 
 
 

*Ozone smog at ground level is different from the ozone layer in the upper atmosphere, 

 

Ecology is an equal opportunity employer. 

#00-02-008 

Nitrogen Dioxide 
Nitrogen dioxide and related nitrogen oxides (NOx) are produced when fuel is burned.  These 
compounds contribute to ozone formation and are a health problem themselves.  The effect of 
NOx exposure on the respiratory system is similar to that of ozone and sulfur dioxide. 
 
Lead 
Lead content has been reduced in gasoline.  As a result, there is a significant drop in public 
exposure to outdoor lead pollution.  Lead poisoning can reduce mental ability, damage blood, 
nerves, and organs, and raise blood pressure.  Even small ingestions or inhalations of lead can be 
harmful because lead accumulates in the body. 
 
Particulate Matter 
Particulate matter includes microscopic particles and tiny droplets of liquid.  Because of their 
small size, these particles are not stopped in the nose and upper lungs by the body's natural 
defenses but go deep into the lungs, where they may become trapped and cause irritation. 
Exposure to particulate matter can cause wheezing and similar symptoms in people with asthma 
or sensitive airways.  Particulate matter can serve as a vector for toxic air pollutants (see below). 
 
Toxic Air Pollutants 
Toxic air pollutants such as benzene and formaldehyde are substances from automobile 
emissions that are known to cause or are suspected of causing cancer, genetic mutation, birth 
defects, or other serious illnesses in people even at relatively low levels.  The chemicals can be  
inhaled directly or carried by small particles (dust or lint) into the lungs. 
 
Reducing Risk 
How can we reduce the risk of health problems caused by exposure to vehicle emissions?  Not 
driving is the obvious suggestion, but that isn't always practical.  Instead, carpool, use mass 
transit, bicycle or walk whenever possible.  The fewer vehicles on the highway, the fewer 
pollutants emitted to the air. 
 
Another way to reduce vehicle pollution is by practicing good vehicle maintenance.  Your 
vehicle owner's manual has a suggested maintenance schedule.  Vehicles pollute the least amount 
when they are brand new.  Over time, the emission control systems degrade and pollution 
increases.  Keeping your vehicle well-maintained with regular tune-ups will prolong  
the efficiency of your engine and its emission control systems. 
 
Automobile emissions testing programs are designed to ensure that vehicles are polluting as little 
as possible. 
 

If you have special accommodation needs or require this document in alternative format, please contact 
Tami Dahlgren (360) 4076830 (voice) or (360) 407-6006 (TDD only)

 

