CCyybbeerrsseeccuurriittyy  UUnniitt 
Computer Crime & Intellectual Property Section  
Criminal Division 
U.S. Department of Justice 

 
 
 
 
Best Practices for Victim Response and 
Reporting of Cyber Incidents 

1301 New York Avenue, N.W., 6th Floor, Washington, D.C. 20530 -  CYBERSECURITY.CCIPS@USDOJ.GOV - (202)514-1026  

Version 1.0 (April 2015) 
 

Any  Internet-connected  organization  can  fall  prey  to  a  disruptive  network  intrusion  or 
costly  cyber  attack.    A  quick,  effective  response  to  cyber  incidents  can  prove  critical  to 
minimizing the resulting harm and expediting recovery.  The best time to plan such a response is 
now, before an incident occurs.    

   
This  best  practices  document  was  drafted  by  the  Cybersecurity  Unit  to  assist 
organizations  in  preparing  a  cyber  incident  response  plan  and,  more  generally,  in  preparing  to 
respond  to  a  cyber  incident.    It  reflects  lessons  learned  by  federal  prosecutors  while  handling 
cyber investigations and prosecutions, including information about how cyber criminals tactics 
and tradecraft can thwart recovery.  It also incorporates input from private sector companies that 
have managed cyber incidents.  It was drafted with smaller, less well-resourced organizations in 
mind; however, even larger organizations with more experience in handling cyber incidents may 
benefit from it.   

 
Steps to Take Before a Cyber Intrusion or Attack Occurs 

I.  
 

Having well-established plans and procedures in place for managing and responding to a 
cyber  intrusion  or  attack  is  a  critical  first  step  toward  preparing  an  organization  to  weather  a 
cyber incident.  Such pre-planning can help victim organizations limit damage to their computer 
networks, minimize work stoppages, and maximize the ability of law enforcement to locate and 
apprehend  perpetrators.    Organizations  should  take  the  precautions  outlined  below  before 
learning of a cyber incident affecting their networks.  

 
A.  Identify Your Crown Jewels 

 

Different  organizations  have  different  mission  critical  needs.    For  some  organizations, 
even  a  short-term  disruption  in  their  ability  to  send  or  receive  email  will  have  a  devastating 
impact on their operations; others are able to rely on other means of communication to transact 

 

Page 1 of 15 

business,  but  they  may  suffer  significant  harm  if  certain  intellectual  property  is  stolen.    For 
others still, the ability to guarantee the integrity and security of the data they store and process, 
such as customer information, is vital to their continued operation. 

 
The  expense  and  resources  required  to  protect  a  whole  enterprise  may  force  an 
organization  to  prioritize  its  efforts  and  may  shape  its  incident  response  planning.    Before 
formulating a cyber incident response plan, an organization should first determine which of their 
data,  assets,  and  services  warrants  the  most  protection.    Ensuring  that  protection  of  an 
organizations crown jewels is appropriately prioritized is an important first step to preventing 
a  cyber  intrusion  or  attack  from  causing  catastrophic  harm.    The  Cybersecurity  Framework 
produced  by  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology  (NIST)  provides  excellent 
guidance on risk management planning and policies and merits consideration.1   

 
B.  Have an Actionable Plan in Place Before an Intrusion Occurs 

 

Organizations  should  have  a  plan  in  place  for  handling  computer  intrusions  before  an 
intrusion  occurs.    During  an  intrusion,  an  organizations  management  and  personnel  should  be 
focused  on  containing  the  intrusion,  mitigating  the  harm,  and  collecting  and  preserving  vital 
information  that  will  help  them  assess  the  nature  and  scope  of  the  damage  and  the  potential 
source  of  the  threat.    A  cyber  incident  is  not  the  time  to  be  creating  emergency  procedures  or 
considering for the first time how best to respond.   

 
The  plan  should  be  actionable.    It  should  provide  specific,  concrete  procedures  to 

follow in the event of a cyber incident.  At a minimum, the procedures should address:  

 

  Who  has  lead  responsibility  for  different  elements  of  an  organizations  cyber  incident 
response, from decisions about public communications, to information technology access, 
to implementation of security measures, to resolving legal questions;  

  How to contact critical personnel at any time, day or night;  

  How to proceed if critical personnel is unreachable and who will serve as back-up; 

  What  mission  critical  data,  networks,  or  services  should  be  prioritized  for  the  greatest 

protection;  

  How to preserve data related to the intrusion in a forensically sound manner;  

  What  criteria  will  be  used  to  ascertain  whether  data  owners,  customers,  or  partner 

companies should be notified if their data or data affecting their networks is stolen; and  

  Procedures 

for  notifying 

law  enforcement  and/or  computer 

incident-reporting 

organization.   

                                                
1  The NIST Cybersecurity Framework is available at http://www.nist.gov/cyberframework/upload/cybersecurity-
framework-021214.pdf. 

 

Page 2 of 15 

 
All  personnel  who  have  computer  security  responsibilities  should  have  access  to  and 
familiarity  with  the  plan,  particularly  anyone  who  will  play  a  role  in  making  technical, 
operational,  or  managerial  decisions  during  an  incident.  It  is  important  for  an  organization  to 
institute  rules  that  will  ensure  its  personnel  have  and  maintain  familiarity  with  its  incident 
response plan.  For instance, the procedures for responding to a cyber incident under an incident 
response plan can be integrated into regular personnel training.  The plan may also be ingrained 
through regularly conducted exercises to  ensure  that  it is  up-to-date.  Such exercises should be 
designed  to  verify  that  necessary  lines  of  communication  exist,  that  decision-making  roles  and 
responsibilities are well understood, and that any technology that may be needed during an actual 
incident  is  available  and  likely  to  be  effective.    Deficiencies  and  gaps  identified  during  an 
exercise should be noted for speedy resolution. 

 
Incident response plans may differ depending upon an organizations size, structure, and 
nature of its business.  Similarly, decision-making under a particular incident response plan may 
differ depending upon the nature of a cyber incident.  In any event, institutionalized familiarity 
with  the  organizations  framework  for  addressing  a  cyber  incident  will  expedite  response  time 
and save critical minutes during an incident. 

     
C.  Have Appropriate Technology and Services in Place Before An Intrusion Occurs 

 

Organizations  should  already  have  in  place  or  have  ready  access  to  the  technology  and 
services that they will need to respond to a cyber incident.  Such equipment may include off-site 
data back-up, intrusion detection capabilities, data loss prevention technologies, and devices for 
traffic  filtering  or scrubbing.   An organizations computer servers should  also  be configured to 
conduct  the  logging  necessary  to  identify  a  network  security  incident  and  to  perform  routine 
back-ups of important information.  The requisite technology should already be installed, tested, 
and ready to deploy.  Any required supporting services should either be acquired beforehand or 
be identified and ready for acquisition.    

 
D.  Have Appropriate Authorization in Place to Permit Network Monitoring  

 

Real-time  monitoring  of  an  organizations  own  network  is  typically  lawful  if  prior 
consent for such monitoring is obtained from network users.  For this reason, before an incident 
takes place, an organization should adopt the mechanisms necessary for obtaining user consent to 
monitoring users communications so it can detect and respond to a cyber incident.  One means 
of accomplishing this is through network warnings or banners that greet users who log onto a 
network  and  inform  them  of  how  the  organization  will  collect,  store,  and  use  their 
communications.  A banner can also be installed on the ports through which an intruder is likely 
to access the organizations system.   

 

Page 3 of 15 

 
A banner, however, is not the only means of obtaining legally valid consent.  Computer 
user agreements,  workplace policies, and personnel  training may  also  be used to  obtain  legally 
sufficient  user  consent  to  monitoring.    Organizations  should  obtain  written  acknowledgement 
from their personnel of having signed such agreements or received such training.  Doing so will 
provide an organization  with  ready proof that  they  have met  legal  requirements  for  conducting 
network monitoring.  

 
Any means of obtaining legally sufficient consent should notify users that their use of the 
system  constitutes  consent  to  the  interception  of  their  communications  and  that  the  results  of 
such monitoring may be disclosed to others, including law enforcement.2   If an organization is a 
government entity (e.g., a federal, state, or local agency or a state university) or a private entity 
acting  as  an  instrument  or  agent  of  the  government,  its  actions  may  implicate  the  Fourth 
Amendment.  Consequently,  any notice on  the system of  such an entity  or organization  should 
also inform users of their diminished expectation of privacy for communications on the network.   

 
E.  Ensure Your Legal Counsel is Familiar with Technology and Cyber Incident 

Management to Reduce Response Time During an Incident 

 

Cyber incidents  can raise unique legal  questions.   An organization faced  with  decisions 
about  how  it  interacts  with  government  agents,  the  types  of  preventative  technologies  it  can 
lawfully use, its obligation to report the loss of customer information,  and its potential liability 
for  taking  specific  remedial  measures  (or  failing  to  do  so)  will  benefit  from  obtaining  legal 
guidance from attorneys who are conversant with technology and knowledgeable about relevant 
laws (e.g., the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (18 U.S.C.  1030), electronic surveillance,  and 
communications  privacy  laws).    Legal  counsel  that  is  accustomed  to  addressing  these  types  of 
issues that are often associated with  cyber incidents will be better prepared to provide a victim 
organization with timely, accurate advice.   

 
Many  private  organizations  retain  outside  counsel  who  specialize  in  legal  questions 
associated with data breaches while others find such cyber issues are common enough that they 
have their own cyber-savvy attorneys on staff in their General Counsels offices.  Having ready 
access  to  advice  from  lawyers  well  acquainted  with  cyber  incident  response  can  speed  an 
organizations  decision  making  and  help  ensure  that  a  victim  organizations  incident  response 
activities remain on firm legal footing.    
                                                
2  More guidance on banners, including a model banners, can be found in our manual on searching and seizing 
electronic evidence and in a 2009 legal opinion prepared by the Department of Justices Office of Legal Counsel.  
See Searching and Seizing Computers and Obtaining Electronic Evidence in Criminal Investigations (3d ed. 2009), 
available at http://www.justice.gov/criminal/cybercrime/docs/ssmanual2009.pdf; and Stephen G. Bradbury, Legal 
Issues Relating to the Testing, Use, and Deployment of an Intrusion-Detection System to Protect Unclassified 
Computer Networks in the Executive Branch, 33 Op. Off. Legal Counsel 1 (2009), available at 
http://www.justice.gov/sites/default/files/olc/opinions/2009/01/31/e2-issues.pdf. 

 

Page 4 of 15 

 
F.  Ensure Organization Policies Align with Your Cyber Incident Response Plan 

 

Some preventative and preparatory measures related to incident planning may need to be 
implemented  outside  the  context  of  preparing  a  cyber  incident  response  plan.    For  instance,  an 
organization  should  review  its  personnel  and  human  resource  policies  to  ensure  they  will 
reasonably  minimize  the  risk  of  cyber  incidents,  including  from  insider  threats.    Proper 
personnel and information technology (IT) policies may help prevent a cyber incident in the first 
place.    For  instance,  a  practice  of  promptly  revoking  the  network  credentials  of  terminated 
employeesparticularly system administrators and information technology staffmay prevent a 
subsequent cyber incident from occurring.  Furthermore, reasonable access controls on networks 
may reduce the risk of harmful computer misuse.   

 
G.  Engage with Law Enforcement Before an Incident 
   
Organizations  should  attempt  to  establish  a  relationship  with  their  local  federal  law 
enforcement  offices  long  before  they  suffer  a  cyber  incident.    Having  a  point-of-contact  and  a 
pre-existing relationship with law enforcement will facilitate any subsequent interaction that may 
occur if an organization needs to enlist law enforcements assistance.  It will also help establish 
the trusted relationship that cultivates bi-directional information sharing that is beneficial both to 
potential  victim  organizations  and  to  law  enforcement.    The  principal  federal  law  enforcement 
agencies  responsible  for  investigating  criminal  violations  of  the  federal  Computer  Fraud  and 
Abuse  Act  are  the  Federal  Bureau  of  Investigation  (FBI)  and  the  U.S.  Secret  Service.    Both 
agencies  conduct  regular  outreach  to  private  companies  and  other  organizations  likely  to  be 
targeted  for  intrusions  and  attacks.    Such  outreach  occurs  mostly  through  the  FBIs  Infragard 
chapters and Cyber Task Forces in each of the FBIs 56 field offices, and through the U.S. Secret 
Services Electronic Crimes Task Forces.   

 
H.  Establish Relationships with Cyber Information Sharing Organizations  

 

Defending a network at  all times from  every cyber threat  is  a daunting task.  Access  to 
information  about  new  or  commonly  exploited  vulnerabilities  can  assist  an  organization 
prioritize its security measures.  Information sharing organizations for every sector of the critical 
infrastructure  exist  to  provide  such  information.    Information  Sharing  and  Analysis  Centers 
(ISACs)  have  been  created  in  each  sector  of  the  critical  infrastructure  and  for  key  resources.  
They produce analysis of cyber threat information that is shared within the relevant sector, with 
other sectors, and with the government.  Depending upon the sector, they may also provide other 
cybersecurity  services.    The  government  has  also  encouraged  the  creation  of  new  information 
sharing entities called Information Sharing and Analysis Organizations (ISAOs) to accommodate 
organizations that do not fit within an established sector of the critical infrastructure or that have 

 

Page 5 of 15 

unique  needs.3    ISAOs  are  intended  to  provide  such  organizations  with  the  same  benefits  of 
obtaining cyber threat information and other supporting services that are provided by an ISAC.   

 

II.  

Responding to a Computer Intrusion: Executing Your Incident Response Plan 
 
An organization can fall victim to a cyber intrusion or attack even after taking reasonable 
precautions.  Consequently,  having a vetted,  actionable cyber incident  response plan  is  critical.  
A robust incident response plan does more than provide procedures for handling  an incident; it 
also provides guidance on how a victim organization can continue to operate while managing an 
incident  and  how  to  work  with  law  enforcement  and/or  incident  response  firms  as  an 
investigation  is  conducted.4    An  organizations  incident  response  plan  should,  at  a  minimum, 
give serious consideration to all of the steps outlined below.  

 

A.  Step 1:  Make an Initial Assessment  

 
During  a  cyber  incident,  a  victim  organization  should  immediately  make  an  assessment 
of the nature and scope  of  the incident.   In particular, it is  important  at  the outset  to  determine 
whether the incident is a malicious act or a technological glitch.  The nature of the incident will 
determine the type of assistance an organization will need to address the incident and the type of 
damage and remedial efforts that may be required.     

 
Having appropriate network logging capabilities enabled can be critical to identifying the 

cause of a cyber incident.  Using log information, a system administrator should attempt to 
identify:  

 

  The affected computer systems;  

  The apparent origin of the incident, intrusion, or attack;  

  Any malware used in connection with the incident; 

  Any remote servers to which data were sent (if information was exfiltrated); and  

  The identity of any other victim organizations, if such data is apparent in logged data.   

 

 
 

                                                
3  See, Exec. Order No. 13,691, 80 Fed. Reg. 9347 (Feb. 20, 2015), available at http://www.gpo.gov/fdsys/pkg/FR-
2015-02-20/pdf/2015-03714.pdf.  
4  Often in the case of data breaches, organizations may learn that they have been the victim of an intrusion from a 
third party.  For instance, law enforcement may discover evidence; while conducting a data breach investigation that 
other organizations have also been breached, or a cybersecurity companys forensic analysis of a customers 
network following a breach may uncover evidence of other victims.  Organizations should be prepared to respond to 
such receiving such notice.   

 

Page 6 of 15 

 
In addition, the initial assessment of the incident should document:  
 

  Which users are currently logged on;  

  What the current connections to the computer systems are;  

  Which processes are running; and  

  All open ports and their associated services and applications.   

 

Any  communications  (in  particular,  threats  or  extortionate  demands)  received  by  the 
organization that might relate to the incident should also be preserved.  Suspicious calls, emails, 
or other requests for information should be treated as part of the incident.   
 

Evidence that an intrusion or other criminal incident has occurred will typically include 
logging  or  file  creation  data  indicating  that  someone  improperly  accessed,  created,  modified, 
deleted,  or  copied  files  or  logs;  changed  system  settings;  or  added  or  altered  user  accounts  or 
permissions.    In  addition,  an  intruder  may  have  stored  hacker  tools  or  data  from  another 
intrusion on your network.  In the case of a root-level intrusion,5 victims should be alert for signs 
that the intruder gained access to multiple areas of the network.  The victim organization should 
take care to ensure that its actions do not unintentionally or unnecessarily modify stored data in a 
way  that  could  hinder  incident  response  or  subsequent  criminal  investigation.    In  particular, 
potentially relevant files should not be deleted; if at all possible, avoid modifying data or at least 
keep track of how and when information was modified. 
  
 

B.  Step 2:  Implement Measures to Minimize Continuing Damage 

 
After an organization has assessed the nature and scope of the incident and determined it 
to  be an intentional  cyber intrusion or attack rather than  a technical  glitch, it may need to  take 
steps  to  stop  ongoing  damage  caused  by  the  perpetrator.    Such  steps  may  include  rerouting 
network  traffic,  filtering  or  blocking  a  distributed  denial-of-service  attack,6  or  isolating  all  or 
parts  of  the  compromised  network.    In  the  case  of  an  intrusion,  a  system  administrator  may 
decide either to block further illegal access or to watch the illegal activity to identify the source 
of the attack and/or learn the scope of the compromise.  

  
If proper preparations were made, an organization will have an existing back-up copy of 
critical data and may elect to abandon the network in its current state and to restore it to a prior 

                                                
5  An intruder with root level access has the highest privileges given to a user working with an operating system or 
other program and has as much authority on the network as a system administrator, including the authority to access 
files, alter permissions and privileges, and add or remove accounts. 

 

Page 7 of 15 

state.  If an organization elects to restore a back-up version of its data, it should first make sure 
that the back-up is not compromised as well.   

 
Where a victim organization obtains information regarding the location of exfiltrated data 
or the apparent origin of a cyber attack, it may choose to contact the system administrator of that 
network.    Doing  so  may  stop  the  attack,  assist  in  regaining  possession  of  stolen  data,  or  help 
determine  the  true  origin  of  the  malicious  activity.    A  victim  organization  may  also  choose  to 
blunt the damage of an ongoing intrusion or attack by null routing7 malicious traffic, closing 
the  ports  being  used  by  the  intruder  to  gain  access  to  the  network,  or  otherwise  altering  the 
configuration of a network to thwart the malicious activity.  

 
The  victim  organization  should  keep  detailed  records  of  whatever  steps  are  taken  to 
mitigate the damage and should keep stock of any associated costs incurred.  Such information 
may  be  important  for  recovering  damages  from  responsible  parties  and  for  any  subsequent 
criminal investigation. 
 
 

C.  Step 3:  Record and Collect Information 
 

1. 

Image the Affected Computer(s) 

 
Ideally, a victim organization will immediately make a forensic image of the affected 
computers,  which  will  preserve  a  record  of  the  system  at  the  time  of  the  incident  for  later 
analysis  and  potentially  for  use  as  evidence  at  trial.8    This  may  require  the  assistance  of  law 
enforcement  or  professional  incident  response  experts.    In  addition,  the  victim  organization 
should locate any previously generated backups, which may assist in identifying any changes an 
intruder made to the network.  New or sanitized media should be used to store copies of any data 
that  is  retrieved  and  stored.    Once  the  victim  organization  makes  such  copies,  it  should  write-
protect  the  media  to  safeguard  it  from  alteration.    The  victim  organization  should  also  restrict 
access  to  this  media  to  maintain  the  integrity  of  the  copys  authenticity,  safeguard  it  from 
unidentified malicious  insiders, and establish a chain  of custody.  These steps will enhance the 
value of any backups as evidence in any later criminal investigations and prosecutions, internal 

                                                                                                                                                       
6  A Distributed Denial of Service (DDOS) attack involves the orchestrated transmission of communications 
engineered to overwhelm another networks connection to the Internet to impair or disrupt that networks ability to 
send or receive communications.  DDOS attacks are usually launched by a large number of computers infected by 
malware that permits their actions to be centrally controlled. 
7  A null route directs the system to drop network communications that are destined for specified IP address on the 
network, so a system will no longer send any response to the originating IP address.  This means the system will 
continue to receive data from the attackers but no longer respond to them. 
8  A forensic image is an exact, sector-by-sector copy of a hard disk.  Software capable of creating such copies of 
hard drives preserve deleted files, slack space, system files, and executable files and can be critical for later analysis 
of an incident.   

 

Page 8 of 15 

investigations, or civil law suits. 
 

Keep Logs, Notes, Records, and Data 

2. 
 

The  victim  organization  should  take  immediate  steps  to  preserve  relevant  existing  logs.  
In addition, the victim organization should direct personnel participating in the incident response 
to keep an ongoing, written record of all steps undertaken.  If this is done while responding to the 
incident or shortly thereafter, personnel can minimize the need to rely on their memories or the 
memories  of  others  to  reconstruct  the  order  of  events.    As  the  investigation  progresses, 
information that was collected by the organization contemporaneous to the intrusion may take on 
unanticipated significance.   

 
The types of information that the victim organization should retain include: 
 

  a description of all incident-related events, including dates and times; 

 

 

information about incident-related phone calls, emails, and other contacts; 

the identity of persons working on tasks related to the intrusion, including a description, 

the amount of time spent, and the approximate hourly rate for those persons work; 

 

identity of the systems, accounts, services, data, and networks affected by the incident 

and a description of how these network components were affected;  

 

information relating to the amount and type of damage inflicted by the incident, which 

can be important in civil actions by the organization and in criminal cases; 

 

 

information regarding network topology;   

the type and version of software being run on the network; and  

  any peculiarities in the organizations network architecture, such as proprietary hardware 

or software.   

 
Ideally, a single, designated employee will retain custody of all such records.  This will 
help to ensure that records are properly preserved and can be produced later on.  Proper handling 
of this information is often useful in rebutting claims in subsequent legal proceedings (whether 
criminal or civil) that electronic evidence has been tampered with or altered.   

 

3. 

Records Related to Continuing Attacks 

 
When  an  incident  is  ongoing  (e.g.,  during  a  DDOS  attack,  as  a  worm  is  propagating 
through  the  network,  or  while  an  intruder  is  exfiltrating  data),  the  victim  organization  should 
record any continuing activity.  If a victim organization has not enabled logging on an affected 

 

Page 9 of 15 

server,  it  should  do  so  immediately.    It  should  also  consider  increasing  the  default  size  of  log 
files  on  its  servers  to  prevent  losing  data.    A  victim  organization  may  also  be  able  to  use  a 
sniffer or other network-monitoring device to record communications between the intruder and 
any  of  its  targeted  servers.    Such  monitoring,  which  implicates  the  Wiretap  Act  (18  U.S.C.   
2510  et  seq.)  is  typically  lawful,  provided  it  is  done  to  protect  the  organizations  rights  or 
property  or  system  users  have  actually  or  impliedly  consented  to  such  monitoring.    An 
organization  should  consult  with  its  legal  counsel  to  make  sure  such  monitoring  is  conducted 
lawfully and consistent with the organizations employment agreements and privacy policies. 
 

D.  Step 4:  Notify9  
 

1. 

People Within the Organization 

 
Managers  and  other  personnel  within  the  organization  should  be  notified  about  the 
incident  as  provided  for  in  the  incident  response  plan  and  should  be  given  the  results  of  any 
preliminary  analysis.    Relevant  personnel  may  include  senior  management,  IT  and  physical 
security  coordinators,  communications  or  public  affairs  personnel,  and  legal  counsel.    The 
incident response plan should set out individual points-of-contact within the organization and the 
circumstances in which they should be contacted.     

 

2. 

Law Enforcement 

 
If an organization suspects at any point during its assessment or response that the incident 
constitutes criminal activity, it should contact law enforcement immediately.  Historically, some 
companies have been reticent to contact law enforcement following a cyber incident fearing that 
a criminal investigation may result in disruption of its business or reputational harm.  However, a 
company harboring such concerns should not hesitate to contact law enforcement.  

 
The FBI and U.S. Secret Service place a priority on conducting cyber investigations that 
cause as little disruption as possible to a victim organizations normal operations and recognize 
the  need  to  work  cooperatively  and  discreetly  with  victim  companies.    They  will  use 
investigative  measures  that  avoid  computer  downtime  or  displacement  of  a  company's 
employees.    When  using  an  indispensable  investigative  measures  likely  to  inconvenience  a 
victim organization, they will do so with the objective of minimizing the duration and scope of 
any disruption.   

 
The FBI and U.S. Secret Service will also conduct their investigations with discretion and 

                                                
9  Some private organizations are regulated by the federal government and may be subject to rules requiring 
notification if a data breach or other cyber incident occurs.  While guidance to such organizations for notifying 
regulators is beyond the scope of this document, a cyber incident response plan should take into account whether a 
victim organization may need also to notify regulators and how best to do so.   

 

Page 10 of 15 

work with a victim company to avoid unwarranted disclosure of information.  They will attempt 
to  coordinate  statements  to  the  news  media  concerning  the  incident  with  a  victim  company  to 
ensure  that  information  harmful  to  a  companys  interests  is  not  needlessly  disclosed.    Victim 
companies  should  likewise  consider  sharing  press  releases  regarding  a  cyber  incident  with 
investigative  agents  before  issuing  them  to  avoid  releasing  information  that  might  damage  the 
ongoing investigation.   

 
Contacting  law  enforcement  may  also  prove  beneficial  to  a  victim  organization.    Law 
enforcement  may  be  able  to  use  legal  authorities  and  tools  that  are  unavailable  to  non-
governmental entities10 and to enlist the assistance of international law enforcement partners  to 
locate stolen data or identify the perpetrator.  These tools and relationships can greatly increase 
the odds of successfully apprehending an intruder or attacker and securing lost data.  In addition, 
a cyber criminal who is successfully prosecuted will be prevented from causing further damage 
to the victim company or to others, and other would-be cyber criminals may be deterred by such 
a conviction.   

 
In  addition,  as  of  January  2015,  at  least  forty-seven  states  have  passed  database  breach 
notification  laws  requiring  companies  to  notify  customers  whose  data  is  compromised  by  an 
intrusion;  however,  many  data  breach  reporting  laws  allow  a  covered  organization  to  delay 
notification if law enforcement concludes that such notice would impede an investigation.  State 
laws  also  may  allow  a  victim  company  to  forgo  providing  notice  altogether  if  the  victim 
company consults with law enforcement and thereafter determines that the breach will not likely 
result  in  harm  to  the  individuals  whose  personal  information  has  been  acquired  and  accessed.  
Organizations should consult with counsel to determine their obligations under state data breach 
notification laws.  It is also noteworthy that companies from regulated industries that cooperate 
with law enforcement may be viewed more favorably by regulators looking into a data breach.   

  

 

3. 

The Department of Homeland Security  

The  Department  of  Homeland  Security  has  components  dedicated  to  cybersecurity  that 
not only collect and report on cyber incidents, phishing, malware, and other vulnerabilities, but 
also provide certain incident response services.  The National Cybersecurity & Communications 
Integration Center (NCCIC) serves as a 24x7 centralized location for cybersecurity information 
sharing,  incident  response,  and  incident  coordination.    By  contacting  the  NCCIC,  a  victim 
organization  can  both  share  and  receive  information  about  an  ongoing  incident  that  may  prove 
beneficial to both the victim organization and the government.  A victim organization may also 

                                                
10  For instance, data that are necessary to trace an intrusion or attack to its source may not be obtainable without use 
of legal process (e.g., a search warrant, court order, or subpoena) that may be unavailable to a private party.  
Furthermore, some potentially useful intrusion detection techniques require law enforcement involvement.  For 
instance, under 18 U.S.C.  2511(2)(i) a network owner may authorize law enforcement to intercept a computer 
trespassers communications on the network owners computers during an investigation.   

 

Page 11 of 15 

obtain technical assistance capable of mitigating an ongoing cyber incident.  

 

4. 

Other Potential Victims 

 
If a victim organization or the private incident response firm it hires uncovers evidence of 
additional  victims  while  assessing  a  cyber  incidentfor  example,  in  the  form  of  another 
companys data stored on the networkthe other potential victims should be promptly notified.  
While  the  initial  victim  can  conduct  such  notification  directly,  notifying  victims  through  law 
enforcement  may  be  preferable.    It  insulates  the  initial  victim  from  potentially  unnecessary 
exposure  and  allows  law  enforcement  to  conduct  further  investigation,  which  may  uncover 
additional  victims  warranting  notification.    Similarly,  if  a  forensic  examination  reveals  an 
unreported  software  or  hardware  vulnerability,  the  victim  organization  should  make  immediate 
notification to law enforcement or the relevant vendor.   

 
Such  notifications  may  prevent  further  damage  by  prompting  the  victims  or  vendors  to 
take remedial action immediately.  The victim organization may also reap benefits, because other 
victims  may  be  able  to  provide  helpful  information  gleaned  from  their  own  experiences 
managing  the  same  cyber  incident  (e.g.,  information  regarding  the  perpetrators  methods,  a 
timeline of events, or effective mitigation techniques that may thwart the intruder).   

 

III.  What Not to Do Following a Cyber Incident 
 

A.  Do Not Use the Compromised System to Communicate  

 

The victim organization should avoid,  to  the extent reasonably possible, using a system 
suspected of being compromised to communicate about an incident or to discuss its response to 
the  incident.    If  the  victim  organization  must  use  the  compromised  system  to  communicate,  it 
should  encrypt  its  communications.    To  avoid  becoming  the  victim  of  a  social  engineering 
attack (i.e., attempts by a perpetrator to convince a target to take an action through use of a ruse 
or  guile  that  will  compromise  the  security  of  the  system  or  data),  employees  of  the  victim 
organization  should  not  disclose  incident-specific  information  to  unknown  communicants 
inquiring about an incident without first verifying their identity.   
 

B.  Do Not Hack Into or Damage Another Network  

 

A  victimized  organization  should  not  attempt  to  access,  damage,  or  impair  another 
system that may appear to be involved in the intrusion or attack.  Regardless of motive, doing so 
is  likely  illegal,  under  U.S.  and  some  foreign  laws,  and  could  result  in  civil  and/or  criminal 
liability.    Furthermore,  many  intrusions  and  attacks  are  launched  from  compromised  systems.  
Consequently,  hacking  back  can  damage  or  impair  another  innocent  victims  system  rather 

 

Page 12 of 15 

than the intruders.   

 

IV.  After a Computer Incident 
 

Even after a cyber incident appears to be under control, remain vigilant.  Many intruders 
return to attempt to regain access to networks they previously compromised.  It is possible that, 
despite  best  efforts,  a  company  that  has  addressed  known  security  vulnerabilities  and  taken  all 
reasonable steps to  eject an intruder has nevertheless not  eliminated all  of the means  by  which 
the  intruder  illicitly  accessed  the  network.    Continue  to  monitor  your  system  for  anomalous 
activity. 
 
Once the victim organization has recovered from the attack or intrusion, it should initiate 
measures  to  prevent  similar  attacks.    To  do  so,  it  should  conduct  a  post-incident  review  of  the 
organizations  response  to  the  incident  and  assess  the  strengths  and  weaknesses  of  its 
performance  and  incident  response  plan.    Part  of  the  assessment  should  include  ascertaining 
whether  the  organization  followed  each  of  the  steps  outlined  above  and,  if  not,  why  not.    The 
organization  should  note  and  discuss  deficiencies  and  gaps  in  its  response  and  take  remedial 
steps as needed.   

 

 

Page 13 of 15 

Cyber Incident Preparedness Checklist 

 
 
Before a Cyber Attack or Intrusion 
 

 

Identify mission critical data and assets (i.e., your Crown Jewels) and institute tiered 
security measures to appropriately protect those assets.   

  Review and adopt risk management practices found in guidance such as the National 

Institute of Standards and Technology Cybersecurity Framework. 

  Create an actionable incident response plan. 

o  Test plan with exercises 
o  Keep plan up-to-date to reflect changes in personnel and structure 

  Have the technology in place (or ensure that it is easily obtainable) that will be used to 

address an incident. 

  Have procedures in place that will permit lawful network monitoring. 
  Have legal counsel that is familiar with legal issues associated with cyber incidents 
  Align other policies (e.g., human resources and personnel policies) with your incident 

response plan. 

  Develop proactive relationships with relevant law enforcement agencies, outside counsel, 

public relations firms, and investigative and cybersecurity firms that you may require in 
the event of an incident. 

 
During a Cyber Attack or Intrusion 
 

  Make an initial assessment of the scope and nature of the incident, particularly whether it 

is a malicious act or a technological glitch.  

  Minimize continuing damage consistent with your cyber incident response plan. 
  Collect and preserve data related to the incident. 

o  Image the network 
o  Keep all logs, notes, and other records 
o  Keep records of ongoing attacks 

  Consistent with your incident response plan, notify 

o  Appropriate management and personnel within the victim organization should  
o  Law enforcement  
o  Other possible victims 
o  Department of Homeland Security 

  Do not 

o  Use compromised systems to communicate. 
o  Hack back or intrude upon another network.  
 

 

Page 14 of 15 

 
After Recovering from a Cyber Attack or Intrusion  
 

  Continue monitoring the network for any anomalous activity to make sure the intruder 

has been expelled and you have regained control of your network.  

  Conduct a post-incident review to identify deficiencies in planning and execution of your 

incident response plan. 

 
 

 

Page 15 of 15 

