50

IMO Photographic Handbook

PART 4: METEOR TRAINS

1. Introduction

Bright meteors, particularly fireballs, often leave an afterglow along their trail, called a train. Such
trains have been described extensively in the past (e.g. Beech, 1987). High velocity cometary-type
meteors especially produce persistent trains, but little is known about the mechanisms behind these
phenomena.
When a meteoroid enters the Earths atmosphere its surface atoms sublimate and are turned into ions
through collisions with atmospheric particles, which will themselves be ionized simultaneously. Ions
of both the meteoroid and the atmosphere are then present along the trajectory. While most of these
atoms exist in excited states for about 108 seconds only, there are also some atomic states that may
persist for times longer than several seconds (so-called metastable levels), perhaps associated with
some molecules (N2, NO, NO2, . . . ?).
These appear bright against the night sky. However, much mystery still surrounds the physics of train
phenomena (Ceplecha, 1991).
A large meteoroid entering the atmosphere also distributes a substantial amount of material along its
trajectory as it ablates. This may lead to the formation of the so-called smoke trains, which do not
emit light, and are composed of dust particles.
Both types of trains occur at altitudes above 20 km. At these heights strong winds exist that will
cause the trains to distort within a short period after formation. Thus observations of trains also may
yield information about the upper atmosphere as well as about the amount of material brought into
the atmosphere by the meteoroid.

2. Photography

2.1. Regular trains

Ceplecha Even regular meteor observers are surprised by bright meteors or fireballs. Normally data
about the brightness, time of occurrence, colors, and perhaps sound of a fireball are recorded in detail.
Only for very bright and/or long enduring trains might someone think to take photographs of the
train.
To secure a train on film you might try the following while you are visually observing. Keep a camera
with a high sensitivity film (cf. section 4 of Part 1: Faint Meteors) and a very fast lens with an
already-opened shutter near at hand, protected from exposure by a suitable cover. When a bright

Part 4: Meteor Trains

51

event leaving a train occurs, you remove the cover and expose the film for about 20 . . . 40 seconds.
For very bright and long enduring trains, take a series of photographs to record the variations in
brightness and shape. Each exposure should be between 10 and 30 seconds long. Guiding the pho-
tographs is not necessary. Generally, observers are not prepared in the manner we have just described,
so chance plays a major role.
Some instructive examples are presented in Hirose et al. (1967), p. 110, in Cook and Hughes (1957),
in Keller and Schmidbauer (1988) and also in the Part 10 of this handbook (Fig. 10-12).
Experiments conducted during the 1989 and 1991 Perseid shower suggested there were very few me-
teors leaving suitably bright trains that could be photographed. As a result, the time for the operator
to remove the cover from the lens was comparable to the duration of most of the trains. As already
mentioned, train photographs of very bright fireballs, the trains of which were visible for minutes, do
exist.

2.2. Smoke trains

Since smoke trains do not emit light, they appear dark, thus they are not visible in the night sky.
There are two possible ways of observing them.
First, they may be visible accompanying daylight fireballs as smoke trains. Of course, it is not fea-
sible to establish a regular survey for daylight events, but if you do accidentally see a bright fireball
during the day, you should note if this kind of train is formed, and if so try to photograph it. In this
circumstance, the rules of normal (daylight) photography are valid, and no special instructions are
necessary. To be sure that the structures in a daylight smoke train are measurable, take photos with
different exposure times, both over- and underexposing the image.
The second way of seeing such trains occurs in twilight (Fig. 4-1). Since smoke trains appear below
80 kilometers altitude, they are still lit by the Sun, even in late twilight. Consequently, they appear
bright. The conditions for the visibility of smoke trains as sunlit clouds after sunset or before sunrise
are similar to those for noctilucent clouds.

Figure 4-1: Higher altitudes in the atmosphere are still lit by the Sun even when it is below horizon, causing
twilight phenomena and also illuminating noctilucent clouds (at h = 83 km) and smoke trains left by meteors.
The figure does not consider atmospheric refraction, which increases the duration of visibility somewhat (cf.
Gadsden and Schr oder, 1989, pp. 149153). Geometrically, with the Sun being 9 below the horizon, the zenith
Z of the observer at O is still lit by direct sunlight, while at a depression angle of 19 a near-horizon area
(around H) receives sunlight.

52

IMO Photographic Handbook

Noctilucent clouds are frequently seen at latitudes north of 50N during the period May-August as
well as south of 50S in the months of November-February. These clouds are situated at a mean height
of 83 km. For the clouds to receive sunlight, the sun must not be more than 16 below the horizon
at this altitude. The diagram shows the time interval during the night on different months when the
depression angle of the Sun permits these clouds to be visible for three different latitudes (Fig. 4-2).
These times correspond roughly to the periods at night when smoke trains may be lit, so you can find
which times permit observations of smoke trains in the region of the twilight arch.
If a smoke train is observed you may make a series of exposures of about 10 . . . 20 seconds duration
(depending on the brightness of the sky and the train). If you are not sure about the optimal exposure
time to use, try several, but not less than 3 seconds and not longer than 2 minutes. In choosing film
types, high sensitivity films are ideal as they keep the exposure times short. If the exposure is too
long, the shape of the train will distort during the exposure and the image of it will appear blurred.
It is then hard to measure structures contained in the train.
Both types of trains were recently observed accompanying a daylight fireball which appeared shortly
before sunset, with the trains visible at heights between 30 and 10 km (Ceplecha, 1991). An excellent
example of a very bright smoke train observed in the twilight, is reproduced in Part 10 (Fig. 10-13).

Figure 4-2: Diagram of the visibility of noctilucent clouds which occur at an altitude of  83 km. During the
indicated twilight period (white) the Sun is between 9 and 18 below horizon. This is also the most favourable
time interval for the observation of sunlit fireball trains.
The same diagram, shifted by 6 months, is valid for the same latitudes in the southern hemisphere. For   65
and   40 the time spans for effective observations are short.

Part 4: Meteor Trains

3. Equipment

53

The equipment required to photograph trains is different depending on the train type.

3.1. Regular trains at night

1. camera with a very fast film and lens

2. shutter already open, but covered (e.g. by a dense piece of cloth)

3. when a bright meteor appears and leaves a persistent train you remove the cover and expose the
frame for a length of time dependent on the brightness of the train (at least 20 . . . 40 seconds)

4. if the train lasts for more than one exposure, continue with exposures of about the same duration.

3.2. Smoke trains in daylight

1. normal daylight photography; slight underexposure may be best

2. try to make a series of photographs and note the time of appearance of the fireball (if seen) as

well as the time of the train exposures.

3. note azimuth and zenith distance of the train.

3.3. Smoke trains during twilight

1. camera with a fast lens and film

2. try to make several exposures of different durations, depending on the film and lens used(try at

least 10 . . . 20 seconds)

3. note the time of the fireballs appearance (if seen) and the time(s) of the exposures taken.

4. note azimuth and zenith distance of the train.

4. Use of a video camera

These phenomena can also be recorded with a video camera. The dust trains in daylight or twilight
do not require special hints. One advantage of a video camera over a still camera is the time mark
which is included on each frame. Even if the time is not precisely adjusted to a time signal, you will
still record the relative time scale of the changes within a train.
Regular trains during the night may be much more difficult to record because of their faintness.

54

IMO Photographic Handbook

References and bibliography:

Beech M., 1987: On the trail of meteor trains. Q. Jl. R. astr. Soc. 28, 445455.
Ceplecha Z., 1967: Meteor spectra. In: L.Kres ak and P.M.Millman (eds.): Physics and Dynamics of
Meteors. IAU-Symp., 7383.
Ceplecha Z., 1991: personal communication.
Cook A.F. and Hughes R.F., 1957: A reduction method for the motions of persistent meteor trains.
Smithson. Contr. Astrophys., 1-No. 2, 225237.
Gadsden M. and Schr oder W., 1989: Noctilucent clouds.
Springer.
Hirose H., Nagasawa K. and Tomita K., 1967: Spectral studies of meteors at the Tokyo Astronomical
Observatory. In: L.Kres ak and P.M.Millman (eds.): Physics and Dynamics of Meteors. IAU-Symp.,
105118.
Keller P., Schmidbauer G., 1988: Helle Leuchterscheinung in der Faschingsnacht. Sterne und Wel-
traum 27, 249. (in German)
Terentjeva A., 1990: Main problems of visual meteor observation. In: P. Sp anyi and I. Tepliczky
(eds.): Proceedings IMC 1989, Balatonf oldv ar, Hungary, 5357.

(Physics and Chemistry in Space 18).

