Exploring Solar Flares with 
Gamma Rays and Neutrons

R. Murphy
Space Science Division 

Gamma-ray and neutron emissions from solar flares carry information about the flaring process and conditions 

within the flaring magnetic loop. Extraction of this information from solar flare measurements requires an ion-
acceleration, transport, and interaction model with parameters directly related to those physical processes. In this 

paper we describe such a magnetic-loop model. Each of the gamma-ray and neutron measurable quantities depends to 
varying degree on the parameters of the model. We describe these dependences and construct a self-consistent approach to 
the analysis of high-energy flare data that provides an optimum set of parameters. To illustrate this approach, we summa-
rize the analysis of gamma-ray and neutron data obtained from the 1991 June 4 solar flare with the Oriented Scintillation 
Spectrometer Experiment (OSSE), a satellite-based instrument developed at NRL. 

What aRE SolaR FlaRES aNd hoW do WE 
lEaRN about thEm?

Solar flares are explosions that occur in the atmo-
sphere of the Sun leading to the emission of radiation 
covering the full range of the electromagnetic spec-
trum: radio, visible, UV, X-rays, and gamma rays. The 
energy released in a solar flare can be greater than 1032 
ergs, enough to meet the energy demand of the United 
States for 100,000 years. This enormous amount of 
energy is dumped into the solar atmosphere in only 
a few tens of seconds. Flares are often associated with 
the escape of energetic particles (electrons, neutrons, 
protons, and heavier nuclei), mass ejections, and shock 
waves. As the shock waves move through interplanetary 
space, they also accelerate particles. At Earth, these 
various phenomena can disrupt radio communication, 
damage satellites and destabilize their orbits, cause 
failures in long-distance power lines, change the terres-
trial magnetic field, and even endanger astronauts. The 
potential impact of such solar activity on DoD assets 
and enterprises is clear.

A solar flare is a stunning, violent, awe-inspiring 

event occurring on our nearest star, the Sun, an equally 
awe-inspiring object. What exactly is a flare? What is 
the mechanism that accelerates the energetic particles? 
How is the energy residing in the Suns magnetic fields 
made available for this acceleration? What are the 
physical conditions at the flaring site and how do they 
change with time as the flare progresses? What is the 
connection between the energetic particles directly 
associated with the flare and the energetic particles 
seen in interplanetary space? Answering such questions 
would be reward enough, but with these answers we 

may be able to predict the occurrence of a flare and 
its associated disruptions sufficiently early to allow 
measures to be taken to protect those DoD assets and 
enterprises.

The frequency of solar flares (along with other 
aspects of the Sun such as the number of sunspots) 
varies in an 11-year activity cycle related to the 22-year 
cycle of the reversal of the Suns overall magnetic field. 
As of this writing (early 2008), we are at an activity 
minimum. This can be seen in Fig. 1, which shows the 
number of sunspots during the decay after the last 
activity maximum and predictions for the onset of the 
next. Surprisingly, some of the largest flares of previous 
cycles have occurred during the rising portions of the 
curves, before the maxima had been reached.

Because placing detectors in the hot flaring plasma 
at the Sun is impossible, solar flares can only be studied 
remotely via the various emissions they produce. The 
most easily observed component of flare emission 
is thermal radiation emitted by the hot plasma. But 
once the flare energy has been thermalized, most of 
the information about its initial release and about the 
subsequent physical processes associated with it are 
lost. Such information can be better obtained by study-
ing the higher-energy X-ray and gamma-ray emissions 
produced when the electrons and ions directly acceler-
ated by the energy release subsequently interact with 
the solar atmosphere. Flares can accelerate electrons to 
greater than 10 MeV and ions to greater than 1 GeV, 
corresponding to velocities very near the speed of light. 
By using such measurements, we seek to learn what 
specific acceleration process (or processes) is at work 
and what the physical conditions of the plasma are at 
the flare site.

2008 NRL REVIEW

109

FEATURED RESEARCH

ISES Solar Cycle Sunspot Number Progression

Data Through 31 Dec 07

175

150

125

100

75

50

25

r
e
b
m
u
N

 
t

o
p
s
n
u
S

0
0

0



n

a

J

1

0

2

0

3

0

4

0

5

0

6

0

7

0

8

0

9

0

0

1

1

1

2

1

3

1

4

1

1

FIGURE 1
Recent sunspot numbers (20002007) 
and predictions for the next activity 
cycle (20082016).

6

1



n

5
J a

Smoothed Monthly Values

Monthly Values

Predicted Values (Smoothed)

Updated 2008 Jan 2

NOAA/SWPC Boulder, CO USA

Because X-ray and gamma-ray emissions are easily 

absorbed by the Earths atmosphere, their detection 
requires flying instruments on high-altitude balloons 
or on satellites, such as the Oriented Scintillation 
Spectrometer Experiment (OSSE), the Solar Maximum 
Mission (SMM), the Reuven Ramaty High Energy Solar 
Spectroscopic Imager (RHESSI), and the Gamma Ray 
Large Area Space Telescope (GLAST). Such instruments 
allow the detailed study of flare photon spectra, bring-
ing the power of spectroscopic analysis, a well-known, 
powerful tool at other wavelengths, to the study of 
gamma-ray emission from solar flares.

OSSE was designed and built at NRL and launched 

on NASAs Compton Gamma Ray Observatory 
(CGRO) in April 1991. Figure 2 shows CGRO being 
deployed into orbit by the space shuttle Atlantis. While 
its primary scientific goal was celestial, OSSE accom-
plished excellent observations of a number of solar 
flares. OSSE provided photon energy spectra from 
50 keV to 10 MeV, and detection of gamma rays and 
neutrons above 10 MeV extended its ability to study 
solar flares. CGRO was de-orbited in June 2000. The 
SMM Gamma-Ray Spectrometer was designed and 
developed as a collaborative effort between the Uni-
versity of New Hampshire, the Max Planck Institute 
in Garching, Germany, and NRL. The instrument 
was designed to observe solar X-rays and gamma rays 
from 10 keV to 100 MeV; it maintained excellent per-
formance throughout its mission from 1980 to 1989. 
SMM made significant contributions to both solar and 
celestial astronomy. RHESSI was designed and is oper-
ated by the Space Sciences Laboratory at the University 
of California at Berkeley. Launched in February 2002, 
RHESSI provides high-resolution spectroscopy and 
imaging of solar flares from about 3 keV to about 20 

MeV. RHESSI is expected to operate throughout the 
onset of the next activity cycle. GLAST, launched in 
June 2008, is the next-generation high-energy gamma-
ray observatory covering the photon energy range from 
10 keV to more than 100 GeV. NRL was responsible for 
the design and development of the GLAST calorimeter. 
Intended for making observations of celestial gamma-
ray sources, GLAST will also have excellent solar-flare 
capabilities.

hoW doES thE ENERGy-RElEaSE pRocESS 
REvEal itSElF?

The energy source for particle acceleration in 

solar flares is undoubtedly related to reconnection of 
magnetic fields in the corona, the low-density upper 
atmosphere of the Sun. The Suns atmosphere is usually 
divided into three layers. The deepest and most dense 
layer is the 300-km-thick photosphere, which forms 
the visible surface of the Sun. The temperature of the 
photosphere decreases from about 6000 degrees Kelvin 
(K) at its bottom to a minimum of about 4000 K at its 
top. Above the photosphere is the chromosphere, with 
a thickness of about 10,000 km. The chromosphere 
is hotter than the photosphere, extending from the 
minimum of 4000 K to about 20,000 K where there is 
an abrupt change to the very hot corona (the region of 
this abrupt change is called the transition region). The 
corona extends millions of kilometers into space with 
temperatures exceeding a million degrees Kelvin.

Magnetic fields dominate the physical processes in 

the corona, and the field loop structures can be revealed 
by the bright, hot plasma trapped within them. This is 
shown by the Transition Region and Coronal Explorer 
(TRACE) image in Fig. 3(a) obtained at 171 A, a wave-

110

2008 NRL REVIEW

FEATURED RESEARCH

FIGURE 2
Deployment of the Compton Gamma Ray Observatory.

(a)

(b)

FIGURE 3
(a) TRACE image (171 A) of magnetic loops. (b) Yohkoh image of soft X-ray loop and hard X-ray footpoint and looptop emission.

2008 NRL REVIEW

111

FEATURED RESEARCH

length of light corresponding to a plasma temperature 
of about a million degrees Kelvin. Images of solar-flare 
X-ray emission show that such higher-energy emission 
is concentrated at the footpoints of magnetic loops (see 
Fig. 3(b)), implying that once the energetic particles are 
accelerated they are essentially trapped within a loop 
and interact at the higher densities associated with the 
footpoints. Acceleration probably occurs near the top 
of the loop where the density and the associated energy 
losses are lower, allowing for efficient acceleration. 
X-ray images of some flares (see Fig. 3(b)) show a third 
source of emission near the top of loops which may be 
associated with the acceleration process.

When flare-accelerated electrons interact with 
the solar atmosphere, they directly produce X- and 
gamma-ray continuum emission via bremsstrahlung, 
radiation that occurs when electrically charged elec-
trons are deflected as they pass near electrically charged 
ambient nuclei. On the other hand, flare-accelerated 
ions undergo nuclear interactions with the ambient 
nuclei to produce excited and radioactive nuclei, neu-
trons, and pions (unstable elementary particles). Some 
of the neutrons can escape the Sun, but the other prod-
ucts remain trapped in the solar atmosphere and reveal 
themselves by subsequently producing observable 
gamma-ray emission via secondary processes. Except 
for the positron annihilation line (discussed below), 
gamma-ray emission from accelerated ions arises from 
nuclear interactions and so does not depend on the 
temperature or density of the ambient medium, freeing 
its interpretation from many of the uncertainties asso-
ciated with atomic-line spectroscopy.

The measurable quantities associated with these 

various emissions (discussed in the following sections) 
allow us to learn about the flare process. They convey 
information about the accelerated ions responsible for 
their production and also about the physical condi-
tions of the magnetic flare loop in which the particles 
transport from the acceleration site to the interaction 
region. Analyses of high-energy solar-flare emissions 
therefore offer the potential to learn about the structure 
and evolution of the flare environment in addition to 
particle acceleration.

Nuclear deexcitation

An accelerated-ion interaction (for example, an 
accelerated proton interacting with ambient carbon) 
can produce a nucleus in one of its excited states which 
then promptly deexcites (for most nuclei, the lifetimes 
of excited states are less than 1010 s). The transition 
produces a photon with energy equal to the energy 
difference between the two states. As this process is 
repeated during the course of a flare, gamma-ray lines 
at specific energies become visible in the spectrum.1 
Most deexcitation-line energies are from 1 to 8 MeV; 

an example is the 4.439 MeV line that results when a 
carbon nucleus returns from its first excited state back 
to its ground state. Motivated by the early detection 
of solar-flare gamma-ray lines, the cross sections for 
production of the strongest deexcitation lines from 
solar flares were measured in the laboratory. Because 
these cross sections typically peak at a few tens of MeV, 
deexcitation lines are mostly produced when protons 
with energies from a few to about 20 MeV interact with 
ambient solar material.

Because the lifetimes of the excited states are so 

short, the recoiling nuclei do not lose appreciable 
energy before they deexcite, and so retain information 
about the energy and direction of the ion before inter-
action. This memory is then reflected by the precise 
energy of the emitted photon because it is Doppler-
shifted from its rest energy. Studies of the line shapes 
that result from these Doppler shifts can therefore 
determine the angular distribution of the accelerated 
ions when they interacted to produce the excited nuclei. 
Lines resulting from interactions of the accelerated 
low-mass protons and alpha () particles with ambient 
nuclei heavier than He are narrow (with fractional 
widths of about 2% of the line energy) because the 
relatively low recoil velocity of the heavy nucleus results 
in minimal Doppler shifting of the photons. Heavy 
accelerated ions interacting with ambient H and He 
produce broad lines (with fractional widths of about 
20%) because the heavy nucleus retains much of its 
initial velocity resulting in significant Doppler shifting.
The measurable quantities associated with deexci-

tation lines are (1) the time history of the emission, 
(2) the detailed shape and Doppler shift of the line, and 
(3) the relative yields of the various lines compared 
with other emissions. An example of a solar-flare 
gamma-ray count spectrum is shown in Fig. 4, the 1991 
June 4 flare observed with OSSE. The nuclei responsible 
for the strongest deexcitation lines are noted. There 
are several lines from the most abundant elements in 
the solar atmosphere that potentially can be used in 
flare analyses. Also shown are the various components 
as determined by fitting the observed spectrum with 
spectra calculated with a numerical model: the narrow 
(red) and broad (green) deexcitation lines, and the 
electron bremsstrahlung (blue). Also shown are the 
neutron-capture line (dotted) and the positron (e+) 
annihilation line (orange), discussed below.

Radioactive Nuclei and the positron-annihilation 
line

Accelerated-ion interactions also create radioactive 

nuclei which decay into daughter nuclei accord-
ing to their half-lives, which vary from fractions of a 
second to days. The decay product can be created in 
an excited state which again decays promptly, but the 

112

2008 NRL REVIEW

FEATURED RESEARCH

105

104

103

102

10

1

1

V
e
M
1

s
 
s
t

 

n
u
o
C

101
0.1

Electron bremsstrahlung
power law

56Fe, 24Mg, 20Ne, 28Si

e+

n capture

16O,15N
12C

16O

Broad lines

Narrow lines

1

Energy (MeV)

10

FIGURE 4
Solar-flare gamma-ray count spectrum of the 1991 June 4 solar flare 
observed with CGRO/OSSE.

appearance of the photon is still delayed relative to the 
initial nuclear reaction due to the radioactive half-life. 
Because they are delayed, the detectability of these lines 
may be enhanced since they appear after the bulk of 
the prompt emission has decayed away. They are also 
unique in that they are generally emitted after the recoil 
radioactive nucleus has had time to slow to thermal 
speeds, resulting in minimal Doppler shifting and a 
very narrow line. Because radioactive nuclei usually 
result from spallation reactions that break the target 
nuclei apart, their production cross sections generally 
have thresholds higher than those for deexcitation lines. 
The accelerated-ion energies are therefore somewhat 
higher. The measurable quantities associated with line 
production from radioactive nuclei are (1) the time 
history of the emission and (2) the yields of the various 
lines compared with the other emissions.

Many radioactive nuclei decay with the emission 
of a positron. The initial energies of the positrons are 
typically several hundred keV, much higher than the 
thermal energies of the ambient particles. The posi-
trons then lose energy and eventually annihilate with 
electrons (both free electrons and bound electrons if 
any partially ionized atoms are present), either directly 
or through the formation of positronium (Ps), a 
bound electron-positron atom. Direct annihilation 
of a positron-electron pair at rest yields two photons, 
each of energy 511 keV (the rest mass of an electron or 
positron), producing a spectral line at 511 keV (see Fig. 
4). If positronium is formed, the annihilation depends 
on the total spin wave function of the Ps and can result 
in either two 511 keV photons, producing a spectral 
line at 511 keV, or three photons with energies less than 
511 keV, producing a continuum spectrum.

The annihilation process is complex, with the 

details depending strongly on the temperature, density, 
and ionization state of the ambient medium. These 
details determine the shape of the resulting annihila-
tion line and the line/continuum ratio. The positron-
annihilation line can therefore be used to probe the 
ambient conditions at the Sun where the positrons are 
annihilating. The annihilation line is unique in this, 
differing from deexcitation lines which, because they 
result directly from nuclear interactions, are indepen-
dent of such ambient conditions. At 511 keV, the line 
energy is significantly lower than most of the deexcita-
tion lines and is more easily scattered as the photons 
escape through the solar atmosphere, attenuating the 
line. The measurable quantities associated with the 
annihilation line are (1) the time history of the emis-
sion, (2) the detailed shape of the line, (3) the ratio of 
the line and Ps continuum yields, and (4) the yield of 
the line compared with the other emissions.

Neutrons

Ion interactions also produce neutrons which 

can be observed both directly and indirectly. Because 
neutrons are uncharged, those initially moving up can 
escape from the Sun and, if they survive the transit to 
Earth (neutrons free of the nucleus have a half-life of 
about 10 minutes), can be directly detected with instru-
ments in orbit. Events with high-energy neutrons >200 
MeV can even be detected by monitors on the Earths 
surface.

Neutrons initially moving down into the Sun may 

be indirectly detected because they can be captured 
on ambient hydrogen to produce deuterium with its 

2008 NRL REVIEW

113

FEATURED RESEARCH

binding energy appearing as a strong gamma-ray line 
at 2.223 MeV (see Fig. 4). The captures occur deep in 
the photosphere where the density is high enough so 
that the time required to be captured is significantly 
less than the neutron lifetime. Since the probability for 
elastic scattering is much larger than the probability 
for capture, most of the neutrons thermalize first, 
producing a very narrow line and causing a delay in the 
formation of the capture photon relative to neutron 
formation. The ambient 3He/H ratio has a strong effect 
on both the neutron-capture line yield and its delay 
because non-radiative reactions with 3He compete with 
the line-producing captures on H.

The yields of the neutron-capture line and the 

escaping neutrons depend strongly on the angular dis-
tribution of the neutrons which in turn depends on the 
angular distribution of the interacting ions. Neutron 
production involves interacting-ion energies somewhat 
higher than those producing excited or radioactive 
nuclei, extending to 100 MeV. Escaping neutrons 
surviving to Earth are produced by even higher-energy 
ions, more than several hundred MeV. The measurable 
quantities associated with neutron production are (1) 
the time history of the neutron-capture line, (2) the 
time-dependent energy spectra of the neutrons arriving 
at the Earth, and (3) the neutron and neutron-capture 
line yields compared to the other emissions.

pions

Neutral and charged pions are mesons produced 

in interactions of the highest-energy ions (at hundreds 
of MeV). Neutral pions decay (mean lifetime of 2.6 
 108 s) directly into two 67.5 MeV gamma rays. 
Charged pions decay (mean lifetime of 0.84  1016 s) 
via muons into positrons and electrons which produce 
bremsstrahlung gamma rays. Positrons from positively 
charged pions also produce annihilation radiation, 
both continuum when the decay positrons annihilate in 
flight and 511 keV line emission when they annihilate 
near rest. Because the high-energy ions that produce 
pions can penetrate deep into the solar atmosphere, 
the low-energy annihilation photons will be scattered 
escaping the Sun, attenuating the line. The measurable 
quantities associated with pion-decay emission are (1) 
the time history of the emission, (2) the spectral shape 
of the radiation, and (3) its yield compared to the other 
emissions.

hoW iS iNFoRmatioN ExtRactEd FRom 
SolaR FlaRE mEaSuREmENtS?

A model is typically required to understand a 
complex physical system and to make predictions 
of its behavior, with the model described by a set of 
parameters representing the properties of the system. 

A solar flare is a very complex system and to extract 
information about the flare process from high-energy 
flare measurements, we have developed a flare-loop 
transport and interaction model. The model incor-
porates those aspects of transport and interaction of 
flare-accelerated ions in a loop that are most important 
for gamma-ray and neutron production. It reflects the 
evolution of our understanding of the flare process 
over several decades since the foundations of high-
energy flare interactions were established in a series of 
papers by R. Ramaty, R. Lingenfelter, and B. Kozlovsky. 
The energy- and angle-dependent cross sections for the 
most important nuclear reactions in solar flares have 
been measured in the laboratory. Information about 
the remaining reactions has been obtained with theo-
retical nuclear-reaction computer codes such as TALYS.

The magnetic-loop model is represented by a 

group of computer codes and is described by a set of 
parameters (discussed below) related directly to the 
physical processes and conditions at the flare site. For 
a given set of choices for these parameters, the model 
provides expected values for the measurable quantities 
associated with gamma rays and neutrons, which can 
be compared with observations. The parameter values 
may then be adjusted to give the best agreement of 
prediction with measurement among all the measur-
able quantities. But because many of the measurable 
quantities depend on the same parameters, deriving 
well-constrained values for those parameters is chal-
lenging. Early analyses often did not take these compli-
cated inter-dependences into account in a systematic 
way, addressing only a limited number of parameters.

With the flare-loop model, all of these inter-depen-

dences can be systematically addressed by identifying 
all relevant parameters, showing how the nature of 
the nuclear interactions depend on them and how 
the various measurable quantities are subsequently 
affected. With this understanding, we have constructed 
a comprehensive, self-consistent approach to the analy-
sis of flare data. Success of the approach, however, does 
require that the available flare measurements cover a 
sufficiently broad range of the measurable quantities.

the Flare-loop transport and interaction model

Figure 5(a) shows a schematic diagram of a flaring 

loop, directly reflecting the flare-loop geometry as 
observed (compare with Fig. 3(b)). Figure 5(b) shows 
the corresponding flare loop model. The model consists 
of a semicircular coronal portion of length L and two 
straight portions extending vertically from the transi-
tion region through the chromosphere into the photo-
sphere. Below the transition region, the magnetic field 
strength b is assumed proportional to a power  of the 
pressure. Such a converging magnetic field can result 
in mirroring of accelerated particles. Turbulence in 

114

2008 NRL REVIEW

corona
e, p, 3He, , C, N, O, ...

reaction
products

ionized
constant B
turbulence ()

neutral
B  (pressure)
no turbulence

chromosphere

(a)

FIGURE 5
(a) flare loop schematic; (b) loop model.

the loop can cause pitch-angle scattering (PAS) which 
is characterized by , the mean free path required for 
an arbitrary initial angular distribution to relax to an 
isotropic distribution. We assume a particular density 
height profile n(h) and ambient elemental composition 
for the solar atmosphere. Accelerated ions are released 
isotropically at the top of the loop with an assumed 
elemental composition and kinetic-energy spectrum 
(typically, a power law in energy with index s). The 
heliocentric angle of the flare site on the solar disc, obs, 
is the angle between the normal to the solar surface at 
the flare and the direction to the Earth.

Using this model we have explored the dependence 

of the measurable quantities on the parameters. The 
properties of an interacting accelerated ion that most 
significantly affect the properties of the subsequent 
gamma-ray and neutron emissions are (1) the time 
of the interaction after release from the acceleration 
region, (2) the ion direction of motion at interaction, 
and (3) the ion kinetic energy at interaction.

Interaction Time Scale

In the absence of magnetic convergence ( = 0), 
ions do not mirror and the nuclear interaction time 
history depends only on the transit time down the loop 
(which depends on the loop length L) and the energy 
loss rate in the atmosphere (which depends on the 
density n). In the presence of magnetic convergence 
( = 0), ions with initial pitch angles lying close to 
the loop axis also do not mirror (they are within the 
loss cone) and behave similarly. Ions outside the loss 
cone mirror and lose energy much more slowly as they 
repeatedly traverse the low-density corona. Interactions 
of these ions thus occur on longer time scales, with the 

FEATURED RESEARCH

isotropic accelerated-
ion release

obs

CORONA

loop length L

CHROMOSPHERE

PHOTOSPHERE

(b)

time scale increasing with increasing convergence . 
Turbulence in the loop causes particles to be scattered 
into the loss cone, continuously repopulating it. As a 
result, with more scattering (smaller ) the nuclear 
interaction rate increases at early times and corre-
spondingly decreases at later times.

Interacting-Ion Angular Distribution

In the absence of magnetic convergence ( = 0), 
there is no mirroring and the angular distribution of 
the interacting ions will be downward isotropic regard-
less of the level of PAS. In the presence of magnetic 
convergence ( = 0) but no PAS, most ions mirror 
and the interactions occur mostly at the ion mirror 
points where the density is greatest. Thus, most ions 
are moving parallel to the solar surface when they 
interact, in a fan beam angular distribution. Any 
downward contribution from those ions that do not 
mirror becomes even less important as  increases. 
By continuously repopulating the loss cone, the effect 
of PAS is to produce more interactions involving 
downward-directed ions. This can be seen in Fig. 6, 
showing angular distributions for a moderate amount 
of magnetic convergence ( = 0.2) and three levels of 
PAS. Here,  = cos () where  is the angle between the 
normal to the solar surface and the direction of the ion. 
With no PAS, the distribution is peaked at  = 90 ( 
= 0), a fan-beam distribution, with some downward-
directed interactions ( < 0) from ions originally in the 
loss cone. As PAS increases ( decreases), the distribu-
tion becomes more downward directed. A consequence 
of the angular distribution is that when it is more 
downward-directed, the interactions occur deeper in 
the solar atmosphere.

2008 NRL REVIEW

115

FEATURED RESEARCH

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

)
1

r
s
(
 

 


d
N
d

/

0.00

-1.0

PAS
none
intermediate
strong

FIGURE 6
Angular distribution (reactions per 
steradian) of the interacting ions for 
 = 0.2 and several values of pitch 
angle scattering (PAS).

-0.5

0.0


0.5

1.0

Ion Energy at Interaction

The energies of the accelerated ions at interaction 
are mostly determined by the combination of the accel-
erated-ion spectral steepnesss (steeply falling spectra 
are referred to as soft and less steeply falling spectra 
as hard) and the ion-energy dependence of the 
specific production cross section. On average, harder 
accelerated-ion spectra result in higher interacting-ion 
energies. However, cross sections involving energetic 
 particles typically have lower threshold energies, so 
increasing the ratio of the number of accelerated  
particles to protons (/p) shifts the interacting-ion 
energies lower.

the dependence of the measurable Quantities on the 
loop model parameters

Table 1 summarizes the measurable quantities and 
indicates those loop parameters that affect each. In the 
following we discuss some of the most important of 
these parameter dependences. We distinguish two types 
of parameters: (1) acceleration parameters describing 
aspects of the accelerated ions and (2) physical param-
eters describing aspects of transport within the loop.

Narrow deexcitation-line yields and ratios depend 

on (1) the steepness of the accelerated-ion spectrum 
(here assumed a power law with index s) because of 
the different ion-energy dependences of their line-
production cross sections, (2) the ratio of the number 
of accelerated  particles to protons (/p) since both 
species contribute to narrow lines, and, most directly, 
(3) the relative abundances of the target elements in 
the solar atmosphere. The shape and Doppler shift of 
the lines depend on (1) the /p ratio since the heavier 
 particles produce higher recoil velocities for the 
excited nucleus, (2) the ion spectrum since a harder 

116

2008 NRL REVIEW

spectrum has more high-energy ions producing higher 
recoil velocities, and (3) the interacting-ion angular 
distribution, most directly determined by magnetic 
convergence () and PAS (). Since the interacting-
ion angular distribution is typically not isotropic, the 
location of the flare on the Sun (obs) will also affect 
the observed line shape. The time history will depend 
on the loop length L and on the amount of mirroring 
(through  and ).

The neutron-capture line yield depends on (1) the 

accelerated-ion spectral index s, (2) the /p ratio, (3) 
the interacting-ion angular distribution (through  and 
) since neutrons must be moving downward to be effi-
ciently captured, and (4) the photospheric abundance 
of 3He. Because the captures occur deep in the photo-
sphere, the capture photons can be strongly scattered, 
resulting in attenuation of the line, especially for flares 
near the solar limb where the path-length through the 
solar atmosphere is large. The flare location obs is thus 
an important parameter. The time history depends on 
(1) the interacting-ion angular distribution (through  
and ), (2) the photospheric abundance of 3He, and (3) 
the flare location obs. 

Similar to the neutron-capture line, the time- and 

energy-dependent energy spectra of the neutrons 
escaping the Sun and arriving at Earth depend on (1) 
the accelerated-ion spectral index s, (2) the /p ratio, 
(3) the interacting-ion angular distribution (through  
and ), (4) the loop length L, and (5) the flare location 
obs.

The yield of the annihilation line (which follows 

from positron production), depends on (1) the acceler-
ated-ion spectral index s, (2) the /p ratio, and, since 
the line can be more easily scattered than the deexcita-
tion lines, on (3) the depth of the positron production 
(through  and ). Because of this scattering, the yield 
also depends on (4) the flare location obs. The detailed 

TABLE 1  Measurable Quantities of High-Energy Flare Emissions and the 
Loop Model Parameters that Affect Them

Measurable
Quantity

narrow deexcitation

line fluences and ratios

narrow deexcitation
line shift and shape

narrow deexcitation

line time history

neutron-capture

line fluence

neutron-capture line

time history

neutron fluence

at Earth

neutron arrival time

history at Earth

511 keV line fluence

511 keV line shape

and continuum

Acceleration Parameter

Physical Parameter

/p, s

/p, s

aion(t)

/p, s

aion(t), /p, s

ambient abundances

, , obs, n(h)

, , L, n(h)

, , obs, n(h)
ambient 3He/H

, , obs, L, n(h)
ambient 3He/H

/p, s

, , obs, n(h)

aion(t), /p, s

, , obs, L, n(h)

/p, s, 3He/4He
acc. abundances

, , obs, n(h), T, X
ambient abundances

/p, 3He/4He, s

, , obs, n(h), T, X

511 keV line time

history

aion(t), /p, s

acc. abundances

, , obs, L, n(h), X

pion-decay radiation

yield

pion-decay radiation

spectral shape

pion-decay radiation

time history

images

/p, s

/p, s

aion(t)



ambient abundances

, , obs, n(h)

, , L, n(h)

L, obs

FEATURED RESEARCH

2008 NRL REVIEW

117

FEATURED RESEARCH

shape of the line depends on the annihilation process 
which, in turn, depends on the density (n), temperature 
(T), and ionization state (X) of the ambient medium.
The yield and spectral shape of pion-decay radia-
tion depends on (1) the accelerated-ion spectral index 
s, (2) the /p ratio, and (3) the interacting-ion angular 
distribution (through  and ).

analysis algorithm for Solar-Flare Gamma-Ray and 
Neutron data

From Table 1 and the above discussion we see that 
while there are a large number of quantities that can be 
measured, there are also a large number of parameters 
to be determined. In addition, each of the measurable 
quantities can depend on several parameters. Restrict-
ing an analysis to one or a small subset of the measur-
able quantities can result in parameter estimates that 
may be inconsistent with estimates derived from analy-
sis of other measurable quantities. And if the effect of 
all of the relevant parameters are not properly taken 
into account, the uncertainties can be underestimated. 
A reliable analysis must utilize as many measurable 
quantities as possible to determine as many parameters 
as possible. But because of the many inter-depen-
dences, this can be quite challenging, and additional 
assumptions may still be required to make progress in 
constraining the parameters. 

We have developed a data-analysis algorithm that 
provides the approach and analysis steps necessary for 
a comprehensive analysis of solar-flare gamma-ray line 
and neutron data.1,2,3 The guiding principle of the 
algorithm is to first consider those measurable quanti-
ties that depend on only one or two parameters and 
then, using those parameter estimates, proceed to other 
measurables that have more complicated dependences. 
To illustrate the procedure, we summarize some of the 
results from our recent analysis of the high-energy flare 
data available for the 1991 June 4 flare observed with 
OSSE (among other instruments). The June 4 flare 
remains unique for its breadth of available high-energy 
emission measurements. In that analysis, we established 
well-constrained values for the parameters and showed 
that the loop model can account for the wide variety of 
measurements available for this flare with reasonable 
values for the parameters.

In June 1991, an active region rotated onto the 

solar disk and produced some of the largest flares ever 
recorded. The active region first appeared at the east 
limb on June 1 and produced an intense flare. The peak 
of this flare was missed by the CGRO instruments due 
to a routine shut-down. As there was a high probability 
for subsequent intense flares, a solar Target of Oppor-
tunity was declared and OSSE stopped observing its 
current celestial target and re-oriented to the Sun. On 

118

2008 NRL REVIEW

June 4, a second intense flare occurred while OSSE was 
viewing the Sun. The flare was one of the most power-
ful nuclear gamma-ray line flares observed to date; 
most instruments, from the soft X-ray to the gamma-
ray bands, saturated at its peak. Energetic particles from 
the flare were observed in interplanetary space by the 
Ulysses EPAC experiment, GOES, and IMP-8 plat-
forms. In the visible light of H, the flare was located at 
N30E70, corresponding to a heliocentric angle obs of 
about 74.

We began the analysis with the parameter that 

is most directly established, the size of the flare loop 
determined from white-light images of the flare. 
(Ideally, images of gamma-ray emission loop foot-
points, such as obtained with RHESSI for more recent 
flares, would be used.) We assume the white-light 
patches in the images to be footpoints where the ions 
interact, implying loop lengths from 11,500 km to 
65,000 km, depending on which pair of patches is 
assumed to be associated with the loop producing the 
gamma rays.

The next parameter to be determined was the 
accelerated /p ratio. The most direct measure of 
/p is the measured fluence ratio of the 0.45 MeV 
deexcitation-line complex (produced exclusively by 
accelerated  particles) and a narrow line such as the 
4.439 MeV line of C. However, this ratio also depends 
on the accelerated-ion spectral index s. The spectral 
index can be determined from the measured fluence 
ratio of the 6.129 MeV O and 1.634 MeV Ne lines, but 
this ratio also depends on /p. We therefore simultane-
ously determined /p and s by calculating values of the 
two fluence ratios for a range of assumed values for 
/p and s and comparing them with measured fluence 
ratios. This provided a confidence region for the two 
parameters: the accelerated /p ratio was at least 0.4 
(considerably larger that the value of 0.03 found in the 
corona) and the spectral index s was 3.9  0.2 (similar 
to the average value of ~4.2 found from analyses of 
SMM flares).

With /p and s now determined, we next con-

strained  and  using the measured Doppler shift of 
the 4.439 MeV C line. Unfortunately, Doppler shifts 
from flares such as this located nearer the limb than 
disk center are minimal, and the resulting constraint 
was not useful. However, combining it with the  
constraint obtained from the time history of deexcita-
tion lines (using our already-determined value for the 
loop length L), we obtained a well-constrained con-
fidence region for the two parameters. We found that 
convergence of the magnetic field was required and 
that turbulence was present in the loop.

Finally, using all of the parameter values deter-

mined so far, we calculated neutron spectra arriving 
at Earth and compared them with neutron count rates 

FEATURED RESEARCH

obtained with OSSE. We found that the number of 
neutrons arriving at Earth was over-predicted, espe-
cially at early times. This can be seen in Fig. 7 compar-
ing the measured (data points) and predicted (green 
curve) neutron count rates. Neutrons arriving early 
are higher-energy neutrons produced by high-energy 
accelerated ions. Reducing the number of high-energy 
neutrons relative to low-energy neutrons can be 
achieved if the accelerated-particle spectrum steepens 
with energy, as long as this does not affect the other 
measurable quantities previously analyzed. This is 
possible since those emissions are produced by acceler-
ated ions with lower energies than the ions producing 
the neutrons escaping into space and surviving to 
Earth. We also show in Fig. 7 (red curve) the predicted 
neutron arrival time history calculated with a cutoff ion 
energy Ec = 125 MeV. We confirmed that such a cutoff 
did not affect the other calculated quantities.

diScuSSioN

This article presents our model for gamma-ray 

and neutron production by flare-accelerated ions 
in a magnetic loop, with model parameters directly 
related to the physical processes and conditions at 
the flare site. With this model, all of the measurable 
quantities associated with high-energy flare emission 
can be calculated, and comparison of model predic-
tions with measurements provides constraints on the 
parameters. But the dependences of the measurable 
quantities on the parameters is complex and obtaining 

parameter constraints can be difficult. We developed a 
flare-analysis algorithm that allows, for the first time, 
a comprehensive analysis of all measurable quantities. 
The algorithm considers first those measurable quanti-
ties that depend on only one or two parameters and 
then, with those parameter estimates, proceeds to other 
observables that have more complicated dependences. 
Reliable determination of all of the parameters requires 
that the observations cover a sufficiently wide range 
of the measurable quantities. To illustrate the proce-
dure, we summarized our analysis of the 1991 June 4 
flare, remarkable for its range of high-energy emission 
measurements.

The analysis procedure can be applied to other 
flares having a similarly wide range of measurable 
quantities, and we look forward to applying it to flare 
data obtained with GLAST as the new activity cycle 
develops. With the extended photon-energy range of 
GLAST, we will be able to expand our studies to the 
highest accelerated-ion energies. As our understanding 
of solar flares improves, we will be nearer the goal of 
predicting solar activity and preventing disruptions 
in our increasingly technology-dependent lives and 
endeavors.

ackNoWlEdGmENtS

This work is built on many years of research by 

many investigators, including R. Ramaty, B. Kozlovsky, 
R. Lingenfelter, G.H. Share, and X.-M. Hua. 

[Sponsored by NASA and ONR]

100.00

10.00

1

s
 
s
t
n
u
o
C

1.00

0.10

0.01

3:30:00

neutron count rate

narrow-line flux
(arbitrary units)

3:40:00

Time (UT on 4 June 1991)

3:50:00

4:00:00

4:10:00

FIGURE 7
Comparison of the neutron count rate time history measured with OSSE from the June 4 
flare with calculated count rate time histories. The green curve is for an unbroken power-
law accelerated-ion spectrum and the red curve is for a spectrum cut off at Ec = 125 
MeV. Also shown is the time history of the narrow deexcitation line flux (histogram).

2008 NRL REVIEW

119

FEATURED RESEARCH

References
1 R. Ramaty, B. Kozlovsky, and R.E. Lingenfelter, Nuclear 
Gamma-Rays from Energetic Particle Interactions, 
Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series 40, 487-526 (1979).
2 B. Kozlovsky, R.J. Murphy, and R. Ramaty, Nuclear 
Deexicitation Gamma-Ray Lines from Accelerated Particle 
Interactions, Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series 141, 523-
541 (2002).

3 R.J. Murphy, B. Kozlovsky, G.H. Share, X.-M. Hua, and R.E. 
Lingenfelter, Using Gamma-Ray and Neutron Emission 
to Determine Solar Flare Accelerated Particle Spectra and 
Composition and the Conditions within the Flare Magnetic 
Loop, Astrophysical Journal Supplement Series 168, 167-194 
(2007). 

 

T H E   A U T H O R

RoN muRphy received a B.S. in physics in 1979 and a 
Ph.D. in 1985, both from the University of Maryland. His 
thesis research involved high-energy emission from solar 
flares. He came to NRL in 1988 in a joint appointment with 
NRL and NASA Goddard Space Flight Center, then as a 
National Research Council researcher, and finally as a civil 
servant in 1990. He has continued his research involving 
solar flares, authoring and co-authoring a number of articles 
in refereed scientific publications. His research involves 
both theoretical calculations and analysis of gamma-ray and 
neutron data from a number of satellite instruments.

120

2008 NRL REVIEW

