GPSMeasuring Plate Motion
How fast are the tectonic plates moving?
Background pages to accompany: IRIS Animations:  GPSMeasuring Plate Motion

Introduction*
Scientists now have a fairly good understanding of how 

the plates move (Figure 1) and how such movements relate 
to earthquakes and volcanic activity. Movement is most 
pronounced along narrow zones between plates where the 
results of plate-tectonic forces are most evident (Figure 2). 
Current plate movement can be tracked directly by means 

of space-based geodetic measurements; geodesy is the 
science of the size and shape of the Earth. Because plate 
motions are global in scale, they are best measured by 
satellite-based methods. The late 1970s witnessed the rapid 
growth of space geodesy, a term applied to space-based 
techniques for taking precise, repeated measurements of 
carefully chosen points on the Earths surface separated 
by hundreds to thousands of kilometers. The Global 
Positioning System (GPS) has been the most useful for 
studying the Earths crustal movements. 

By repeatedly measuring distances between specific 
points, geologists can determine the movement along 
faults or between plates. The separations between GPS 
sites are already being measured regularly around the 
Pacific basin. By monitoring the interaction between the 
Pacific Plate and the surrounding mostly continental plates, 

HOT LINKS: 

Interactive Flash:  Walk-Run Triangulation

Interactive Flash:  Plate Boundaries

Animation:  Plate Boundaries

What is GPS? How does it work?

Using Real Data:

        Velocity Viewer: Real-time Plate Rate

        Data for Educators

Triangulating from Satellites

Activity:  What is a Rate?

scientists are learning more about events that build up 
to earthquakes and volcanic eruptions in the circum-
Pacific Ring of Fire. Space-geodetic data have 
already confirmed that the rates and directions of plate 
movements, averaged over several years, compare well 
with rates and directions of plate movements averaged 
over millions of years.

Figure 1:  General plate motions on a global scale. Regional maps show far more complicated motion vectors. 
Length of arrows indicates rate of movement of that part of the plate.
Map from From UNAVCO Plate Motion Calculator: http://sps.unavco.org/crustal_motion/dxdt/model/

*Text from www.gps.gov/,  www.usgs.gov and www.faa.gov

Before GPS how did we know the plates were moving?
Two lines of evidence unlocked the mystery: Seemingly 
related rock types great distances apart and the magnetic 
polarity recorded by ocean-floor rocks.

 Alfred Wegener (1880-1930) found that large-scale 

geological features on separated continents often matched 
very closely when the continents were brought together. 
For example, the Appalachian Mountains of eastern North 
America matched with the Scottish Highlands, and the 
distinctive rock strata of the Karroo system of South Africa 
were identical to those of the Santa Catarina system in 
Brazil. He was ostracized for his theory of continental 
drift because the all-important geology of ocean basins 
that confirm plate tectonics and continental drift was not 
sufficiently understood until the 1960s and 70s. Evidence 
of past rates of plate movement on a smaller scale can be 
obtained from geologic mapping. If a rock formation of 
known agewith distinctive composition, structure, or 
fossilsmapped on one side of a plate boundary can be 

A.

matched with the same formation on the other side of the 
boundary, then measuring the distance that the formation 
has been offset can give an estimate of the average rate of 
plate motion. This simple but effective technique has been 
used to determine the rates of plate motion at divergent 
boundaries, for example the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, and 
transform boundaries, such as the San Andreas Fault.

The oceans floors were a key piece to the puzzle. Because 

the ocean-floor magnetic striping records the flip-flops in 
the Earths magnetic field, scientists, knowing the timings 
of magnetic reversals, can calculate the average rate of 
plate movement over time spans of several million years. 
These average rates of plate separations can range widely. 
The Arctic Ridge has the slowest rate (less than 2.5 cm/yr), 
and the East Pacific Rise near Easter Island, in the South 
Pacific about 3,400 km west of Chile, has the fastest rate 
(more than 15 cm/yr).

B.

e
t

a Pla
c
u
e F
n d
a
u
J

e
t

n Pla
a
ric
e
m
h A

t
r
o
N

Figure 2:  Plate velocities from Plate Boundary Observatory (PBO)
A.) LEFTMap of the western U.S. shows movement across the San 

Andreas fault zone in California (Red arrows indicate direction and 
rate of relative motion; yellow lines = active faults) . 

B.) ABOVEThe northeast-trending vectors of Washington and 

northern Oregon show that this part of the North American plate 
is being pushed toward the northeast by the subducting Juan de 
Fuca Plate. These plates are locked together by immense friction 
along the plate boundary. The stored elastic energy is released 
every 300  500 years in a great (M9) earthquake. Subduction 
zones occur around the Pacific Rim (the Ring of Fire). Recent great 
earthquakes at subduction zones include the Sumatra 2004 and 
Chile 2010 earthquakes. Maps from UNAVCO :

 http://geon.unavco.org/unavco/IDV_for_GEON_gps.html

Reading GPS time-series plots
GPS measures rate of movement in north, east, 
and vertical directions that are combined to give 
information of the location in 3-D space. These 
motions are recorded onto three separate graphs 
as illustrated by Figures 3A and 3B.
WHAT IS A RATE?*  (click for details and activity)
	
	
	
	
	

A rate is a speed of motion  
Velocity has both magnitude (rate = speed)  
     and direction of motion 
Velocities are represented by vectors
Vectors can be mathematically manipulated 
Vectors can be used to describe properties 
    of motion

Every day we use rates to describe events that 

happen over a period of time. Perhaps you drove 65 
miles per hour to school this morning because you 
were running late, or you rode on an amusement 
park ride last weekend that went 80 miles per hour. 
Each time you describe a change in position with 
respect to time, you have used a rate to do it. Rates 
can be described mathematically as: rate = distance 
/ time. Velocity can be represented an arrow, whose 
length equals the rate (speed) of motion and whose 
orientation represents the direction of motion. These 
arrows are called vectors that describe rates and 
directions of motion. 

So why do people use vectors instead of just 
mathematical expressions? Actually people use 
both. A perfect example is the velocity maps used 
to describe how fast and in what direction GPS sites 
on the Earths plates are moving. Scientists first 
calculate velocities for each GPS site in centimeters 
per year, using mathematical equations. Then, they 
place the velocities, in the form of vectors, on a map 
of the Earth. This allows them to get a better mental 
picture of what is happening to the plates world wide. 
Velocity maps can be made for any area where the 
displacements of a sets of points been determined 
over an interval of time. A displacement is an overall 
change in position from the start to the end of a 
measurement interval. For maps of plate velocity, the 
rates are often given in cm/year.

 

A.
A.

s
r
e
t
e
m

i
l
l
i

m
n

 

i
 
t
n
e
m
e
c
a
p
s
i
D

l

Figures 3A: Graph of GPS movement shows a station in 
Washington that is being pushed back toward the northeast 
by the subducting Juan de Fuca Plate (Figure 2B).
Between 2004 and 2007 this station moved:

 

North: from -11 mm to +12 mm = 23 mm
East: from -15 mm to +18 mm = 33 mm

The larger error bars, data gaps, and glitches in the graph 
of vertical position show the larger errors involved in 
determining vertical location. For a classroom activity, we 
concentrate on the horizontal motions.

B.

NORTH:     23 mm 
EAST:
       33 mm
ACTUAL:  37 mm to East-northeast

s
r
a
e
y
3
n

 

 

i
 
l

a
t
o
t
 
,

H
T
R
O
N

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

0        5       10     15      20      25      30      35      40  
EAST, total mm in 3 years

* http://scign.jpl.nasa.gov/learn/gpsact2.htm

Figure 3B:: How far did it really move??  Plot the north 
and east vectors on the grid below and you determine that 
the movement was 37 mm toward the northeast.
NOTE:  Watch Roger Grooms video demonstration of this 
               (GPS_Activity_Parts3-5.mov)  on our web site.

Using GPS to Study Earthquakes & Volcanoes**

Monitoring volcanic deformation in Hawai`i

Changes to the surface of a volcano (volcano deformation) can provide clues about what is happening deep below 

the surface and provide telltale information of a forthcoming eruption. Deformation can be measured with GPS.

4A

4B

Figures 4a and 4b: By looking at the position of points on the Earths surface measured with GPS, scientists can detect the onset 
of deformation of the crust. For instance, at Mauna Loa volcano in May 2002, GPS stations on opposite sides of the summit started 
moving away from each other, indicating that the volcano was inflating. From Miklius and Cervelli, Nature, 2003.
For narrated animation of extension across a volcano visit:  
Measuring Deformation with Tilt and GPS :http://www.iris.edu/hq/programs/education_and_outreach/animations/16

Measuring displacement due to a recent earthquake in Parkfield, CA

5A

5B

Figures 5A and 5B): When an earthquake occurs, the ground on either side of the fault moves instantaneously, 
sometimes causing strong ground shaking. GPS measurements enable scientists to determine the length of these 
displacements (Figure 5A) and determine how much slip took place on the fault and where slip occurred. Although we 
cannot feel it, GPS measurements shows that the crust on either side of the fault continues to slip slowly for months to 
years after an earthquake (Figure 5B).

**This page from Using GPS to Study Plate Tectonics: www.unavco.org/edu_outreach/docs/gps_tev.pdf
      Figure credits. 4a and 4b: Miklius and Cervelli, 2003. 5 and 6: J. Murray.

What is GPS?
GPS is a relatively new technology that uses signals 
sent from satellites orbiting the Earth to very accurately 
determine the location on receivers on the surface. 
GPS is based on technologies developed for military 
and aerospace research, notably radio astronomy and 
satellite tracking. These satellites continuously transmit 
radio signals back to Earth. To determine its precise 
position on Earth (longitude, latitude, elevation), each 
GPS receiver must simultaneously obtain signals from 
at least four satellites.  

Satellites:   GPS relies on two dozen navigational 

satellites that orbit our planet at 20,000 km (12,500 
mi) above the surface every 12 hours, as part of the 
NavStar system of the U.S. Department of Defense. 
Spacing was determined so that from any point on 
Earth, at least 4 satellites will be above the horizon 
and detectable.  Each satellite has: 
1) a computer, 2) an atomic clock (Universal Time 
Coordinated, UTC), and 3) a radio. 
With a computerized understanding of its own orbit, 
it continually broadcasts its changing position and 
time via radio signals. Once a day, each satellite 
checks its own time and position with a ground 
station to make any needed corrections. This makes 
the GPS receiver the most accurate time piece 
available to you. 

GPS Receiver:  The GPS receiver on the ground 
detects the radio signals from the satellites and 
the computer triangulates its own position by 
getting bearings from a minimum of 3 satellites.  If 
4 or more satellites can be received, the receiver/
computer	can	figure	out	the	altitude	as	well	as	the	
geographic position.  
Triangulation is a geometric calculation of the 
distance from, and the angle to, each satellite.  The 
more satellites the GPS receiver sees the more 
accurate the location determination will be. The 
result is provided in longitude and latitude and 
can be accurate to within a range of 1020 meters 
for hand held GPS, and to within millimeters for 
anchored GPS stations. The most advanced GPS 
receivers used for the Plate Boundary Observatory 
can determine their location to a precision equal to 
the size of a grain of rice! 
If the GPS receiver is also equipped with a display 
screen that shows a map, the position can be shown 
on the map. If you are moving, most GPS receivers 
can calculate your speed and direction of travel 
and possibly give you estimated times of arrival to 
specified	destinations.

Right: 24 satellites circle 

the Earth.

Center:  Satellites have 

1) computer 
2) atomic clock 
3) radio

Below: GPS receiver 

detects and computes 
signals from 3 satellites

 

Note:  GPS ground station.
The radio waves actually 
travel toward the Earth not 
into space as is implied here! 

GPS ground station.

GPS can answer 5 questions simultaneously:
         1. Where am I?
         2. Where am I going?
         3. Where in my destination?
         4. Whats the best way to get there?
         5. When will I get there?
GPS is the only system today that can show your 
exact position on the Earth anytime, no matter 
where you are as long as you have contact with 
several satellites!

