10 World’s Most Beautiful National Parks
1. Snowdonia, Wales

As you might suppose from the name, Snowdonia National Park is set on Snowdon Mountain. The
mountain is 3560 feet tall and as picturesque as it is peaceful. Lakes and rivers are set amid trees and
rocky outcroppings, making it the perfect place to practice photography. Visitors will also find old
buildings, including several castles within park borders. The history of the area is full of folk tales and
legends and makes it an even more exciting place to visit.
In 1951, the Park was established as the 3rd National Park in Great Britain, after the Peak District and the
Lake District. The Park covers 2,140 km2 (827 square miles), and has 60 km (37 miles) of coastline. The
natural forests of the Park are of the mixed deciduous type. The Welsh Oak, ash, birch, hazel and
mountain-ash are the most common trees. Over 26,000 people live within the Snowdonia National Park,
of whom approximately 62% can speak some Welsh. Every year Snowdonia National Park attracts more
than 6 million visitors, making it the 3rd most visited National Park in Wales and England. If you are a
hiker, Snowdonia National Park is the perfect place to visit.

Source: Internet

2. Grand Canyon, the United States

The Colorado River carved out the Grand Canyon over hundreds of years, creating an amazingly
complex canyon. Tourists flock to the site every year to admire it or even to hike down and camp
in the myriad of channels cut out by the water. The Grand Canyon is one of the Natural Wonders
of the World and has also been named a UNESCO World Heritage site. It stretches over more than
1,200,000 acres in Arizona.
One of the best things about the Grand Canyon area is that it has some of the cleanest air in the
US. There are about 1,737 famous species of vascular plants, 195 species of lichen, 167 species of
fungi and 64 species of moss found in the Park. Grand Canyon has also a dozen endemic plants,
which are known only within the boundaries of the Park. However, only 10% of its flora is actually
exotic. Apart from casual sightseeing from the South Rim, running, hiking, rafting and helicopter
tours are highly popular here. The Grand Canyon 24 hour Ultra Marathon is a 126 km (78-mile)
race that takes participants out on the North Rim of Grand Canyon. So, if you are a runner, you
shouldn’t miss this event.

Source: Internet

3. Kruger National Park, South Africa

One of the largest national parks in the world, Kruger covers millions of acres of land. It is host to
an amazing number of African species, including elephants, giraffes and many other animals. You
can check these animals out from viewing towers scattered throughout the park. Apart from the
towers, development is nearly nonexistent and the park fends for itself in most ways.
The Park boasts 21 rest camps, 2 private lodge concessions, along with 15 private designated
safari lodges. Camping in the Kruger National Park has become more popular with backpackers
and tourists since it is cheaper, open to everyone and doesn’t require any special permission to
partake. The Kruger National Park offers 9 different trails, including overnight, but you may not
find trails in the wilderness areas.

Source: Internet

4. Deosai, Pakistan

Deosai National Park is best known for its impressive flowers. Every spring, thousands of
different types of flowers bloom. They form a living carpet of color that attracts an even larger
variety of butterflies. The park is certainly worth seeing in the spring, though it is lovely all year
round. Another point of interest would be the park’s incredible plateaus, some of the highest in
the world.
In 1993, the Park was established to protect the Himalayan Brown Bear along with its habitat.
Though the Government of Pakistan has taken several effective measures during the last decade,
the bear is still under great threat. There are also many great and unique animals and birds. The
Deosai National Park is a tourist attraction and many tourists who visit Baltistan also go to
Deosai.

Source: Internet

5. Kakadu National Park, Australia

The Australian government and the aboriginal people work together to manage the Kakadu National
Park. It is a World Heritage site and the amazing views attract tourists year round. One of the most
interesting attractions is the aboriginal rock art that can be found in the area. It is also home to a
range of animals, including the saltwater crocodile.
The flora of the Kakadu National Park is among the richest in northern Australia with over 1700
plant species, which is a result of the landform, geological and habitat diversity of the Park. The
Kakadu National Park is also one of the world’s most weed free national parks. No wonder the
Park draws hundreds of thousands of tourists per year.

Source: Internet

6. Hortobagy, Hungary

Hortobagy National Park was the first national park in Hungary. It was established as a national
park in 1973. In 1999, the Park was elected among the World Heritage sites. Hortobagy is rich with
unique folklore and interesting cultural history. It’s an official refuge for wild horses and home to
a number of endangered birds. The Park provides habitat for over 342 species of birds and is a
bird watcher’s paradise, with plenty of migratory waterfowl, too.

Source: Internet

7. Plitvice Lakes, Croatia

If you head into inland Croatia, you will find Plitvice National Park. It is an area of mountainous
terrain ideal for hiking and a number of lakes and streams. The unique thing about the water in the
park is that most of the lakes and streams contain travertine. This gives the water a clarity seldom
found in nature, as well as a very bright blue-green hue.

Source: Internet

8. Madain Saley National Historic Park, Saudi Arabia

Where many national parks are heavily forested, Madain Saley is almost entirely made up of desert
and rock. It is still one of the most beautiful sights you’ll see, however, particularly when you
come across one of the amazing oasis scattered throughout the park. An ancient burial ground is
also located on the site. It’s estimated that the more than 125 tombs and facades were cut from
rock somewhere between 500 BC and 100 AD. They are still in amazing condition and certainly
worth a visit if you’re in the area.

Source: Internet

9. Sagarmatha National Park, Nepal

Nepal has a unique, wild look to it and Sagarmatha is no exception. The park contains a number of
Sherpa villages, as well as a few monasteries. Here you will find Mount Everest, as well as its
sister mountains, so the national park sees quite a bit of traffic. Several animals make their home
here, including mountain goats that balance precariously along seemingly sheer rock cliffs.

Source: Internet

10. Iguazu National Park, Argentina and Brazil

The Iguazu National Park runs through Argentina and into Brazil. It protects the subtropical
rainforest here, as well as the Iguazu Falls. The falls are actually made up of hundreds of
waterfalls around a curved cliff. Visitors to the falls can take a boat to get a closer look or can
walk through the various waterfalls by crossing catwalks. The park is home to a wide range of
wildlife, including howler monkeys, jaguars, tapirs, and caimans.
Around the world, countries are preserving their most fascinating and historical areas. National
parks protect the natural beauty and keep it accessible for future generations. While all parks
have something lovely about them, the places on this list are some of the more amazing ones out
there. Have you ever visited any of these breathtakingly beautiful parks? Do you know any other
park to add to this list?

Source: Internet

