UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON SUSTAINABLE 
UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON SUSTAINABLE 
UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON SUSTAINABLE 
UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON SUSTAINABLE 

DEVELOPMENT (RIO+20)
DEVELOPMENT (RIO+20)    
DEVELOPMENT (RIO+20)
DEVELOPMENT (RIO+20)

    

NATIONAL PREPARATORY PROCESS 
NATIONAL PREPARATORY PROCESS     
NATIONAL PREPARATORY PROCESS 
NATIONAL PREPARATORY PROCESS 

 

 
 

Report for Rwanda 
National  Report 
National  
for Rwanda     
Report 
National  
National  
Report 
for Rwanda 
for Rwanda 

 
 
By 
 
 

Dr. Alfred R. Bizoza 

 
 

For  

 
 

The Government of Rwanda  

 

With  

 

Support from UNDESA  

 
 

    
    
    
    
    
June 2012
June 
2012    
June 
June 
20122012

0 | P a g e  
 

TABLE  OF CONTENTS 
TABLE  OF CONTENTS     
TABLE  OF CONTENTS 
TABLE  OF CONTENTS 
    
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ..................................................................................................... 2 

1. BACKGROUND ................................................................................................................ 4 

1.1. Introduction.................................................................................................................. 4 
1.2. Context of the study ...................................................................................................... 4 
1.3. Objectives..................................................................................................................... 5 
1.4. Assessment  Approach and Materials of the study .............................................................. 5 
1.5. Scope of Assessment ...................................................................................................... 7 
1.6. Structure of the  Report.................................................................................................. 7 

2. AN OVERVIEW   OF MAJOR RESOLUTIONS AND AGREEMENTS  OF RIO EARTH 

SUMMIT(S) .......................................................................................................................... 8 

2.1. RIO Earth Summit ........................................................................................................ 8 
2.2. Objectives and Themes for Rio+ 20 ................................................................................ 9 
3. DEFINITION OF KEY CONCEPTS ................................................................................ 10 

3.1. Meaning of Green Economy ......................................................................................... 10 
3.2. The Concept of Sustainable Development in Rwanda....................................................... 10 
3.3. Institutional Framework ............................................................................................... 11 

4. CURENT STATUS  OF  SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT  IN RWANDA COMPARED 

TO RI0+10 ......................................................................................................................... 12 

4.4. Transport and Energy .................................................................................................. 19 
4.5. Trade and Regional Integration ..................................................................................... 20 
4.6. Human Development and Social Sectors......................................................................... 20 
4.7 . Key Determinants of observed Progress ......................................................................... 26 
5. INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS  FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT............ 28 

5.1. Governance Framework ................................................................................................ 28 
5.2. Integrated Planning and Decision Making....................................................................... 28 
5.3. New Institutions towards Sustainable Development ......................................................... 29 
6. CONCLUSIONS.............................................................................................................. 30 

ANNEX .............................................................................................................................. 31 

 

Deleted: 3

Deleted: 5

Deleted: 5

Deleted: 5

Deleted: 6

Deleted: 6

Deleted: 8

Deleted: 8

Deleted: 9

Deleted: 9

Deleted: 10

Deleted: 11

Deleted: 11

Deleted: 11

Deleted: 12

Deleted: 13

Deleted: 20

Deleted: 21

Deleted: 21

Deleted: 27

Deleted: 29

Deleted: 29

Deleted: 29

Deleted: 30

Deleted: 31

Deleted: 32

1 | P a g e  
 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY        
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
    
Rwanda has been elected to participate in the national preparatory process in advance of the 
United  Nations Conference  on  Sustainable Development (UNCSD) to  take place in  Rio de 
Janeiro from 20th to 22nd, June 2012.  

This report summarizes the progress made in Rwanda in terms of environment and sustainable 
development since  the  Rio Declaration on Environment and Development in 1992 in Rio de 
Janeiro,  Brazil;  referred  as  Earth  Summit.  This  summary  is  based  on  secondary  data  from 
different national reports as documented in the stocktaking report  and inputs from different 
stakeholders.  

There is greater evidences that number of achievements and challenges from different sectors ( 
Environment  and  natural  resources  management,  Agricultural  productivity  and  livestock, 
Transport and Energy, Trade and Regional Integration, and Human Development and Social 
Sectors)  was  identified  to  inform  on  areas  that  need  more  attention  in  the  next  wave  of  
environment and sustainable development in Rwanda.  

Rwanda  has  promoted  integrated  planning  and  decision  making  process  through  different 
planning  and  development  approaches.  The  Economic  Development  and  Poverty  Reduction 
strategy (EDPRS)  is the leading planning tool opted after the PRSPs since 2008. Other tools 
aligned  on  the  EDPRS  include  the  sector  strategic  plan  (with  a  5  years  planning  horizon), 
District  Development  Plan,  Long  Term  Investment  Framework  (LTIF),  and  Medium  Term 
Expenditure Framework.  

Findings  of  this  report  show  also  areas  that  need  closer  attention  by  the  policy  makers  to 
support the process of green economy  in the context of sustainable development. One of the 
prominent  area  that  captured  more  attention  is  the  role  of  the  private  sector  in  economic 
development.  Despite greater efforts made in the past to encourage the private sector play its 
role,  there  is  yet  a  need  to  enhance  public  private  partnerships  for  a  sustained  development.  
The  Private  Sector  is  assumed  to  play  major  role  along  the  value  chain  especially  in 
transforming the agriculture sector. 

 Capacity building ( both skilled human and financial resources )  to meet the demands of each 
sector in terms of activity implementation was also highlighted as a restraining factor towards 
sustainable development.  More  specifically,   the  role  of Monitoring  and  Evaluation  is  found 
key in terms of capacity building to inform processors on their achievements and constraints. 
Similarly,  some  sectors  are  yet  to  develop  their  database  to  serve  as  benchmarks  for  their 
evaluation. The Role  of the National  Institute  of Statistics  in this area is highly  needed and 
recommended.  

This  report  outlines  also  the  importance  that  Rwanda  has  attached  to  institutional 
transformation.   different institutional innovations  (in the broad sense of structures, policies, 
regulations)  drive the development in various sectors of economy. . Although complementary 
towards sustainable development, the challenge remains on how  and the extent to which these 
are  being  integrated  by  local  governments  (  District  and  Sectors)  in  their  respective  District 
Development  Plans  and    Imihigo    Performance  Contracts.  Therefore,  there  is  need  to 

2 | P a g e  
 

establish  a framework that easy the coordination of different initiatives around green economy 
and sustainable development.   

In all, apart from the above areas highlighted for more consideration,  findings from this report 
show  that  Rwanda  has  made  tremendous  efforts  towards  environment  and  sustainable 
development.  Thus,  results  of  this  report  form  a  basis  for  future  perspectives  of  Rwanda  in 
terms of a green economy   in the context of sustainable development and poverty eradication; 
and the institutional framework for sustainable development.  

3 | P a g e  
 

1. 1. 1. 1. BACKGROUND 
BACKGROUND     
BACKGROUND 
BACKGROUND 

 

1.1. 1.1. 1.1. 1.1. Introduction
Introduction    
Introduction
Introduction

  

Rwanda has been elected to participate in the national preparatory process in advance of the 
United  Nations Conference  on  Sustainable Development (UNCSD) to  take place in  Rio de 
Janeiro from 20th to 22nd, June 2012. This is a follow up of other previous UNCSD held in the 
past mainly that of 3rd to 14th, June 1992 in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. After ten years, Rwanda 
participated  also  in  the  RIO+10  World  Summit  held  in  Johannesburg,  South  Africa  , 
September  2002.  In  this  summit  Rwanda  presented  its  national  report  on  sustainable 
development and the implementation of the Agenda 21.  

 

The  2002  national  report  evaluated  the  progress  made  in  different  areas  of  sustainable 
development  during  the  period  1992-2001.  These  areas  include  socio-economic  dimensions, 
management  of  natural  resources,  partnerships  with  different  stakeholders  including  civil 
societies,  and  the  execution  of  Agenda 21.  This  report  was  prepared  through  a participatory 
process involving different stakeholders who dare to address issues related to environment and 
sustainable development. 

 

In  this  connection,  the  United  Nations  Department  of  Economic  and  Social  Affairs 
(UNDESA)  has  availed  its  support  for  a  national  consultative  workshop  to  facilitate  multi-
stakeholder consultations in advance of the Rio+20 Conference of June 2012. The motivation 
is  to  build  national  capacity  to  engage  fully  in  the  Rio+20  process  as  well  as  to  ensure 
continuing efforts to implement the outcomes of the upcoming Conference.  

 

The national preparation process consists of three consecutive and interlinked phases. All three 
phases contribute to the preparation of the national report document while building capacity 
on  the  issues  of  sustainable  development.  These  three  phases  comprise:  the  preparation  of  a 
stocktaking  report  (based  on  consultations  of  key  informants  and  desk  review);  a  multi-
stakeholder consultative meeting that addresses the issues of the UNCSD; and the outcomes of 
both the stocktaking exercise and multi-stakeholder meeting will be documented in a synthesis 
national report. More details about the three phases are detailed in Sub-section 1.3.  
 

1.2. 1.2. 1.2. 1.2. Context of the study 
Context of the study     
Context of the study 
Context of the study 

 

Rwanda has participated and subscribed to resolutions and agreements of the United Nations 
Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) held at Rio de Janeiro during 3rd to 
14th  June, 1992  in  Brazil,  referred as  Earth  Summit.    After  ten  years,    a World  summit was 
organized in 2002 (Rio+10) to evaluate the progress made so far with respect  to environment 
and  sustainable  development.  It  is  in  the  same  line  that  this  report  comes  to  evaluate  the 
progress made  by Rwanda after 20 years (Rio+20) for the UNCED  planned to take place in 
Rio de Janeiro from 20th to 22nd , June 2012. 
 

4 | P a g e  
 

The logic of this report stands as a review of the progress made in various development areas in 
the last two decades, the current status, and future perspectives in terms of green economy and 
sustainable  development.  The  intention  is  to  document  actions  taken  by  Rwanda,  challenges 
encountered  in  the  implementation  of  RIO  resolutions  as  well  as  the  successes  made  in 
different  areas  such  as  agriculture,  transport,  energy,  climate  change,  biodiversity,  land 
degradation,  water,  and  socioeconomic dimensions  (such  as  hunger  and poverty eradication).  
This  will  enable    a  number  of  expected  outcomes  from  the  upcoming  conferences  to  be 
identified through a consultative process with different stakeholders. Results from consultation 
with  different  stakeholders  shed  light  on  future  perspectives  relative  to  green  economy  and  
sustainable development in Rwanda.    

    

1.3. 1.3. 1.3. 1.3. Objectives 
Objectives     
Objectives 
Objectives 
 
The overall objective of this study is to facilitate the national consultative workshop in Rwanda 
for national preparatory process of the UNCSD to take place in Rio de Janeiro in June 2012. 
More specifically, the study intends: 
 
-  To  generate  a  stocktaking  report  that  will  guide  the  country  multi-stakeholder 

consultations in advance of the Rio+20 conference. 

-  To create an environment that facilitates more engagement by different stakeholders  in the 
process of achieving consensus on key success stories and gaps to be addressed relative to 
green economy and sustainable development at country level, and future prospects.  

-  To decide on how to ensure continuing efforts to implementing the outcomes of the 2012 

Rio Conference.  

The last two objectives will be achieved through the multi-stakeholders consultative meeting to 
be organized. Findings of this stocktaking report deals with the first objective.  

1.4. 1.4. 1.4. 1.4. Assessment 
Approach and Materials of the study 
Assessment     Approach and Materials 
of the study     
Approach and Materials 
Assessment 
Assessment 
Approach and Materials 
of the study 
of the study 
 
Reference made to the nature of the assignment, the methodology used is mainly participatory 
in  the  sense  that  opinions  of  key  stakeholders  in    sustainable  development  in  Rwanda  were  
collected and documented.  Preparation and  facilitation  of the multi-stakeholders consultative 
meeting  constitutes  a  conducive  environment  for  this  participatory  approach.  Another 
component of this participatory approach lies under cooperation between different institutions 
involved  in  the  design  and  implementation  of  this  study.  These  comprise    the  Ministry  of 
Natural Resources, Rwanda Environment Management Authority (REMA), Rwanda Natural  
Resources  Authority  (RNRA),  the  UNDESA  (for  overall  direction),  and  UNDP-Rwanda. 
The logic of this study involves mainly three phases as suggested in the terms of reference.  

 

    
    
    

5 | P a g e  
 

the 

current 

in 

status  of  Rwanda 

 Phase 1. Stocktaking report
 Phase 1. Stocktaking report    
 Phase 1. Stocktaking report
 Phase 1. Stocktaking report
 
In  order  to  prepare  a  good  stocktaking  report  within  the  remaining  timeframe,  a  review  of 
relevant documentation (such as national strategies, assessment reports, plans, policies, capacity 
needs  assessments,  and  practical  experiences,  NBSAPs,  NAPAs)  will  feed  into  a  deeper 
understanding  of 
environment 
protection/management    and  socioeconomic  development.  The  national  report  of  Rwanda 
presented in 2002 at the World Summit in Johannesburg, South Africa serves as one of key 
references  for  the    2012  national  report.    Other  reference  documents  include  the    Rwanda 
Vision  2020,  the  PRS  and    EDPRS  Self-assessment      report  (  2008-2011),  the  MDG 
evaluation  report,  District  EDPRS  self-assessment  Reports,  Sector-specific  EDPRS  self-
Assessment Reports, State of the environment report (REMA, 2009), From Post-Conflict to 
environmentally Sustainable Development (UNEP, 2011), and other resource documents to be 
identified in the course of the study. Therefore, the current  aims to  give the progress made so 
far by Rwanda in the last two decades based on information from a desk review of the above 
documents, among others.   

terms  of 

 

From this review, key gaps were e identified for each sector of which responsible institution (s)  
provided  additional  information  and  ,  proposed  respective  actions  and  future  prospects.    In 
addition,  Information  gained  at  this  stage    from  different  stakeholders  were    used  to 
complement existing secondary data for the stocktaking report and for this national report. The 
first draft of the stocktaking report was  sent to different and institutions identified from the 
desk review for them to feed other relevant information for this report.            
    
Phase 2. Multi
Phase 2. Multi----stakeholder consultative meeting  
stakeholder consultative meeting      
Phase 2. Multi
Phase 2. Multi
stakeholder consultative meeting  
stakeholder consultative meeting  
 
Due to the time constraint, this meeting did not take place. However, the Ministry of Natural 
Resources,  REMA,  and  UNDP  Country  Office    contacted  a  number  of  knowledgeable  and 
senior  representatives  from    central  government  Institutions  (such  as  MINEDUC  &  HLIs, 
MoH,  MINIRENA,  MINECOFIN,  Ministry  of  Trade  and  Industry,  and  Ministry  of 
Agriculture,  MININFRA),    International  Organizations,  donor  organizations,  private  sector,  
and  major groups  representatives (such as women,  children,  farmers, youth, trade unions and 
others)    to  give  their  inputs  on  the  stocktaking    report  produced  at  phase  1.  Information 
obtained at this stage in addition to the stocktaking report added value to the  preparation and 
the writing of the national report (Phase 3, below).  
    
Phase 3.  Preparation of Draft National Report     
Phase 3.  Preparation of Draft National Report                 
Phase 3.  Preparation of Draft National Report     
Phase 3.  Preparation of Draft National Report     
 
Information obtained  at phases 1 and 2 allowed us to have this synthesis report.  This report 
will  focus on the  UNCSD  objectives  and  themes in  the  context  of  the  traditional themes  of 
sustainable  development,  the  present  situation,  experiences  gained,  and  aspirations  of  the 
country.  The  report  focused  on  the  following  aspects  :    key  issues  and  barriers  affecting 
sustainable development , options for green economy from different perspectives (government, 
major  groups  and  donors),  what  institutional  arrangement  needed  to  sustain  goals  of 
Sustainable Development (SD), major recommendations to strengthen the national sustainable 
development  agenda  based  on  the  multi-stakeholders  dialogue  and  the  outcomes  of  the 
stakeholders consultations .  

6 | P a g e  
 

    

Scope of Assessment 
1.5. 1.5. 1.5. 1.5. Scope of A
ssessment     
Scope of A
Scope of A
ssessment 
ssessment 
 
The scope of assessment is  at country level for the last decade. This assessment will determine 
the  current  status  of  Rwandas  sustainability  measured  through  social,  economic,  and 
environmental indicators. Reference will be made to commitments of Rwanda in RIO in 1992, 
RIO+10  in  2002,  and  the  orientation  of  Rwanda  for  the    next  decade  (Vision  2020).  In 
addition  to  progress  made  by  Rwanda,  the  assessment  will  contribute  to  the  knowledge  of 
encountered challenges towards sustainable development and recommend new areas for actions.   
For this purpose, there are many government line ministries and   institutions  concerned with 
issues of green and sustainable development  and these added value to this report: Ministry of 
Natural  Resources,  Ministry  of  Finance,  Ministry  of  Trade  and  Industry,  Ministry  of 
Agriculture,  Ministry  of  Health  (MoH),  Ministry  of  Education  (MINEDUC),  Higher 
Learning Institutions, Office of the Prime Minister (PRIMATURE )  (for Gender issues), and 
Ministry of Infrastructure (MININFRA).    

1.6.1.6.1.6.1.6.    Structure of the 
Structure of the  Report 
 Report     
Structure of the 
Structure of the 
 Report 
 Report 
 
This  report  is  constructed  around  a  number  of  Sections  about  environment  and  sustainable 
development  in  Rwanda.  Together,  these  sections  explore  the  successes,  challenges,  current 
status,  institutional  arrangements,  and  future  perspectives  of  Rwanda,  with  focus  to  green 
economy  and  sustainable  development.  More  specifically,  Section 2 gives  a  brief  overview  of 
major  resolutions  and  agreements  of  Rio,  while  Section  3  gives  definitions  of  some  of  key 
concepts used in this report.  Section 4 provides the current status of sustainable development 
in Rwanda. We present in the same section key challenges and success factors for sustainable 
development  with  closer  attention  to  environment  and  natural  resources  management,  socio-
economic  dimensions,  partnerships,  and  implementation  of  Agenda  21,  among others.  In 
Section  5,  the  report  outlines  the  institutional  arrangement  opted  by  Rwanda  to  support 
sustainable development. The last Section concludes the report.   

7 | P a g e  
 

    

2. 2. 2. 2. AN OVER
AN OVERVIEW   OF MAJOR RESOLUTIONS AND 
VIEW   OF MAJOR RESOLUTIONS AND 
AN OVER
AN OVER
VIEW   OF MAJOR RESOLUTIONS AND 
VIEW   OF MAJOR RESOLUTIONS AND 
 OF RIO EARTH SUMMIT
AGREEMENTS  OF RIO
AGREEMENTS 
 EARTH SUMMIT(S)(S)(S)(S)    
 EARTH SUMMIT
 OF RIO
AGREEMENTS 
AGREEMENTS 
 OF RIO
 EARTH SUMMIT

    

2.1. 2.1. 2.1. 2.1. RIO Earth Summit 
RIO Earth Summit     
RIO Earth Summit 
RIO Earth Summit 

 

The  Earth  summit  grouped  more  than  178  governments  represented  by  Heads  of  State  or 
Government  adopted  a  number  of  resolutions  also  known as  the  Earth  Summit  Agreements. 
These agreements are grouped under three major categories aimed at changing the traditional 
approach to development (See United Nations Report, 1997): 
 
  Agenda  21  a  comprehensive  programme  of  action  for  global  action  in  all  areas  of 

sustainable development;  

 The Rio Declaration on Environment and Development  a series of principles defining the 
rights and responsibilities of States;  

  The  Statement  of  Forest  Principles    a  set  of  principles  to  underlie  the  sustainable 

management of forests worldwide. 

 
 
The Agenda 21 contains detailed proposals for developmental actions  in different areas such 
as social and economic areas, and for conserving and managing the natural resources that are 
the  basis  for  life.  The  underpinning  assumption  for  participating  government  is  that  the 
integration  of   development  and  environmental  concerns  will  lead  to  the fulfillment  of  basic 
needs, improved standards for all, better protected and better managed ecosystems and a safer 
and  a more prosperous  future  (  United  Nations  Report,  1997).    In addition,    development 
actions  should  consider  and  strengthen  the  role  of  different  groups  namely  women,  farmers, 
trade  unions,  children  and  youth,  and  Non-Governmental  Organizations  towards  sustainable 
development.  
 
The  RIO  declaration  resulted  from  the  United  Nations  Conference  for  Sustainable 
development  held  at    Rio  de  Janeiro,  Brazil  for  the  period  of   June   3rd  to  14th, 1992.  This 
declaration  guides  States  on  issues  regarding  environment  and  sustainable  development.  
Participant-countries agreed on 27 principles indicating the rights and responsibilities of States 
with  respect  to  environment  and  sustainable  development.  They  also  constitute  fixed  bench 
marks  for  member  of  states  in  addressing  concerns  of  environment  and  sustainable 
development. The principles are detailed in the report of the UNCED (1992).  
 
The  Statement  of  Forest  Principles  was  the  first  global  consensus  reached  out  for  the 
sustainable management of forests ( United Nations, 1997). Among its provisions include the 
following (United Nations, 1992):   

8 | P a g e  
 

  That all countries, notably developed countries, should make an effort to green the world 

through reforestation and forest conservation; 

  That States have a right to develop forests according to their socio-economic needs, in 

keeping with national sustainable development policies; and 

  That specific financial resources should be provided to develop programmes that encourage 

economic and social substitution policies.  

In 2002, the representatives of the peoples of the world, assembled at the World Summit on 
Sustainable  Development  in  Johannesburg,  South  Africa,  from  2  to  4 September  2002, 
reaffirmed their commitment to sustainable development. The main reason for this summit was 
to evaluate what was achieved in relation to Rio agreements of 1992.  Rwanda also participated 
and has presented the progress made after 10 years and the way forward in different areas of 
sustainable development.   Among the perspectives opted at this time include the following ( 
MINITERRE, 2002:68):   

  To  finalize  the  writing  of  Agenda  21  which  was  already  under  construction  so  that  this 

may serve as reference in the implementation of Rio recommendations.   

  Programme actions will continue to address issues of poverty eradication, improve health 
conditions, environmental degradation, resources management, basic infrastructure such as 
access  to  potable  water,  electricity,  education,  roads,  telecommunication,  and  population 
growth.  

  Continue  reinforcing  the  process  of  decentralization  and  good  governance  already 
undertaken by Rwanda. In this line, the central government will support local government 
for environmental management. This was  supposed to facilitate local government execute 
local plans regarding environmental protection in line with local specificities.  
  

Objectives and Themes for Rio+ 20 
2.2. 2.2. 2.2. 2.2. Objectives and 
Themes for Rio+ 20     
Objectives and 
Objectives and 
Themes for Rio+ 20 
Themes for Rio+ 20 

The main objective of the Rio+20 is to secure renewed political commitment for sustainable 
development, assess the progress to date and the remaining gaps in the implementation of the 
outcomes  of  the  major  summits  on  sustainable  development,  and  address  new  and  emerging 
challenges ( UNCSD, 2012)1. The assessment of the progress in terms of environment and 
sustainable  development  will  consider  the  period  of  the  last  20  years  since  the  first  Earth 
summit in 1992.  Accordingly, two main themes constitute the focus of the conference: a green 
economy  in  the  context  of  sustainable  development  and  poverty  eradication;  and  (b)  the 
institutional framework for sustainable development.  

                                                 
1  UNCSD (2012). [ Internet]. Rio+20- United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development. Accessed from :   
http://www.uncsd2012.org/rio20/objectiveandthemes.html. On 22nd May, 2012.  

9 | P a g e  
 

3. 3. 3. 3. DEFINITION OF KEY CONCEPTS 
DEFINITION OF KEY CONCEPTS     
DEFINITION OF KEY CONCEPTS 
DEFINITION OF KEY CONCEPTS 
 

3.1. 3.1. 3.1. 3.1. Meaning of Green Economy 
Meaning of Green Economy  
Meaning of Green Economy 
Meaning of Green Economy 
 
There is no agreement on a common definition of a green economy and rather than seeking one 
definition, there is a consensus on focusing more on approaches and national policies consistent 
with the general understanding of a green economys effects. Some countries argue that a green 
economy  must  contribute  to  advancing  sustainable  development,  reinforcing  its  three  pillars 
which  are  economic  growth,  human  development  and  environmental  protection.  It  should 
embrace both development and environment agendas and help to create new jobs.  The African 
Development  Forum  held  in  2010,  agreed  that  the  concept  of  green  economy  aimed  at 
improving  human  well-being  without  undermining  the  resource  base  that  current  and  future 
generation  depend  on 
the 
internationalization  of  environmental  externalities  in  prices,  taxes  and  subsidies,  public 
expenditures  on  green  infrastructure  and  technology,  renewable  energy,  energy  and  material 
efficiency improvements and sustainable buildings.   

livelihoods.  Green  economy  policies 

include 

for 

their 

The Concept of Sustainable Development in Rwanda 
3.2. 3.2. 3.2. 3.2. The Concept of 
Sustainable Development in Rwanda         
The Concept of 
The Concept of 
Sustainable Development in Rwanda 
Sustainable Development in Rwanda 

 

Sustainable development is a pattern of economic growth in which resource use aims to meet 
human needs while preserving the environment so that these needs can be met not only in the 
present, but also for the future generations. In other words, it is the development as that meets 
the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their 
own  needs  (UN  Worlds  Commission  on  Environment  and  Development  Report,  1987). 
Sustainable  development  takes  into  account  society,  environment  and  economic  factors 
conceptualized  as  pillars  in  order  to  ensure  a  more  balanced  form  of  development.  As 
documented  in  REMA  (2010),  there  are  different  models  of  sustainable  development.  For 
instance Hattings model  is a three sphere model from which three pillars are intertwined and 
they embrace a holistic approach of in the process of sustainable development as depicted by 
Figure 1  ( REMA, 20102, citing, Hatting, 2005).  

 
Figure 1:
Figure 1: Sustainable Development ( Hatting, 2005), cited byREMA (2010)  
Figure 1:
Figure 1:
 

 

                                                 
2 REMA (2010). Rwanda Environmental Education for Sustainable Development Strategy: A strategy and 
Action Plan for 2010-2015. Rwanda Environment Management Authority, Kigali, Rwanda.  

10 | P a g e  
 

3.3. 3.3. 3.3. 3.3. Institutional Framework 
Institutional Framework     
Institutional Framework 
Institutional Framework 
 
An effective institutional  framework is key  for sustainable development at all levels. It 
facilitates the full implementation  and follow up of the  agenda  of the development. It 
should lead to the strengthening of international bodies and organizations dealing with 
sustainable  development,  while  respecting  their  existing  mandates,  as  well  as  to  the 
strengthening  of  relevant  regional,  national  and  local  institutions.  Solid  institutions 
responsive  to  the  needs  of  the  people  and  improved  infrastructure  are  the  basis  for 
sustained economic growth, poverty eradication, and employment creation.  

11 | P a g e  
 

    

4.4.4.4.    CURENT STATUS 
CURENT STATUS     OF OF OF OF     SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT  IN 
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT  IN 
CURENT STATUS 
CURENT STATUS 
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT  IN 
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT  IN 
RWANDA COMPARED TO RI0+10
RWANDA COMPARED TO RI0+10    
RWANDA COMPARED TO RI0+10
RWANDA COMPARED TO RI0+10

    
4.1.4.1.4.1.4.1.Introduction 
Introduction     
Introduction 
Introduction 
 

The assessment of sustainable development is mostly done with reference to three pillars- 
economic growth, human development and environmental protection. These can be examined 
at local, national, regional or global levels.  
 
Rwanda has implemented the first Poverty Reduction Strategy (PRSP) from 2002 to 2005 to 
manage the transitional period of rehabilitation and reconstruction after the period of war and 
genocide against the Tutsi (MINECOFIN, 2011)3.  Good progress was achieved with good 
results in social sectors (health and education) than in productive sectors including agriculture, 
infrastructure  and  the  private  sector.  Thus,  these  performances  were  not  translated  in 
significant reduction of poverty and inequality4.  
 
In  order  to  respond  to  constraints  faced  during  the  implementation  of  PRSP1,  a  new 
Economic  Development  and  Poverty  Reduction  (EDPRS)  strategy  was  developed  for  the 
period 2008-2012,  focusing  on  three flagship programmes:   sustainable  growth for jobs and 
exports,  vision  2020  Umurenge  program  to  address  the  issue  of  extreme  poverty  and 
vulnerability, especially in rural areas as well as the governance focused on maintaining peace 
and  security.  The  EDPRS  guides  the  development  of  sector  strategic  plans  and  districts 
development plans. 

 

The overall objective of the EDPRS was to reduce the share of the population living in poverty 
from 56.9% in 2005-6 to 46% in 2012-13.  The EICV III shows that this target is already 
surpassed one year before the end of EDPRS. In 2011, 44.9% of the population was under the 
poverty line and the share of people living in the extreme poverty was 24.1% against the target 
of 24%, which is a decline of 37%, compared with 2005-6. The assessment of the EDPRS 
shows that more than 85% of the targets have been met, exceeded or is highly on track to be 
achieved. The implementation rate of policy actions was very high (96%) as 485 out of 504 
policy actions are fully implemented. 

 

The  good  result  was  achieved  due  to  the  participation  of  the  population,  home  grown 
initiatives  such  as  umuganda,  the  ownership  of  the  EDPRS  by  all  stakeholders  and  the 
alignment  of  all  resources  to  the  framework  of  the  EDPRS,  adequate  institutional  and  legal 
framework, improved service delivery with ICT based solutions. 
 

                                                 
3 MINECOFIN ( 2011). EDPRS: Lessons Learned  2008-2011. Ministry of Finance and Economic Planning, 
Kigali, Rwanda.  
4 MINECOFIN (March 2011). 3- years of the economic development and poverty reduction (EDPRS). A 
summary implementation report. 2008-2010.  

12 | P a g e  
 

However,  the  following  shortcomings  were  identified:  lack  of  exhaustive  and  well-articulated 
strategies  in  some  sectors,  issues  related  to  disaster  management  and  risk  reduction,  regional 
integration and climate change, insufficient coordination and communication across sectors and 
between  central  and  local  government  entities,  poor  procurement  planning  and  insufficient 
capacity  of  private  sectors  which  have  delayed  some  important  projects.    In  this  chapter  we 
present main achievements as well as challenges in different sectors.  

 

4.2. 4.2. 4.2. 4.2. Environment and Natural Resource Management 
Environment and Natural Resource Management     
Environment and Natural Resource Management 
Environment and Natural Resource Management 

    
2.1.1.  Water Resource Management 
2.1.1.
Water Resource Management     
2.1.1.
2.1.1.
Water Resource Management 
Water Resource Management 

 
The  EDPRS  focuses    on  water  management  and  development  for  its  multi-use.    It  has  not 
however, considered  the cross cutting nature of water resources management and the impact of 
climate  change  and  other  environment  changes  which    could  have  negative  impact  on  water 
resources5.  

Regarding the legal and institutional framework, a law governing water has been approved in 
2009  and  it  is  operational.  The  water  resources  management  sector  policy  is  being  finalized 
and  the  water  resources  management  strategy  (2011-2016)  is  completed.    Its  objective  is  to 
ensure  that  water  resources  in  Rwanda  are  conserved  and  managed  in  an  integrated  and 
equitable manner to meet the country needs (economic, social and ecological), while taking care 
of  trans-boundary  interest  and  international  environment  obligations.  A  department  of  water 
resources management was created in 2011 and is still working on its staffing and institutional 
capacity  development  in  the  Ministry  of  Infrastructure.  The  absence  of  this  department  and 
delays  in  developing  the  sector  and  sub  sector  strategies  resulted  mainly  in  limited  financial 
support  from  donors  or  unfulfilled  commitments.In  water  resources  management,  the 
implementation of EDPRS began with challenges in the water resources management sector 
mainly  due  to  the  lack  of  a  clear  institutional  framework.  However  with  the  new  water 
resources  policy  and  strategy  in  the  process  of  approval,  the  establishment  of  an  integrated 
water resources management department under the Rwanda Natural Resources Authority, and 
of a water resources management thematic working group under the Environment and Natural 
Resources Sector Working Group, there is enough ground work to improve the results of the 
WRM in the EDPRS2.  The WRM department is in process of starting the preparation of 
water resources master plan which will give a strong basis to prioritize the water use based on 
existing  and  planned  water  demand  and  needs,  against  the  quantity  and  quality  of  water 
available.  

 
Challenges    and way forward 
     Challenges
and way forward     
Challenges
Challenges
and way forward 
and way forward 
    
The finalization of strategies on water management was delayed due to the fact that they are 
aligned to the EDPRS but with a longer life-span. There will be a need to make sure that the  
second  generation  of  EDPRS    accommodates  water  strategies.      Even  though  the  budget 
preparation since 2008, required alignment of the budget with the EDPRS priorities, it is not 

                                                 
5Ministry of natural resources. Environment and natural resources sector EDPRS self-assessment report. 

13 | P a g e  
 

clear how this was put into practice in the sub-sector. This resulted in implementing activities 
which were contributing to EDPRS but without clear indicator for monitoring. 
 
There is need to increase the integration between the different sectors (Ministries) which use / 
supply  water.  This  will  improve  the  water  use  efficiency  and  also  improve  its  conservation 
ultimately. This will require the newly established water resources department to be pro-active 
in assessing policies and strategies of different sectors and help the Government to prioritise the 
use of water by different sectors. The sector also needs to work closely with other sectors and 
capture all activities related to the improvement of water resources. 
 

Environment,  Climate Change and  Biodiversity
2.1.2.  Environment,  Climate Change
2.1.2.
 and  Biodiversity    
Environment,  Climate Change
2.1.2.
2.1.2.
Environment,  Climate Change
 and  Biodiversity
 and  Biodiversity

 
There are significant results achieved in this sector in Rwanda. It was planned to increase the 
proportion  of  protected  areas  for  biodiversity  preservation  from  8%  to  10%  in  2012. 
Currently this target  has been  out surpassed as it  is 10.3%  (MINIRENA, 2011)6.    Critical 
ecosystems  have  been  mapped,  assessed,  rehabilitated,  mostly  wetlands  and  riverbanks  and 
lakeshores. Concerning the legal, regulatory, policy and institutional framework, commendable 
results  have  been  realized  through  development  and  dissemination  of  legal  and  regulatory 
instruments  in  regard  to environmental  management  and  protection.  .    Public  awareness  and 
broad  national  sensitization    for environmental  management  has  been  successfully conducted 
across  the  country  (Central  and  decentralized  levels,  private  sector,  civil  society,  NGOs, 
environment  clubs,  schools,  environmental  campaigns,  etc).  The  strategy  to  implement 
environment education for sustainable development has been developed; awareness material and 
training modules were developed and disseminated; different ministries including MINAGRI, 
MINECOFIN,  MINICOM,  MINIRENA,  MINALOC,  MINEDUC,  MININFRA, 
MINISANTE,  MINIJUST  were  supported  to  integrate  national  environment  priorities  and 
commitments into sector planning, budgeting and implementation, check lists and indicators to 
integrate  environment  in  sector  and  district  development  plan  were  prepared  and  made 
accessible,  extensive  trainings  on  mainstreaming  environment  and  climate  change  have 
conducted  targeting  mainly  central  and  decentralized  staff  in  charge  of  planning,  EDPRS 
facilitators,  and  District  environment  officers.  Of  notable  importance,  is  the  undergoing 
process of creating an environment and climate change fund.   

 

Due  to  the  above  success  factors  or  initiatives,    the  pollution  of  the  environment  has  been 
significantly reduced by banning plastic bags, ozone depleting substances and other persistent 
organic pollutants.  Measurable  progress  including  EIA  review and approval  process has  been 
registered and this improved the business and investment climate. Protected areas management 
and  conservation  have  been  supported  to  realize  tourism  potential  and  economic  value  that 
contributed to national development.  

 

The  implementation  of  the  environment  and  climate  change  strategic  plan  requires  broader 
partnership  and  institutional  responsibility  than  REMA.  In  this  line,  the  sector  Wide 
Approach (SWAP) for ENR provides an opportunity to realize this requirement. 

                                                 

6 MINERENA (2011). Environment and natural resources sector EDPRS self-assessment 

report. Ministry of Natural Resources, Kigali, Rwanda.  

14 | P a g e  
 

 

           Challenges
Challenges    
Challenges
Challenges
 
Despite  this  good  achievement,  there  are  some  key  challenges  faced  by  the  sector  in  the 
implementation and evaluation of its program. They include weak system of data collection in 
the environment and natural resources as well as inadequate baseline data for natural resources 
and environment sector,  low level of awareness and appreciation of environment issues among 
business  sector  and  local  government  structures  which  increase  the  cost  of  enforcement  and 
monitoring and  low level of coordination between different sectors (central, local government 
and civil society) in planning and implementing policies, low level of institutional capacity and 
specialization of civil society organizations to manage the environment. 

 

In  addition,  the  environment  and  climate  change  sub  sector  remains  under  funded,  despite 
modest increases in budget allocation and donor support to the sector. This limits long term 
investments in both physical ecosystems protection and institutional capacity development. In 
addition, some programs with development partners have problems with timely disbursement 
and financial management.   

 

There is also a problem of high turnover of staff and organizational restructuring which impact 
the  efficacy  of  investment  in  training  and  systems  development  and  performance  of  the  sub 
sector especially at District level.  

  
4.2.3 Land management
4.2.3 
Land management    
4.2.3 
4.2.3 
Land management
Land management

Land is one of key factors of production and its use and management has to be carried out in a 
sustainable and rational manner. The National Land Policy developed in 2004 through a wide 
consultation and participation calls for land reforms both in tenure system and land use and 
management. To take into consideration the dynamic in land management, it was planned that 
the policy be reviewed every 5 years to accommodate new realties on ground. As part of the 
environment  and  natural  resources  sector  a  land  sub  sector  strategic  plan  was  developed  in 
2010 after the development of the strategic plan for the broader sector of   environment and 
natural resources.   

 

The land sector strategic plan has four strategic objectives: ensure sustainable and rational land 
use  in  Rwanda  through  a  comprehensive  national  land  use  master  plan;  ensure  security  and 
rational  land  tenure  for  all  land  claimants  trough  systematic  land  tenure  regularization; 
strengthen  land  administration  and  ensure  coherence  of  national  land  policy  with  the  Africa 
land Policy Framework and Guidelines taking into consideration the sub regional integration 
context.  Intended results during the EDPRS period in the land sector are being achieved. Some 
institutional arrangements have been made to sustain the implementation of land policy : the 
office of registrar of land titles in 2007; the national land centre at the national level and land 
bureaux at district levels in 2008. 

 

The land sector strategy addresses governance theme through land legislation, reduction of land 
conflicts,  public  participation  and  transparency  in  land  tenure  regulation,  provision  of 

15 | P a g e  
 

collateral,  collection  of  land  fees  for  local  governments  and  land  use  planning  for  better 
development. 

 
Challenges and way forward
Challenges and way forward    
Challenges and way forward
Challenges and way forward
 

The existing structures for the implementation of land policy are not well equipped and staffed 
( such as land committee at cell level). Frequent reforms which in some cases took long to be 
effective have at some extent hindered the implementation of some policies. In addition, there 
were some conflicting decisions due to the fact that the land institutional framework was new 
so  that  it  was  difficult  to  people,  especially  at  distinct  level  to  understand  their  roles  and 
responsibilities.  

 

There is a need of much involving NGOs and CSOs in the policy dialogue to strengthen their 
role  as  advocacy  for  land  owners  and  facilitators  in  the  implementation  of  the  policies.    A 
strategy for land management to deal with land fragmentation and reducing dependency over 
land (substance agriculture) should be developed; the national land policy of 2004 should be 
also reviewed to accommodate new development goals.  
 
Forestssss management 
4.2.44.2.44.2.44.2.4  Forest
 management     
Forest
Forest
 management 
 management 

Forests are major component of environment and sustainable development in Rwanda. From 
historical  perspective,  we  observe  that  about  70%  of  the  national  territory  was  covered  with 
natural  forests  but  about  60%  reduction  in  the  natural  forest  has  also  occurred  since 
independence (UNEP, 2011)7. However, major reforestation efforts were carried out between 
1975-1990 (Africa Forest Forum, 2011). But due to the war and Genocide against Tutsi in 
1994,  a  number  of  forests  were  destroyed  by  displaced  people  fleeing  the  war  or  by  new 
settlements for returning refugees (Africa Forest Forum, 2011). The national report of Rwanda 
presented  at  Rio+10  gives  an  estimate  of  about  15000  ha  of  forest  plantations  that  were 
destroyed and about 35000 ha were negatively affected ( MINITERE, 2002)8.   Furthermore, 
in 1997 the government encouraged people to share available resources and some state lands ( 
such as national parks) were allocated to settle new returnees (Bizoza, 2011: 159).  These few 
examples, among others,  show how deforestation in Rwanda is a major concern.   

Findings from the same Africa Forum report (2011)  show that some government and donor 
initiatives  since  1999  onwards  have  greatly  boosted  the  forestry  sector  in  Rwanda.  These 
comprise : the lunching of the forest management support project ( 2003), the first national 
forest policy in 2004, establishment of revenue sharing program by RDB since 2005,  and the 
adoption of the national forest policy in 2010.  The overall goal of this national policy is to 
make the forestry sector one of the bedrocks of economy and national ecological balance for 
sustainable benefits to all segments of the society (Ministry of Forests and Mines, 2010).   
                                                 
7 UNEP (2011).  Rwanda : From Post Conflict  to environmentally sustainable development , Nairobi, Kenya.  
8 MINITERE (2002). Rapport National du Rwanda sur le developpement Durable et la mise en oeuvre de lAgenda 21. 
Kigali, Rwanda.  
9 Bizoza R.A ( 2011). Farmers, Institutions and land Conservation : Institutional Economic Analysis of Bench Terraces in 
The Highlands of Rwanda. Thesis, Wageningen University, Wageningen, Netherlands.   

16 | P a g e  
 

Although there are some discrepancies in the estimates of the forest coverage, the  FAO ( 2007 
, cited in,  UNEP, 2011: 151) suggests that 19.5 % of the land area is covered by the forest 
while MINIRENA suggest 9.7 % ( UNEP, 2011). Nevertheless, these estimates are far from 
the targets of 30% of forest cover by the Rwanda Vision 2020 (MINIRENA, 2011).  The 
EDPRS  target  for  forest  cover  is  estimated  at  23.4%  compared  last  years  achievement  
estimated  at  22.1%.  It  was  planned  that  the  remaining  1.3%  of  remaining  cover  will  be 
planted with 67, 000, 000 during 2011.  The following Table (1) depicts the protected areas 
comprising forest reserves and national parks.  
 

Table 1: Protected forests and National parks  

Name 

Management 
responsibility  

Akagera National Park  

African Parks Network 

Nyungwe National Park  

Volcano National Park  

Gishwati Forest reserve 

Mukura Forest Reserve 

RDB 

RDB 

NAFA  

RNRA 

Source : Adapted from Africa Forest Forum, 2011.  

Challenges 
Challenges     
Challenges 
Challenges 

Date established  

Area ( Km2) 

1934 

2004 

1929 

1933 

1933 

1085 

970 

160 

10 

16 

 A  number  of  constraints  of  the  forestry  sector  are  outlined  in  the  national  forestry  policy 
(2010: 26). These include excessive and indiscriminate cutting of forests, uneven distribution 
of forest resources over the country, low productivity of existing man made forests and poor 
quality of forest genetic material, low afforestation rate (estimated at 0.029 ha per capita which 
is low to the FAO standard of 1 ha per person in order to meet ecological balance and wood 
demand), wasteful conversion, inadequate extension services, and  limited land for reforestation 
and afforestation due to low pace of alternative activities to make free land for forest activities ( 
MINIRENA, 2011).    

 

and Livestock
Agricultural productivity and 
4.3. 4.3. 4.3. 4.3. Agricultural productivity 
Livestock            
Livestock
and 
Agricultural productivity 
Agricultural productivity 
and 
Livestock
 
The main challenge, as expressed by the Rio Conference in 1992, is  to increase agricultural 
production  in  a  sustainable  manner  so  that  to  respond  to  ever  increasing  food  needs  of  the 
world population and  reduce poverty.    It  is also expressed  by  the  Millennium Development 
Goal 1 - eradicate hunger and poverty.  
 
Economic  development  in  Rwanda,  as  in  many  other  developing  countries,    remains 
agricultural  dominant.  The  majority  of  households  are  employed  in  agriculture.  Therefore, 

17 | P a g e  
 

agriculture  sector  is  conducive  for  economic  growth  and  poverty  reduction  (  NISR,  2011).  
For instance,  the decline in agricultural productivity explains why incomes have fallen in the 
mid-1980s (PRSP 2002).  Accordingly, the increase of agricultural production in many years 
have been through expansion of cultivated area rather than through increased productivity. But, 
since  2000s,  numerous  strategies  have  been  designed  to  develop  certain  areas  of  agriculture 
sector. The aim for these strategies is to transform agricultural productivity and to having food 
security.   Thus,  the transformation of  agriculture  and  related environmental actions has  been 
central to agricultural strategies in the context of poverty reduction strategies since 2002.  
 
The Ministry of Agriculture implements its activities through its Strategic Plan for Agricultural 
Transformation (PSTA). The recent one covers the period 2009-2012 and was developed with 
sub-sector strategies to operationalize EDPRS as well as the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture 
Development  Program  (CAADP).  Consistent  with  the  MDGs,  the  EDPRS  goal  is  to  raise 
agricultural productivity and ensure food security (MINAGRI, 2011)10.  The progress made 
with regard to this goal is partly explained by achievements made,  in the context of agriculture 
development, through four interrelated programmes: 
 
 

Intensification and development of sustainable production systems 

  Support to the professionalization of the producers  
 

 Promotion of Commodity Chains and Agribusiness Development  
Institutional Development  

 
 
Land holdings remains determinant of agricultural development and poverty reduction. About 
90%  of  the population  own  land  but  more  than  60%  cultivate  less  than  0.7  hectares    ( the 
amount  of  land  required  for  the average  household  to  live  above the poverty  line)  (  UNDP 
2010)11  
 
According to statistics from the National Institute of Statistics (EICV 3-2011),  84% of crop-
producing  households  in  Rwanda  have  at  least  one  of  their  plots  protected  from  erosion. 
Regionalization of crops has been an important government policy over recent years. 21% of 
households added an additional type of crop to at least one of their plots. Use of fertilizer use 
to increase agricultural production has increased from 18% to 38% households in the last five 
years. While use of chemical fertilisers increased from 11% to 29% of households in the same 
period. A smaller increase is observed in the use of organic fertilizers (from 7% to 9%).  
 
The same statistics from EICV 3-2011 shows that cattle ownership has considerably increased. 
Currently, higher proportions about  47%   in  Rwanda  are able to afford  cattle. This notable 
achievement is also supported by the government policy of one cow per poor family known as 
Girinka Programme) initiated by His excellency the president of Rwanda Paul Kagame.   But 
more efforts are to be made in the poorest Southern Province.    
 
Some policies and programmes that have contributed to the progress made in agriculture and 
livestock include:  land tenure regularization, Agricultural reforms (such as  crop intensification 
and  regionalization,  voucher  system  to  enable  access  to  inputs  of  farmers,  land  use 
                                                 
10 MINAGRI, 2011.  EDPRS Self-Assessment Report. Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Resources. Kigali, Rwanda.  
11 UNDP (2010). Millennium Development Goals Progress Report. Rwanda Country Report, Kigali, Rwanda.  

18 | P a g e  
 

consolidation),  soil  and  water  conservation  programmes,  and  one  cow  per  poor  family  that 
enabled many people access cattle; leading to other positive multiplier effects ( such as access to 
manure for agricultural production, more milk and resulted incomes).   
 
Challenges 
Challenges     
Challenges 
Challenges 
 
Although  some  tremendous  achievements  have  been  made  towards  increased  agricultural 
productivity  and  food  security,  some  challenges  remain  in  the  context  of  agricultural 
transformation. The PSTA II ( 2009-2012) (which is the lead development approach in this 
very  sector)  paid  little  attention  to  some  cross-cutting  issues  ,  particularly  those  that  were 
multi-sectoral    but  central  to  agricultural  development  (e.g.  nutrition,  environment,  access  to 
finance,  feeder  roads,  and  gender).  It  is  advised  that  these  insufficiencies  will  be  taken  into 
account in the development of PSTAIII ( 2013-2017).   Similarly, private sector engagement 
did not receive much attention in the context of PSTAII  ( 2013-2017) and  the development 
of the next PSTA III will have to accommodate this insufficiency.  The reason is that private 
sector development along the value chain can play a central role in transforming agriculture in 
Rwanda ( MINAGRI, 2011).   
 

4.4. 4.4. 4.4. 4.4. Transport and Energy 
Transport and Energy     
Transport and Energy 
Transport and Energy 

    

As a basic requirement for the development of national economy, the energy sector is key in 
Rwanda.  The  EDPRS  energy  sector  objectives  are:    increasing  access  to  energy,  sustainable 
tariff  structure,  diversification  of  energy  resources  and  security  and  strengthening  of 
institutional framework and institutional capacity.  Positive results have been achieved in terms 
of access to energy. Tax incentives have been provided for Liquid Petroleum Gas and energy 
serving devices  importation.  The  electricity  law  was  passed  by  the  cabinet  and  the  electricity 
tariff structure study has been conducted. The 7 year energy strategic plan (2011) has set more 
ambitious targets for energy development. 

 

The  priority  of  the  energy  sector  implementation  plan  is  to  increase  electricity  generation 
capacity  from  96  MW  to  over  1 000MW  by  2017  and  access  to  electricity  from 204  000 
connections of today to 1 200 000 by 2017, that is achieving an  increase of 50%. To achieve 
this  objective,  the  energy  policy  has  considered  a  number  of  cross  cutting  themes  including 
institutional  roles  and  responsibilities,  private  sector  participation,  gender,  social  inclusion, 
environment, research and development as well as regional and international cooperation. 

 

Deleted: .

Deleted: ies

Formatted: Font color: Violet

Formatted: Font color: Violet

Formatted: Font color: Violet

Achievements  in  the  energy  sector  like  dissemination  of  improved  cook  stoves  and  biogas 
digester  construction  have  contributed  to  improved  health  situation  for  women  and  children 
who  used  to  spend  most  of  their  time  searching  for  fire  wood  to  be  used  as  fuel.  Increased 
energy efficiency through audit grid and introduction of solar water heaters has contributed to 
environmental protection.  

Deleted: s

Deleted: have 

 

Energy targets as defined in the EDPRS related to electricity generation capacity and number 
of households, institutions and enterprises with access to energy are expected to be met. So far 

19 | P a g e  
 

the  number  of  electricity  connections  stands  at  236  663  by  October  2011  and  installed 
capacity is at 100 MW against 350 000 and 160 MW as respective targets by end 2013. 

 
Challenges
Challenges    
Challenges
Challenges
 

The recent 7 year strategic plan (2011) is not aligned to the wider EDPRS and vision 2020 in 
terms  of  financial  resources  and  implementation  schedule.  This  poses  financing  issues  to 
implement the strategic plans in the sector.    

 

The management issues and ongoing institutional reforms need to be strengthened for a better 
achievement  of goals  by  providing  clear  mechanisms  by  which  local  government  should  take 
ownership responsibility of government programs.  Concerning the collaboration with donors, 
technical and financial supports have been effective.  

 

There  are  risks  involved  at  exploratory  stage  for  geothermal  resources  development  and  the 
participation of the private sector is less likely to happen. In addition, the low participation of 
the private sector is likely to negatively impact the implementation of generation projects.  

 

In addition, there is no sufficient guidance ( such as rules and procedures) on capacity building 
in the sector, the coordination between policy makers in the sector needs to be improved and 
separation  of  responsibilities  between  policy  makers  and  implementers  should  be  clearly 
defined. Some of the targets set need to be strongly supported by macroeconomic projections 
and well documented studies.  

4.5. 4.5. 4.5. 4.5. Trade and Regional Integration 
Trade and Regional Integration     
Trade and Regional Integration 
Trade and Regional Integration 
 
Rwanda is a landlocked and resource scarce country with a relatively small market. In its vision 
2020, the Government of Rwanda has clearly indicated that regional integration will be one of 
the responses to these problems.  The accession of Rwanda  to the East African Community ( 
EAC) on first July 2007 was in this direction and was aiming to contribute to the economic 
development  of the country by strategically placing  it in  a regional  market with  113 million 
people.  This  will  also  increase  economic  activities  and  business  opportunities  through  the 
benefits of economies of scale and attracting foreign investment targeting the regional market. 
Information on trade benefits in the context of regional integration is yet scarce.   

4.6. 4.6. 4.6. 4.6. Human Development and Social Sectors 
Human Development and Social Sectors     
Human Development and Social Sectors 
Human Development and Social Sectors 

    

4.6.1.  Education 
4.6.1.  
Education     
4.6.1.  
4.6.1.  
Education 
Education 

The  EDPRS  strategy  for  education  had  two  objectives:  the  development  of  skills  for  a 
knowledge  based  economy  and  the  promotion  of  science,  technology  and  innovations  for 
economic growth.  

 

The  education  sector  strategic  plan  (2008-2012)  was  updated  to  address  key  policy  and 
strategic challenges and objectives in the sector (ESSS 2010-2015) as outlined in the EDPRS 

20 | P a g e  
 

as well as the vision 2020.  To respond to the high demand of the labor market in terms of 
skills and competencies, following programs were prioritized: improved access to and quality of 
upper  secondary  schools,  teacher  training  colleges,  higher  learning  institutions  and  demand 
driven technical and vocational education and training courses (TVET).  In addition, the nine 
year basic education was identified as the foundation for human resource development.  

 

Significant  achievement  has  been  realized  in  the  education  sector.    Important  institutional 
reforms  were  implemented,  including  the  establishment  of  the  Rwanda  Education  and 
Workforce  Development  Authority  to  support  the  achievement  of  the  EDPRS  and  ESS 
objectives, particularly for quality education and TVET as well as the adoption of English as 
the medium of instruction in schools and the nine years basic education ( 9YBE)  fast tracking 
strategy.  

 

Targets in the education sector as defined in EDPRS are being achieved. The primary school 
completion rate was 79% in 2011 surpassing the target (78%) for the period 2011-2012 and 
from a baseline figure of 52% in 2008. The qualified teachers to pupil ratio at primary level is 
still relatively high. Ahead of the 2012 target of 60:1 is  well improved compared to the 2008 
figure  of  73;1.  This  improvement  is  due  in  part  to  the  recruitment  of  2  471  new  primary 
school  teachers  during  the  2010/2011  period  and  a  further  2  146  new  primary  teachers  in 
2009/2010. 

  

The  transition  rate  from  basic  education  (S3)  to  upper  secondary  (S4)  has  reached  94% 
against 2008 baseline of 86% and far surpassing the current target. The current targets of 20% 
for  girls  and  30%  for  boys  as  percentage  of  students  in  science  have  been  surpassed.  These 
percentages  are  now 21%  and  31%  respectively.    The  objective  of  a  demand  driven  TVET 
approach is being achieved. Indeed, a baseline survey shows that 63% of employers are satisfied 
with the skills of TVET graduates.  

 

The Primary Net Enrolment Rate (NER) continues to improve for both girls and boys. The 
current  estimate  of    95.4%,  has  already  surpassed  the  2012  target  of  95%.  If  this  trend 
continues, Rwanda will be on track to meet the MDG target of 100% net enrolment by 2015. 
The NER for girls (97.5) remains higher than for boys (94.3%).  Both Repetition Rate (13%) 
and  Dropout  Rate  (11%)  continue  to  decline  (from  a  2008  baseline  of  15.3%  and  14.7% 
respectively) and targets set for 2012 at 10% and 8% respectively are likely to be met.  

 

The number of  students in  secondary  schools  continues to increase  as  a result  of the 9YBE, 
with a total of 486,437 currently enrolled against a baseline figure of 288,036 in 2008. Girls 
make up 52% of students in Secondary Education overall and 49% of those students enrolled 
in  science  combinations at  the  upper  secondary  level, towards achieving gender parity  in this 
key area. The number of vocational training centres (VTCs) has increased from 61(2010) to 
98(2011) facilitating a 50% increase in the number of students, with a current enrolment of 
11,315, 39% of whom are female. 

    
Challenges
Challenges    
Challenges
Challenges
    

Despite  these good  achievements,  a  number  of challenges have  been  identified  in this  sector. 
They include: 

21 | P a g e  
 

 

The TVET Policy  and the  expansion strategy  should  be evidence-based (e.g. based  on more 
analysis on what are the key skills that would most promote sustainable and equitable economic 
growth) and take into account implementation capacity both in terms of human and financial 
resources.  Government  action  to  facilitate  and  promote  the  provision  of  quality  TVET  by 
private  TVET  institutions  and  enterprises  should  be  an  important  aspect  of  the  expansion 
strategy.  
 
Following challenges have been identified for TVET.  They include:  increasing the number of 
graduates  with  relevant  skills  for  the  labour  market;    quality  of  teaching  on  occupational 
competence;    limited  and  inequitable  access  to  TVET  provision;    insufficient  knowledge  of 
private  providers,  and  absence  of  quality  assurance/measurement  mechanism  for  private 
providers; lack of up-to-date curricula and lack of serious testing of practical skills. 

 

For  a  good  monitoring  and  dissemination  system,  there  is  a  need  of  collaboration  with  the 
NISR especially to ensure equal access for all data users as well as achieving consensus on the 
quality and accuracy of official education statistics. In addition, there is a lack of data broken 
down for categories of vulnerable children including children with special needs, children from 
the poorest families and others. The challenge of analyzing retention and learning achievements 
from a socio-economic and geographic perspective to identify which children are dropping out, 
at risk of dropout and/or not learning and why has also been identified as necessary to support 
future planning to promote education for all.  

 

To  ensure  that  the  CPAF  indicator  adequately  tracks  progress  in  the  responsiveness  of  the 
education and training system to the labor market, there is a need for (1) Reconsideration of 
the methodology used; and (2) institutionalization of periodic data collection and reporting on 
this indicator by WDA. 

 

There is a strong view within the Education Sector Working Group of the need to include an 
indicator that captures improvements in learning achievement, and to ensure that this indicator 
and its target is tracked and reported on as part of the CPAF/EDPRS indicator monitoring 
process.  The  preliminary  results  of  the  assessment  revealed  that  the  majority  of  P3  students 
meet (55%) or exceed (8%) curricular expectations in reading while a majority does not meet 
curricular expectations in numeracy.  
    

2.1.3.  Health 
2.1.3.
Health     
2.1.3.
2.1.3.
Health 
Health 

 
In line with the operationalization of the EDPRS, the Health Sector Strategic plan II (HSSP-
II)  has  been  developed  and  strategies  were  provided  through  key  international  policies  and 
goals,  including  the  MDGs,  Africa  Health  Strategy,  the  Paris  declaration,  Accra  Accord  and 
Abuja declaration.12  
 
The  EDPRS  objectives  in  the  health  sector  are  to  maximize  preventive  health  measures  and 
build capacities to have high quality and accessible health care services to entire population.  

                                                 
12 Ministry of health. Economic development and poverty reduction strategy (EDPRS). Health sector 
assessment report. November 2011 

22 | P a g e  
 

 

Impressive  results  were  achieved  in  EDPRS  I  especially  due  to  strong  political  will  and 
commitment,  the  improved  access  to  health  services,  community  based  programs,  the 
introduction  of  performance  based  approaches,  community  based  health  insurance  and 
important investment in the human resource workforce development.  

 

Over the course of the EDPRS I, the Total Fertility Rate improved from 5,5 (DHS 07-08) to 
4,6 children/women aged 15-49 (DHS 2010 Preliminary results). This coincided with the use 
of modern contraceptive methods increasing from 27% (DHS 07-08) to 45% (DHS 2010). 
For the same period the proportion of children fully immunized increased from 80% (DHS 
07-08) to 90% (DHS 2010). Assisted deliveries in health facilities increased from 45% (DHS 
07-08) to 69% (DHS 2010).  
 
The utilization rate of mosquito nets by pregnant women improved from 60% (DHS 07-08) 
to 72% (DHS 2010).  The infant mortality rate (deaths of children <12 months/1000 live 
births) decreased from 86 (2005), 62 (DHS 07-08) to 50 (DHS 2010) and the same applies 
to the under-five mortality (deaths of children < 59 months/1000 live births) which decreased 
from 103 (DHS 07-08) to 76 (DHS 2010). In terms of malnutrition slight improvement has 
been achieved: stunting decreased from 51 (DHS 07-08) to 44 (DHS 2010), Wasting from 5 
(DHS  07-08)  to  3  %  (DHS  2010)  and  underweight  from  18  (DHS  07-08)  to  11  (DHS 
2010). As the stunting is a socioeconomic development indicator of a community, this is an 
indirect  sign  of  the  degree  of  poverty.  Nonetheless,  the  decrease  in  the  underweight  can  be 
allocated to a better geographical and financial access to healthcare services.  

 
    
Challenges
Challenges    
Challenges
Challenges
    

As  indicated,  an  important  investment  has  been  done  in  health  care  human  resource 
development.  However,  a  lot  is  still  to  be  done  to  get  sufficient  health  staff  with  required 
human and technical skills and distribute the health providers in more remote areas. There also 
need  of  strengthening  research  and  evidence  based  planning,  policy  making  and  medical 
practice but also increase the participation of private sector in health sector. This will not only 
increase the access to health care but also boost economic growth through private investment 
the health sector. 
 

of extreme PoPoPoPoverty 
Eradication of extreme 
2.1.4.  Eradication 
2.1.4.
verty     
of extreme 
Eradication 
2.1.4.
2.1.4.
Eradication 
of extreme 
verty 
verty 

 
Rwanda has  had an impressive record  in  translating  its recent growth into poverty reduction 
across the country over the past five years. Compared to the period 2005/06; the reduction in 
poverty  at  the  national  level  is  12  percentage  points  in  2010/11.  The  contrasts  with  the 
limited  poverty  reduction  experienced  over  the  period  2000/01  to  2005/06  of  only  2 
percentage points. 
 
At the national level, consumption poverty fell from 58.9% in 2000/01 to 56.7% in 2005/06 
and again to 44.9% in 2010/11. Extreme poverty shows similar patterns as at a national level 
it fell from 40% in 2000/01 to 35.8% in 2005/06 and to 24.1% in 2010/11. The following 
Table (2) provides counts of extreme poverty trends for the period 2000-2011. 

23 | P a g e  
 

 

 

2000/01
2000/01    
2000/01
2000/01

2005/06
2005/06    
2005/06
2005/06

2010/11
2010/11    
2010/11
2010/11

 
 

40.040.040.040.0    

14.5 
44.7 
40.4 
46.5 
39.4 

12.9 
44.9 
37.7 
39.1 
29.9 
16.0 
39.5 
35.835.835.835.8    

7.8 
31.1 
27.4 
23.5 
20.8 
10.4 
26.4 
24.124.124.124.1    

Table 2: counts of extreme poverty trends in percentage (%) for the period 2000-2011  
 
Province 
Province     
Province 
Province 
Kigali City  
Southern Province  
Western Province  
Northern Province  
Eastern Province  
Urban 
Rural 
TotalTotalTotalTotal    
                    Source: National Institute of Statistics of Rwanda, 2012 
 
As  already  indicated  (  above), since 2008, more  than  85% of  the  EDPRS  targets have  been 
met, exceeded or are highly on track to be achieved, while the implementation rate of policy 
actions  has  been  96%  (485  out  of  504  policy  actions  are  fully  implemented).  The  high 
implementation  rate  has  led  to  impressive  results  in  all  three  flagship  programmes.  The 
Following Table (3) gives some EDPRS indicators with reference to the situation of 2006.  
 
Challenges
Challenges    
Challenges
Challenges
    
According to the assessment of the implementation of EDPRS, following challenges have been 
identified. 
Some  sectors  still  lack  exhaustive  and  well-articulated  strategies    including  financing  and 
capacity  mobilization  strategies,  while  they  have  been  crucial  in  guiding  implementation   
ensuring coordination and alignment of stakeholders. For example, the transport sector needs a 
single transport sector strategy including a reporting system and sector monitoring strategy. In 
the  same  vein,  in  the  area  of  private  sector  development,  the  lack  of  an  overarching  sector 
strategy  has  hindered  coordination  efforts  for  policy  and  strategy  formulation  and 
implementation as well as priority setting. 
 
In  addition,  some  structures  are  still  not  functioning  as  expected  because  roles  and 
responsibilities  are  not  well  defined  in  some  areas  and  more  reforms  are  needed,  there  is 
insufficient coordination and communication across sectors as well as between central and local 
government  entities 
sector  and  cooperatives 
(NGOs/CSOs)  in  some  areas  has  affected  the  quality  of  policy  dialogue  especially  at  the 
District  level, districts  and  sectors  have  pointed  out  the  need  for  an  integrated  M&E  system 
that  links  the  different  sub-systems,  important  projects  are  sometimes  delayed  due  to  poor 
procurement planning and insufficient capacity of private contractors, quality of service delivery 
in both public and private sectors has also been noted as one of the key areas for improvement. 
 
Also,  there is  room for  improvement  in regard to  mainstreaming cross cutting issues such  as 
disability,  disaster  management  and  risk  reduction,  regional  integration  and  climate  change. 
While  Sectors  and  Districts  acknowledged  progress  in  integrating  cross  cutting  issues  of 
gender,  HIV/AIDS  and  environment,  they  also  highlighted  the  need  for  more  tools  and 

, 

insufficient 

involvement  of  private 

24 | P a g e  
 

guidance on effectively mainstreaming cross cutting issues into their plans, budgets and M&E. 
The development and collection of specific disaggregated indicators was of particular concern 
and interest moving forward. 
 
 
 
Table 3:  Key EDPRS S S S  indicators 
Table 3:  Key EDPR
 indicators     
Table 3:  Key EDPR
Table 3:  Key EDPR
 indicators 
 indicators 

Source:  MINECOFIN, 2011    

    

25 | P a g e  
 

     

4.7 4.7 4.7 4.7 . . . . Key Determinants of observed Progress 
Key Determinants of observed Progress     
Key Determinants of observed Progress 
Key Determinants of observed Progress 
    

Eighteen years ago, Rwanda was considered a dead country, deeply destroyed, whose future was 
simply unclear following the 1994 genocide against Tutsi.  Today,  the country has achieved 
tremendous progress both politically and economically. The fundamental causes of this decade 
of quick development are to be attributed mostly to the  good leadership ( Kigabo, 2010) , rich 
and  positive  ideology  as  well  as  strong  political  commitment    aimed  to  serve  the  general 
interest,    and  committed  to  find  durable  solutions  to  community  problems.  The  current 
leadership in Rwanda has been working to reestablish social harmony and promote sustainable 
economic  development.  It  created  structures,  mechanisms,  and  practices  that  guarantee 
participation  of  all  and  transparency  in  public  affairs  management.  In  addition,  reforms  are 
enacted following mass consultative meetings to efficiently react to community problems13.  
 
In addition to the above, the EDPRS self-assessment has also revealed the following enabling 
factors to achieving EDPRS goals and hence development objectives in various areas in the last 
few  years ( MINECOFIN, 2011: 6-7):  
 
The      participation  of  population
The      participation  of  population,  has  allowed  fast-tracking  implementation  and  has  proven 
The      participation  of  population
The      participation  of  population
cost  effective:  examples  include  fast-tracking  9YBE,  mobilization  of  the  population  for  land 
consolidation  and  use  of  fertilizers,    government  programs  of  health  mutuelles  (medical 
insurance), using bed nets, universal vaccination, etc.  
 
HomeHomeHomeHome----grown  initiatives
grown  initiatives  turned  into  success  stories  in  strengthening  delivery.  These  include: 
grown  initiatives
grown  initiatives
Umuganda  (community  work),  Gacaca  (traditional  courts),  Abunzi  (mediators),  Imihigo 
(performance  contracts),  Inteko  zAbaturage  (citizen  forums),  Ubudehe  (socio-economic 
classification  to  assist  vulnerable  groups),  VUP  (  Vsion  2020  Umurenge  Program),  Girinka 
(one cow per poor family), etc.  
 
TTTThe  ownership  of  the  EDPRS  by  all  stakeholders
he  ownership  of  the  EDPRS  by  all  stakeholders  and  alignment  of  all  resources  to  the 
he  ownership  of  the  EDPRS  by  all  stakeholders
he  ownership  of  the  EDPRS  by  all  stakeholders
framework of the EDPRS in the respect of the aid policy principles have allowed to make the 
EDPRS a useful guiding strategy used by all and facilitating achievements of targets.  
 
 
AAAAdequate  institutional/  legal  framework
dequate  institutional/  legal  framework  for  implementation    and  flexibility  to  change  or 
dequate  institutional/  legal  framework
dequate  institutional/  legal  framework
adapt has proven effective (e.g. RDB, REB, EWSA, etc). The experience shows that where the 
institutional  framework  was  inadequate  or  reforms  were  delayed  during  the  implementation 
period,  progress  has  been  less  visible  than  in  the  sectors  where  the  right  institutional  set-up 
existed from the very beginning of the EDPRS process.  
 
Improved service delivery with 
Improved service delivery with support of ICT solutions
support of ICT solutions. With the strong focus of the country 
support of ICT solutions
Improved service delivery with 
Improved service delivery with 
support of ICT solutions
on transforming into a middle income country in Vision 2020 with ICT at the forefront, some 
of the successes in service delivery and investment climate reforms have centered around ICT 
solutions. These  include online registration of businesses, online filing of tax claims, a rapidly 

                                                 
13 For details, see Kigabo (2010) in Commission on growth and development working papers.  

26 | P a g e  
 

evolving  financial  sector  which  embracing  new  and  innovative  IT  products  as  well  as  an 
electronic  immigration  service,  driving  license  application  to  name  but  a  few.  These  offer 
important opportunities for integrating other sectors such as agriculture and for bridging the 
urban-rural divide. 
 
erformance  contracts  (Imihigo)  at  district  level  are  a  very  useful  planning  tool,  which 
PPPPerformance  contracts
erformance  contracts
erformance  contracts
improves performance
performance and which assists Districts to ensure that their activities are addressing 
performance
performance
the key priorities.  

27 | P a g e  
 

    

5. 5. 5. 5. INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS  FOR SUSTAINABLE 
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS  FOR SUSTAINABLE 
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS  FOR SUSTAINABLE 
INSTITUTIONAL ARRANGEMENTS  FOR SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT 
DEVELOPMENT     
DEVELOPMENT 
DEVELOPMENT 

    

5.1. 5.1. 5.1. 5.1. Governance Framework 
Governance Framework     
Governance Framework 
Governance Framework 

 

The governance is one of the three flagship of EDPRS  developed after PRSP 1.  The focus is 
to maintain , among others, peace and security which, in turn,  sustain the development process.  
The 2003 new constitution  outlawed all forms of discrimination, including ethnic and gender 
based  discrimination.  It  laid  a  strong  foundation  to  lead  the  country  towards  rule  of  law, 
respect for human rights and democracy. After the adoption of the new Constitution, Rwanda 
embarked on multiparty democracy; presidential and  legislative elections were held in August 
and September 2003, and local elections followed  in 2006 (MINECOFIN, 2011)  
 
The decentralization programme (phase I) that was underway offered great potential to bring 
government closer to the grassroots, strengthen local governments and improve service delivery. 
(MINECOFIN,  2011).    Through  this  process  of  decentralization  of  power  to  the  lowest 
government  level,  Rwanda  has  embarked  on  the  promotion  of  good  governance.  Expected 
advantages  of  this  policy  is    to  ensure equitable  political,  economic,  and  social  development 
throughout  the  country,  and  to  be  a  cornerstone  of  the  fight  against  poverty  by  increasing 
peoples  participation  in  the  planning  and  management  of  the  development  process( 
Government of Rwanda, 2012)14.  The participation and accountability of local governments 
are enforced by different tools such as the performance-based contracting  locally known as 
Imihigo.  Rwanda has also established the  Office of Ombudsman  in 2003 as  an independent 
public institution aimed to enforce good governance in both Public and Private institutions. All 
these  create,  among  others,  a  conducive  environment  for  external  and  internal  investments, 
leading to sustainable development.  

    

5.2. 5.2. 5.2. 5.2. Integrated Planning and Decision Making 
Integrated Planning and Decision Making     
Integrated Planning and Decision Making 
Integrated Planning and Decision Making 
 
In    the  last  two  decades,  consistent  with  MINECOFIN  (2008)15,    a  number  of  important 
planning  instruments  have  been  developed:    the  Vision  2020;  the  Long  Term  Investment 
Framework; the Economic Development and Poverty Reduction Strategy; sector strategic plans, 
District  development  plans;  the  Medium  Term  Expenditure  Framework;  and  the  Annual 
Actions Plans and District Performance Contracts. One of the reasons for these planning tools 
is to integrate the planning, budgeting, and spending by government line entities.  At District 
level, performance contracts (Imihigo)  are a very useful planning tool that allows the Districts 
to ensure that planned activities are addressing the key priorities. These performance contracts 
                                                 
14 Drawn from the official website of the government of Rwanda :[Internet]. Accessessed 20th May 2012.  
15  MINECOFIN (2008). National Planning, budgeting and MTEF guidelines. Ministry of Finances and 
Economic Planning, Kigali, Rwanda  

28 | P a g e  
 

have  facilitated  to  some  extent  the  progress  and  to  ensure  focus  on  delivery  of  results  ( 
MINECOFIN 2011). 

 

5.5.5.5.3. 3. 3. 3. New New New New IIIInstitutions towards Sustainable Development
nstitutions towards Sustainable Development    
nstitutions towards Sustainable Development
nstitutions towards Sustainable Development

 

Rwanda  has  developed  different  new  institutions  to  support  development  strategies  since 
Rio+20.  These  include  frameworks  such  as  the  Vision  2020,  EDPRS  and  Sector-Wide 
Approach  (SWAP) aimed to improve coordination and delivery in various sectors. According 
to  MINECOFIN  (2011:19:18),    these  frameworks  are  further  broken  down  into  core 
activities,  annual  work  and  action  plans,  including  targets  and  outputs.  Most  of  these  are 
budgeted on an annual basis and accompanied by implementation plans. Some sectors express 
interest  in  developing  a  SWAp  seeing  it  as  a  way  to  move  the  sector  coordination  forward. 
Apart from the SWAP, there other institutions in the form of policies, retreats such as Akagera 
retreat 2007,  regulations, and structures that are being developed by different line ministries to 
meet  development  goals  but  also  in  an  integrated  manner.  For  instance    the  Integrated 
development programme 2008-2012 which normally coordinates all central sectors and local 
governments  in  setting  up  strategies    and  priorities  in  line  with  Imihigo  and  action  plans  of 
local government.  
 
Among  other  institutions,  policies  and  laws  that  were  initiated  to  sustain  the  on-going 
development  process  include  the  following:  Organic  land  Law  (  determining  the  use  and 
management  of  land  in  Rwanda),  national  land  policy,  organic  law  on  environment,  human 
settlement  policy  ( which  emphasizes    village  settlement    for  better  land management,  urban 
housing development policy, and establishment of Rwanda Natural Resources Authority. 
 
Other initiatives in the same domain include waste management in urban areas especially Kigali 
City, support for use of new sources of  energy in order to reduce high dependency on biomas  
(  bank  loan  for  solar  energy,  biogas,  household  plant,  solar  plant,  small  hydropower, 
development of public private partnerships in the domain of energy, climate change observatory 
in  place  since    2011.    In  addition  to  these  policies,  there  quite  a  good  number  of  rural 
development projects aimed at reducing poverty  in rural areas.  
 
In terms of performance evaluation, Rwanda has initiated an innovative  system of performance 
evaluation known locally as Imihigo.  This systems allows, among others,  citizens ownership 
with regard to public choices as well as participation of various stakeholders in the process of 
policy formulation, its  implementation and evaluation.  This  system  is  considered at different 
scale of actions from individuals  to government line units.    
 

29 | P a g e  
 

6666....    CONCLUSIONS 
CONCLUSIONS     
CONCLUSIONS 
CONCLUSIONS 
The purpose of this report is to give the current status of Rwanda in terms of environment and 
sustainable development  to feed into the discussions to take place during the multi-stakeholder 
consultative meeting. The assessment approach opted in the context of this study has allowed 
the  researcher  to  identify  a  number  of  achievements  and  challenges  from  different  sectors  ( 
Environment  and  natural  resources  management,  Agricultural  productivity  and  livestock, 
Transport and Energy, Trade and Regional Integration, and Human Development and Social 
Sectors)  to  inform  on  areas  that  need  more  attention  in  the  next  wave  of    environment  and 
sustainable development in Rwanda.  

It is clear from the review that Rwanda has promoted integrated planning and decision making 
process  through  different  planning  and  development  approaches.  The  EDPRS  is  the  leading  
planning tools opted after the PRSPs since 2008 under the auspices of the Ministry of Finance 
and Economic Planning. Other tools that are based on the EDPRS include the sector strategic 
plan (  with  a 5  years planning  horizon), District Development Plan,  Long Term  Investment 
Framework ( LTIF), and Medium Term Expenditure Framework.  

Some  of  the  areas  that  need  more  attention  by  the  policy,    as  documented    in  individual 
EDPRs Sector-Self assessment and other national reports,  is the need  to improve the role of 
the  private  sector.    The  Private  Sector  is  assumed  to  play  major  role  along  the  value  chain 
especially  in  transforming  the  agriculture  sector.  Capacity  building  (  both  skilled  human 
resources and institutional arrangement) to meet the demands of each sector in terms of activity 
implementation  was  also  highlighted as  a  restraining  factor towards sustainable development. 
More  specifically,    the  role  of  Monitoring  and  Evaluation  is  found  key  in  terms  of  capacity 
building to inform processors on their achievements and constraints. Similarly, some sectors are 
yet  to  develop  their  database  to  serve  as  benchmarks  for  their  evaluation.  The  Role  of  the 
National Institute of Statistics in this area is highly needed and recommended.  

Some of the activities connected to environment and sustainable development require long term 
investments, which in turn,  depend to some extent on financial commitments made by donors. 
It has been observed that some of donors  take longer to materialize their commitments and 
hence this affects the program implementation.  

Another important observation of this report is that  different institutions (in the broad sense 
of  structures,  policies,  regulations)    have  been    (are  being)  established  in  different  sectors. 
Although complementary towards sustainable development, the challenge remains on how  and 
the extent to which these are being integrated by local governments ( District and Sectors) in 
their respective District Development Plans and  Imihigo  Performance Contracts. Therefore, 
there is need to establish  a framework that easy the coordination of different initiatives around 
green economy and sustainable development.   

In all, apart from the above areas highlighted for more consideration,  findings from this report 
show  that  Rwanda  has  made  tremendous  efforts  towards  environment  and  sustainable 
development.  Thus,  results  of  this  report  form  a  basis  for  future  perspectives  of  Rwanda  in 
terms of a green economy   in the context of sustainable development and poverty eradication; 
and the institutional framework for sustainable development.  

30 | P a g e  
 

 

ANNEX 
ANNEX     
ANNEX 
ANNEX 

    
    

List of contributors to the National Report   

______________________________________ 

 
Institution  
Ministry of Natural Resources, 
Ministry of Finance,  

Ministry of Commerce,     

Ministry of Agriculture,     

Ministry of Health (MoH),     

MINALOC 
Ministry of Education (MINEDUC) 
National University of Rwanda     

Office of the Prime Minister (PRIMATURE )  (for Gender issues), 
Ministry of Infrastructure (MININFRA).    

 
Ministry of Gender    

Ministry of Youth    

REMA    

Natural Resources Management Authority     

 
UNDP     

RDB 

RAB 

NAEB 
UNECA 

UNIDO 
BNR 

DFID 

31 | P a g e  
 

Targeted person  
PS  and the DG planning  
DG planning  

DG planning 

DG planning 

DG planning 

DG planning 
DG Research and Technology  
Dr.  Twarabamenye, CEESD  
Director CGIS  
?  
DG planning 

DG planning 

DG planning 

DG  
Research and planning 
Others  
DG planning 

See Shingiro  

 

DG/ Representatives  

DG/ Representatives 
Rogers  

 
Chief Economist  

 

 

 

 

Executive Director or 
representative   
Representative  

 

 

Executive Secretary  

USAID 

EU 

World Bank  

IPAR 

PSF 

DUCTH EMBASY  

NISR 

IMBARAGA  

 
 
 
 
 

32 | P a g e  
 

