Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law, Vol. 3(2) 

 

Steganography: 

Forensic, Security, and Legal Issues 

Merrill Warkentin  

Mississippi State University  
m.warkentin@msstate.edu 

Ernst Bekkering 

Northeastern State University 

bekkerin@nsuok.edu 

 

 

 
 

Mark B. Schmidt 

St. Cloud State University 
mbschmidt@stcloudstate.edu 

ABSTRACT 

Steganography  has  long  been  regarded  as  a  tool  used  for  illicit  and  destructive 
purposes such as crime and warfare. Currently, digital tools are widely available to 
ordinary  computer  users  also.  Steganography  software  allows  both  illicit  and 
legitimate users to hide messages so that they will not be detected in transit. This 
article provides a brief history of steganography, discusses the current status in the 
computer  age,  and  relates  this  to  forensic,  security,  and  legal  issues.  The  paper 
concludes  with  recommendations  for  digital  forensics  investigators,  IT  staff, 
individual users, and other stakeholders. 
Keywords:  steganography,  data  hiding,  information  hiding,  digital  forensics, 
computer law, computer security, steganalysis, privacy 
1. INTRODUCTION 

Steganography  is  the  process  of  hiding  information.  In  the  digital  realm, 
steganography (which literally means covered writing), involves hiding data or 
messages in digital files. The files themselves may appear to be innocuous, and 
would  be  ignored  by  a  casual  observer  or  even  by  authorities.  The  field  of 
information hiding has grown sufficiently in recent years.  Evidence of this growth 
can be seen at workshops on information hiding, and in occasional reports of use 
by criminals and terrorists appear in the popular press. In contrast to cryptography 
where the message is encoded, the purpose of steganography is to hide the fact that 
a  message  is  being  sent.  Once  encoded,  a  cryptographically  altered  message 
typically  appears  unrecognizable  and  would  raise  suspicions.    The  primary 
advantage  of  steganography  over  cryptography  is  that  the  covertext  (apparent 
messages) do not attract attention to themselves, to messengers, or to recipients. 

 

17 

Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law, Vol. 3(2) 

 
Modern information technology enables novice computer users to hide, transmit, 
and unhide steganographic messages without special expertise. (Warkentin, et al, 
2006)  The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: A brief history (Section 
2)  is  followed  by  an  introduction  to  steganography  (3),  with  contrasts  to 
encryption, and an introduction to steganalysis (4).  The following three sections 
focus on forensics issues (5), security issues (6), and legal issues (7).  Section 8 has 
conclusions and recommendations for researchers and practitioners. 

2. BRIEF HISTORY 

2.1 Ancient Greece and Rome 

Steganography has  a  long history, going back  to  the  ancient  Greek  and  Roman 
civilizations. Herodotus, the Greek historian, reports how king Darius shaved the 
head of a prisoner and wrote a secret message on his scalp. After the hair grew 
back,  the prisoner  was  sent  to the  kings  son-in-law  Aristogoras in Miletus  and 
effectively  delivering  the  message  undetected  by  the  enemy.  A  less  time-
consuming  method  of  delivering  secret  messages  was  used  by  a  soldier  named 
Demeratus who needed to send a message to Sparta that king Xerxes planned to 
invade  Greece.  Demeratus  removed  the  wax  from  a  writing  tablet,  wrote  the 
message on the underlying wood, and re-applied the wax. Both examples explain 
why the word steganography is based on the Greek word for covered writing 
(steganos  =  unseen  or  hidden;  graphia  =  writing):  protection  of  the  message  is 
assured  not  through  making  the  message  undecipherable,  but  by  hiding  the 
existence  of  the  message  altogether.  Sending  undecipherable  messages  is  the 
technique of cryptography (kryptos = hidden or secret), and both techniques are 
often  used  in  conjunction.  The  Romans  accomplished  the  goal  of  sending 
messages undetected by writing between the lines of innocuous documents with 
invisible ink made from fluids like milk, urine and fruit juices. When the document 
was heated, the invisible ink would darken and become visible. 

2.2 Middle Ages 

At  the  end  of  the  Middle  Ages,  two  authors  produced  seminal  works  on 
steganography.  Johannes  Trithemius  (1462-1526)  wrote  the  three  volumes  of 
Steganographia (ca. 1499) which superficially describe black magic, specifically 
using spirits to communicate over long distances.  However, by deciphering the 
text with a simple substitution method, one can read treatises on both cryptography 
and steganography.  More than a century later, Gaspari Schotti picked up where 
Trithemius  left  off  and  published  Steganographia  (1665),  which  focuses  on 
techniques with text, invisible inks, and incorporating hidden messages in music.  

2.3 More Recent History 

In  the  mid  19th  century,  a  global  technology  revolution  dramatically  altered 
information transmission speed so that what took days or weeks to convey (at the 
speed of ships and horses) could be achieved in minutes with the new telegraph.  
Almost  immediately,  businesses  and  individuals  sought  to  conceal  their  true 

 

18 

Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law, Vol. 3(2) 

 
message  from  telegraph  operators,  especially  when  the  messages  might  be 
sensitive or might  convey  strategic business  information.    Some  messages  were 
simply  enciphered,  but  others  were  creatively  disguised  using  various 
steganographic schemes to prevent telegraph operators from becoming suspicious. 
(Standage, 1999) 
In  the  late  19th  century,  Lord  Baden-Powell  was  employed  as  a  scout  by  the 
British army. To hide his drawings of positions of Boer artillery bases, he hid maps 
in drawings of butterflies. Certain markings on the wings of the butterflies were 
actually enemy installation positions. Thus, he would not be suspected even if he 
were caught. Hiding messages was further perfected by the German invention of 
the  microdot,  where  photographs  the  size  of  printed  periods  contain  images  of 
standard size pages. FBI Director J. Edgar Hoover labeled this as the enemys 
masterpiece of espionage. Other advancements during World War I included the 
advent of null ciphers, where unencrypted messages about ordinary events contain 
hidden  messages.  For  instance,  the  following  message  sent  by  the  German 
embassy in Washington, DC, to their headquarters in Berlin Apparently neutral's 
protest  is  thoroughly  discounted  and  ignored.  Isman  hard  hit.  Blockade  issue 
affects pretext for embargo on by-products, ejecting suets and vegetable oils can 
be decoded by taking the second letter of each word, and results in Pershing sails 
from NY June 1. (Kahn, 1996) As evidenced by comparing the message sizes, 
this technique was relatively inefficient. Additionally, some of these messages are 
nonsensical, and therefore may raise suspicions.   

2.4 Computer Age 

The  advent of  the digital  computer has  introduced  new  opportunities  for  hiding 
messages,  but  also  new  challenges  for  forensic  investigation.  International 
workshops  on  information  hiding  and  steganography  have  been  held  regularly 
since 1996 (Moulin and OSullivan, 2003), however, the majority of development 
and use of computerized steganography has occurred since 2000 (Cole, 2003). The 
use of steganography is now well within the reach of an average person with a 
computer  and  an  Internet  connection  (Bartlett,  2003),  and  the  most  recent 
development is the potential use of steganography in Internet Telephony systems 
such as Skype (Mazurczyk and Szczypiorski, 2008). 

3. DIGITAL STEGANOGRAPHY 

3.1 Definitions 

In  the  modern  computer  age,  technology  has  enabled  the  embedding  of  hidden 
messages efficiently and easily. Computerized tools encode the message and hide 
it  within  another  file.  Johnson  (2008)  defines  steganography  as  the  art  of 
concealing the existence of information within seemingly innocuous carriers and 
adds that an encrypted message may draw suspicion while a hidden message will 
not. Thus, the goal is to conceal that the fact that the message even exists in the 
first  place  (Anderson  and  Petitcolas,  1998),  so  that  anyone  intercepting  and 

 

19 

Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law, Vol. 3(2) 

 
viewing the file (image, document, e-mail, etc.) would not be readily aware of the 
hidden bits. In the 1996 Information Hiding Workshop in Cambridge (Pfitzmann, 
1996),  the following terminology in  steganography  was  defined.  The  embedded 
data is the information to be hidden in the cover, the original, innocent file such as 
an image, audio, text, or video. The process itself is labeled embedding, and the 
cover and embedded data together form the stego data. 
As  mentioned  earlier,  both  steganography  and  cryptography  intend  to  hide 
information.  Steganography  hides  the  existence  of  the  message,  cryptography 
makes the message impossible to understand for outsiders, and both are often used 
together. Whereas cryptographic messages by themselves are easily identifiable by 
their random and unintelligible appearance, steganography messages appear to be 
normal at first sight. The combined use of steganography and cryptography can 
effectively provide a message sender two levels of protection. 
Another  related  technology  is  watermarking,  where  digital  files  are  visibly  or 
invisibly marked with embedded information. For the sake of completeness, we 
will briefly discuss some cryptographic definitions and principles as they relate to 
steganography,  compare  steganography  and  watermarking,  and  focus  the 
remainder of the paper only on steganography and related issues.  
The  classical  principles  of  cryptography  were  defined  by  the  Dutch  linguist 
Auguste Kerckhoff (1883) as: 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 
(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 
(cid:131) 

(cid:131) 

the system should be, if not theoretically unbreakable, unbreakable in 
practice, 
 the design of a system should not require secrecy, 
compromise of the system should not inconvenience the 
correspondents, 
the key should be memorable without notes and should be easily 
changeable, 
the cryptograms should be transmittable by telegraph, 
the apparatus or documents should be portable and operable by a 
single person, and 
the system should be easy, theater requiring knowledge of a long list 
of rules nor involving mental strain. 

Clearly,  some  of  these  principles  still  apply  today.  Like  steganography, 
cryptography has significantly improved both in use and in decryption since the 
advent of the modern computer. Ciphers are more complex, and any type of data 
can be converted in binary format. Separately and in combination, the techniques 
have been of great interest to the intelligence and law enforcement communities. 
We will address some of these issues in a later section. 

 

20 

Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law, Vol. 3(2) 

 
In watermarking, the object of the communication is not in the embedded message 
but in the carrier itself. The watermark only serves to uniquely identify the carrier. 
This can be overt as a deterrent to digital copying, or hidden as proof of ownership 
and origin. Television broadcast companies routinely include a visible watermark 
in their programming, and copyright protection systems use invisible watermarks. 
This indicates the need for inseparability of watermark and carrier, since removal 
of the (visible or invisible) watermark destroys the deterrence to copying and proof 
of ownership. A special problem for both steganography and watermarking is the 
conversion of digital files to different formats or with different compression levels. 
Both can affect the embedded information, and the technology needs to be robust 
against  this  type  of  attack  and  signal  modification.    For  example,  only  lossless 
compression algorithms (e.g. GIF, not JPEG) are appropriate for steganographic 
concealment, because the embedded data may become altered otherwise.  Certain 
transmission  protocols  may  also  compress  the  signal  in  ways  that  could 
compromise  the  ability to discover  the embedded  data  by  the recipient.  Finally, 
whereas steganographic content can lose significance when information becomes 
outdated  or  stale,  watermarks  retain  their  significance  indefinitely.  A  brief 
comparison of the three technologies is included as Table 1. 

Table 1: Comparison of Steganography, Cryptography, and 

Watermarking 

Technique 
Steganography 

Purpose 
Hiding existence of digital 
content from outsiders 

Cryptography 

Rendering the digital content  
inaccessible to outsiders 

Watermarking 

Protection of digital content 
of carrier 

Comments 
Content generally of 
limited time value. 
Needs carrier file 
Content generally of 
limited time value. 
No need for carrier file 
May or may not be 
readily detectable. 
Durability is essential 

 

For the purposes of this paper, the remainder of the discussion will focus only on 
steganography. 

3.2 Types of Steganography 

The hidden content of stego messages can be embedded in the carrier file by three 
types of methods. The stego message can be injected inside the carrier, which does 
not alter the digital content of the carrier itself. Alternatively, part of the digital 
carrier content can be substituted with the stego message. The latter does change 
the digital content of the carrier. A relatively new method of hiding content is to 
use the stego message to generate a completely new file. Examples of each method 

 

21 

Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law, Vol. 3(2) 

 
may serve to clarify how each can be used, or is used, in practice. 
3.2.1 Injection Techniques 
Hiding  information  in  existing  files  routinely  occurs  in  common  computer 
applications. Properties of Microsoft Office documents are automatically recorded 
with information specified  perhaps years earlier  when the Office application 
was  installed.  The  Author  property  is  automatically  culled  from  the  User 
Information entry under the Tools/Options menu. Complete safe removal requires 
a  special 
tool  (http://office.microsoft.com/en-us/help/HA011400341033.aspx). 
Information Systems conferences and journals now routinely instruct authors how 
to  remove  identifying  information  in  order  not  to  compromise  the  blind  review 
process. More intentionally, information can be invisibly hidden in Web pages by 
using  the  hidden  tag.  The  regular  view  of  the  webpage  does  not  show  the 
content,  but  the  source  view  reveals  the  <input  type="hidden">  tag.  Other 
examples include storing data in unused space in file headers, data packets sent 
over  networks,  and  unused  disk  space  (Johnson  et  al,  2001).  Using  open  space 
without  any  alteration  to  the  carrier  file  is  very  limited  in  capacity,  however. 
Therefore, more modern and secure techniques involve some level of modification 
of the carrier file.  
3.2.2 Substitution Techniques 
In substitution techniques, a limited amount of data of the carrier file is replaced 
with the coded representation of the hidden message. In techniques involving the 
Least  Significant  Bit  (LSB),  the  binary  representation  of  each  picture  element 
(pixel) in a graphic file is changed to encode the hidden message. This is done such 
that  the  effect  on  the  visual  image  is  negligible.  Consider  the  following  color 
encoding: 
10010101   00001101   11001001 
10010110   00001111   11001010 
10011111   00010000   11001011 
The LSB algorithm can hide the following nine bits 101101101 by changing the 
last bit in each octet as needed. This results in 
10010101   00001100   11001001 
10010111   00001110   11001011 
10011111   00010000   11001011 
This example demonstrates that to hide nine bits of information, the algorithm only 
needs to change four of the nine least significant bits in these nine bytes.  Because 
changing the last bit causes an extremely small change in the color of a pixel, the 
change  in  the  graphic  is  imperceptible  to  the  human  eye.    For  a  more  detailed 
description 
visit: 
http://www.garykessler.net/library/steganography.html. More complex algorithms 

process, 

reader 

of 

this 

the 

can 

 

22 

Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law, Vol. 3(2) 

 
include Discrete Cosine Transformation (DCT), Fourier transformations, and the 
Patchwork  Method  of  Bender.  In  audio  files,  techniques  for  information  hiding 
include replacing the phases of short segments imperceptibly with reference phases 
representing the hidden data (phase coding), spreading a narrow band signal of the 
message over a wide spectrum of frequencies making it appear as random noise 
(spread  spectrum  encoding),  dividing  the  bandwidth  of  the  carrier  into  multiple 
channels  and  hopping  between  these  channels  (frequency  hopping),  and  many 
others.  
3.2.3 File Creation 
Finally, the stego message can be used to generate a completely new, innocent-
looking file. In essence, the message creates its own carrier. An example of this 
technique  is  the  application  SpamMimic  (http://spammimic.com/  ).  Using 
SpamMimic, a short message can easily be hiding in text that appears to be spam.  
This message then can be send to someone who would then use the website to 
decode the message.  An advantage of this is that few people would be suspicious 
of  spam  messages.    The  technique  is  relatively  inefficient,  as  evidenced  by  the 
conversion of the three words steganography is interesting to text with a word 
count of 574.  Full sentences easily balloon to emails with thousands of words.  
However, given the advantages of such a method, the word count may be of little 
consequence. 

3.3 Steganography Encryption Levels 

Techniques of steganography can also be distinguished by the level of encryption. 
The least secure level, which does not require the exchange of a cipher such as a 
stego  key,  is  pure  steganography.  Effectiveness  of  keeping  the  stego  message 
secure  relies  only  on  the  ability  of  the  message  to  remain  undetected.  Using  a 
secret stego key prior to communication makes the message more secure, but can 
also raise suspicions because exchange of the secret stego key must precede the 
transmission of the carrier with the stego message. Consequently, there is a trade-
off between probability of detection on one hand, and the security of the embedded 
message if detected. The most secure technique uses a private and a public key to 
secure the message embedded in the carrier. The stego message is embedded with 
the use of a public key, and the message extracted with a private key. As in public 
key  encryption,  there  is  no  need  to  exchange  keys  and  therefore  the  risk  of 
detection is not increased. It must also be emphasized that the keys in secret key 
steganography and public key steganography only serve to augment the execution 
of the steganography application, and do not constitute the use of encryption. 
A summary of steganography techniques is included as Table 2. 

 

23 

Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law, Vol. 3(2) 

 

Table 2: Steganography Techniques 
Effect on carrier 
Method 
file 
No change of 
content 

Using built-in 
information 
recording tools or 
open file space 
Part of digital 
content of carrier 
file changed to 
reflect stego 
message 
Stego message 
hidden in larger 
amount of new, 
irrelevant digital 
content 
Stego content is 
encrypted as it is 
included in 
carrier file 

Some 
degradation of 
content quality 

None- new 
carrier file 
created 

Nome beyond 
pure 
steganography 

Comments 

Very limited 
hiding capacity 

Increased risk of 
detection with 
increasing 
volume of stego 
content 
Inefficient, 
detection risk 
highly dependent 
on context of 
message 
Key exchange 
increases risk 
detection 

Technique 

Injection 
techniques 

Substitution 
techniques 

File creation 

Stego encryption 

 

3.4 File types 

Finally,  steganography  can  use  different  types  of  files.  Until  recently,  mostly 
audiovisual files were used as carrier files for inclusion of stego content. These 
files are generally large and have a large image hiding capacity. For instance, the 
color of a pixel in an icon can be changed imperceptibly by minimally changing 
the  digital  color  code  (e.g.  from  01011011  01010011  01011001  to  01011010 
01010011 01011001), whereas changing a single character in the word 'fat' to 'bat' 
is  not  only  noticeable,  but  also  changes  the  entire  meaning  of  the  word. 
Incidentally, both are represented by three bytes.  As steganography is increasingly 
seen as a useful business tool, other file types are now being used as cover files. An 
example  is  the  use  of  steganography  for  placing  identifiers  in  database 
relationships (Agrawal et al, 2003).  

4. STEGANALYSIS: DETECTION OF STEGANOGRAPHY: 

4.1 Steganalysis 

Just as digital technology can be used to hide messages, can it be used to detect and 
decode stego messages. Steganalysis is the process of hunting for small deviations 
in  the  expected patterns of  a  file (Cohen,  2001),  so  that  the presence of hidden 
messages  can  be  detected.  Steganalysis  and  steganography  are  two  sides  of  the 
same coin, similar to cryptography and cryptanalysis, and computer viruses and 

 

24 

Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law, Vol. 3(2) 

 
antivirus  software.  Research  in  steganography  involves  both  developing  new 
techniques  for  hiding  content  and  developing  new  tools  for  detection  and 
deciphering of hidden content. This duality is similar to biologic warfare, where 
development of new biological weapons goes hand in hand with research of their 
antidotes.  

4.2 Types of Steganalysis 

Based on knowledge of the actual message, availability of the original cover file, 
steganography  tool,  the  following  types  of  steganalysis  can  be  distinguished 
(Petitcolas, 2000):  

(cid:131)  Stego only attack - only the stego object is available for analysis;   
(cid:131)  Known cover attack - the cover and the stego object are both 

available;  

(cid:131)  Known message attack - the message is known and can be compared 

with the stego object;  

(cid:131)  Chosen stego attack - the stego object and the stego tool (algorithm) 

are available for analysis;  

(cid:131)  Chosen message attack - choose a regular message, convert to stego 

message for further analysis;  

(cid:131)  Known stego attack - the stego message, the stego tool (algorithm), 

and the cover message are all available for analysis.  

In general, steganalysis becomes more efficient and effective as more elements are 
known.  A  further  level of complexity is  introduced  as  steganalysis  moves  from 
detection only, to detection and deciphering of the stego message. 

4.3 Detection Vectors 

Detection of steganography can be based on comparisons of the stego file and the 
original file, detection of files having larger than expected file sizes, and variation 
in statistical properties of the digital information in the files. Original files are often 
not  available,  unless 
they  come  from  public  sources.  However,  many 
steganography techniques increase the size of the digital carrier file, to the point 
that  is  becomes  statistically  significant.  Moreover,  as  the  structure  of  the  stego 
message  is  superimposed  on  the  digital  carrier  data,  analysis  of  distribution  of 
known properties often reveals the presence of the hidden message. For instance, 
bitmap  files  with  more  than  50  near-identical  colors  should  be  suspected  of 
containing hidden messages (Petitcolas, 2000). 

4.4 Destruction vs. Deciphering 

Finally,  deciphering  of  stego  messages  is  not  always  necessary.  If  the  hidden 
message can be destroyed before it reaches its destination, the attempt at hidden 
communication  has  effectively  been  thwarted.  Graphical  files  can  be  altered  by 

 

25 

Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law, Vol. 3(2) 

 
changing  file  formats,  compression  algorithms,  and  compression  levels,  usually 
without noticeable visible impact on the integrity of the carrier file.  
In  summary,  the  detection  and  deciphering  of  steganographic  content  is 
complicated and has many challenges. Nevertheless, it is a subject that the security 
and legal communities cannot ignore. 

5. DIGITAL FORENSICS ISSUES 

5.1 Digital Forensics 

Digital forensics focuses on the preservation and analysis of digital evidence. As 
defined in Palmer (2008), digital forensics are the use of scientifically derived and 
proven  methods  toward  the  preservation,  collection,  validation,  identification, 
analysis,  interpretation,  documentation,  and  presentation  of  digital  evidence 
derived  from  digital  sources  for  the  purpose  of  facilitation  or  furthering  the 
reconstruction of events found to be criminal, or helping to anticipate unauthorized 
actions shown to be disruptive to planned operations.  As steganography becomes 
more  widely  available  and  the  amount  of  data  on  local  machines  and  Internet 
increases, the issue of detection of the use of steganography by digital forensics 
personnel becomes increasingly important.  In theory, this should be evaluated in 
any  type  of  case  involving  computer  use.  In  practice,  most  cases  will  involve 
audiovisual  files,  such  as  in  child  pornography.  However,  cases  of  industrial 
espionage and fraud could be encountered. 

5.2 Approaches in Forensic Steganalysis 

Digital Forensic experts employ many techniques, and we will limit the discussion 
to those applicable to steganography and steganalysis. 
5.2.1 Detection of software 
In  some  cases,  steganography  software  itself  may  be  discovered  on  computer 
equipment  under  investigation.  The  Steganography  Application  Fingerprint 
Database (SAFDB) currently contains identifying information on 625 applications 
associated with steganography, watermarking, and other data-hiding applications 
(Backbone  Security,  2008a).  Similarly,  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and 
Technology (NIST) maintains a list of digital signatures in the National Software 
Reference  Library,  some  of  which  are  for  steganography  software.  Even  when 
software  has  been  removed,  traces  can  sometimes  be  found  in  places  like  the 
Windows  registry  or  in  system  backup  files.  When  steganography  software 
installation has been identified, malicious intent should be assumed until proven 
otherwise. 
5.2.2 Detecting pairs of carrier files and stego files 
In  addition  to  detecting  the  software  used  for  steganography,  digital  forensics 
experts can detect files with similar visual properties but different file sizes, hash 
values, and statistical properties. If files have been deleted, they may be retrieved 
from the Recycle Bin or similar Trash container, or even reconstructed with special 

 

26 

Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law, Vol. 3(2) 

 
forensics tools for file recovery.  
5.2.3 Using Keywords 
An additional method of detection uses a list of keywords to search for file names 
and content in program files and data files. The list should be specific with regard 
to  steganography.  For  instance,  the  search  term  steg*  can  be  used  to  identify 
steganography.  The  effectiveness  and  efficiency  in  detection,  while  preventing 
false  positives  and  false  negatives,  depends  on  the  quality  of  the  keyword 
dictionary. 
5.2.4 Specialized Steganalysis Software 
In  the  past,  most  steganography  detection  tools  targeted  specific  applications   
frequently  the  same  applications  used  for  steganography.  More  recent  software 
claims to detect stego files created with a wide variety of programs. One of these is 
Stegdetect 0.6, which uses linear discriminant analysis to locate probable images 
with  hidden  content  by  comparing  them  with  a  set  of  normal  images  (Provos, 
2008).  A  second  common  tool  is  Stego  Suite  (Wetstone  Technologies,  2008), 
which  combines  increasingly  intense  levels  of  detection  with  content  cracking 
tools.    The  third  example  is  the  recent  release  of  StegAnalyzerAS  (Backbone 
Security, 2008b), which uses the values stored in the SAFDB to identify potential 
stego  files.  A  comprehensive  list  of  steganography  tools  is  maintained  at 
http://www.jjtc.com/Steganography/tools.html.  
5.2.5 Physical crime scene investigation 
Finally,  physical  crime  scene  investigation  can  reveal  useful  information. 
Passwords  used  for  steganography  tools  can  be  written  on  notes  stuck  under 
keyboards,  and  environmental  objects  can  generate  clues  about  potential 
passwords.  

6. DIGITAL SECURITY ISSUES 

Though steganography tools may be used for legitimate business applications such 
as protecting strategic corporate information during transmission (Schmidt et al, 
2004), they have emerged as a significant issue to forensic investigators and others 
who  are  concerned  with  malicious  and  illegal  uses.  As  steganography  tools 
become more widely available and easier to use, protection against malicious use 
demands  attention,  and  the  balance  between  protection  from  illicit  use  and 
interference with legitimate use emerges as a new challenge. In this section, we 
will focus on protection against malicious use, and not discuss specific potential 
business applications such as watermarking for protection of intellectual property 
(discussed above). 

6.1 Prevention of Malicious Use 

Organizations  fight  a  continuous  battle  for  control  over  the  user  desktop. 
Employees  install  unapproved  applications  such  as  Instant  Messaging  clients, 
screen  savers,  and  peer-to-peer  software  if  given  the  opportunity.  Likewise, 

 

27 

Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law, Vol. 3(2) 

 
employees  could  install  steganography  software  from  repositories  such  as 
JTTC.com (Johnson, 2008). The first lines of defense against these practices are 
as for any unapproved software  company policies and limiting user permissions. 
Acceptable  use  policies  should  explicitly  exclude  steganography  software,  since 
users  could  argue  that  it  does  not  fall  under  banned  software  due  to  some 
legitimate uses.   

6.2 Detection of Unauthorized Steganography Software 

Unfortunately, not all employees abide by company policy and some are able to 
circumvent  restricted  user  permissions.  The  following  measures  should  be 
considered: 

(cid:131)  Use of network intrusion software to detect abnormal movement of 
graphics files. Most business practices do not involve a high level of 
graphics file use, and most traffic will be incoming as a result of web 
surfing. Outgoing graphics files, whether in isolation or as email 
attachments, should be scanned. 

(cid:131)  Since stego files will not be detected unless they are sought, automatic 

scanning of networked computers should be considered. This can be 
done with a variety of commercial steganalysis software. 

(cid:131)  Finally, computers brought in for maintenance or repair should be 

routinely scanned for steganography as well as computer viruses and 
malware.  

Together,  these  measures  will  contribute  to  active  identification  of  illicit 
steganography use in the enterprise. 

6.3 Steganography as an Organizational Priority 

Steganography  is  but  one  threat  to  the  security  of  the  enterprise.  As  with  other 
security  threats  (e.g.,  computer  viruses  and  network  intrusion),  prevention  and 
allocation  of  resources  will  depend  on  the  perceived  relative  importance  of  the 
threat. Wingate (2007) describes four typical stakeholder responses: 

(cid:131)  unaware of the threat. Steganography is typically confused with 

shorthand writing (stenography). 

(cid:131)  denial of the threat. Even some experts fall in this category, as 
evidenced by the statement made by Neils Provos to the press: 
Steganography becomes the focus of attention, dies down, and then 
the public is all over it again, ... But it will never be pervasive, 
because the amount of data you can actually hide in the images is 
fairly small. And if someone wanted to steal intellectual property, itd 
be easier to copy the data on a disk and carry it out in your pocket. 
(Radcliff, 2002). 

 

28 

Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law, Vol. 3(2) 

 

(cid:131) 

resignation. Stakeholders typically state that nothing can be done 
about steganography due to a lack of good tools for detection and 
information extraction. 

(cid:131)  perception of steganography as a legitimate threat. Wingate (2007) 
falls in this category: A comprehensive enterprise security program 
should include countermeasures to the threat posed by insider use of 
steganograhpy. The first step is to acknowledge the threat exists by 
developing and implementing policy to prohibit users from having 
steganography applications on their workstations. Finally, both 
passive and active detection tools and techniques should be employed 
to enforce the no steg policy. 

Users are encouraged to form their own opinion about the relevance and extent of 
the threat of steganography. 

7. LEGAL ISSUES AND CHALLENGES  

Laws involving technology are difficult to enact and even more difficult to enforce 
in  the  Internet  age.  Many  Internet  communications  cross  state  lines  and 
international borders, which creates the issue of jurisdiction. What may be illegal 
in  one  jurisdiction  may  be  legal  in  another.  In  1952,  the  United  States  enacted 
Section  1343  of  the  Federal  Criminal  Code.  It  included  a  wire  fraud  provision, 
which  was  later  extended  to  encompass  the  Internet.  Using  any  part  of  the 
telecommunications system in a criminal act is now a federal offense (Cole, 2003).  
Court orders must be obtained from a judge to monitor phone conversations, but 
the order applies to a specific phone number only. Criminals can easily bypass this 
by using disposable cell phones (Charny, 2003). Other new technologies, such as 
the voice over Internet protocol (VoIP), pose new challenges. Internet Telephony 
breaks phone conversations into data packets, sends them over the Internet, and 
reassembles them at the destination. To monitor this traffic, a few central locations 
would have to be set up where voice streams could be diverted and then be copied 
before resending them to the intended destination (Wired News, 2003). It would be 
much more effective to monitor right after the starting point when packets are not 
separated  over  different  routes  or  right  before  the  destination,  when  all  packets 
follow a single path.  

7.1 Privacy vs. Security 

A delicate balance exists between loss of personal privacy and the greater good of 
society. Groups like the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) are opposing law 
enforcement monitoring of communications. The ACLUs position on privacy and 
technology is that the United States is at risk of becoming a surveillance society. 
Two  concurrent  developments  form  the  basis  for  this  trend  (American  Civil 
Liberties Union, 2003):  

 

29 

Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law, Vol. 3(2) 

 

(cid:131)  The tremendous explosion in surveillance-enabling technologies. 

George Orwells vision of Big Brother has now become 
technologically possible. 

(cid:131)  Even as this technological surveillance monster grows in our midst, 

we are [weakening] the legal restraints that keep it from trampling our 
privacy. 

Another problem is the risk of unintended consequences of any new legislation. 
For example, a Michigan state law enacted March 31, 2003, based on the Digital 
Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) and originally intended to protect cable TV 
operators  and  broadband providers,  contained  the  provision  A  person  shall not 
assemble,  develop,  manufacture,  possess,  deliver,  or  use  any 
type 
telecommunications  access  device  by  doing,  but  not  limited  to,  any  of  the 
following:  ...  (b)  Conceal  the  existence  or  place  of  origin  or  destination  of  any 
telecommunications service (Act 328 of 1931, 2004). The law had to be amended 
in 2004 because in its original form, the legitimate use of technologies, such as 
steganography,  was  clearly  prohibited.  Likewise,  some  information  gathered  by 
authorities could be used for illegitimate purposes.  
Recently, the U.S. government has tried to gain more access to communications 
and  restrict  the  use  of  encryption  technology.  Similar  to  the  Communications 
Assistance for Law Enforcement Act of 1994 (CALEA) in the United States, the 
European Parliament implemented the Communications Data Protection Directive 
in  2003.  European  member  states  can  order  telecommunications  companies  to 
store all electronic communications, including phone calls, e-mails, and Internet 
use,  for  indefinite  periods.  In  general  though,  the  European  Union  is  more 
permissive with regard to specific technologies to hide data. Neither the United 
States  nor  the  European  Union  has  enacted  laws  restricting  the  use  of 
steganography specifically, and it is unlikely that legal restrictions on the use of 
steganography will be implemented. Laws restricting the use of cryptography have 
existed for years (Koops, 2007), while legal limits on the use of steganography 
have  yet  to  be  implemented.  Moreover,  the  potential  thwarting  of  criminal 
activities may not outweigh the loss of privacy. 

7.2 International Travel 

Finally, though steganography may not be illegal, even the possession could be 
cause  for  alarm  in  some  parts  of  the  world.  International  travelers,  including 
business travelers, should realize that unhidden coded  messages, no matter how 
unbreakable,  will  arouse  suspicion  and  may  in  themselves  be  incriminating  in 
countries where encryption is illegal. If hidden digital messages would be found, 
the  owner  of  the  equipment  could  be  in  similar  legal  trouble  abroad.  The 
possession and use of steganography should therefore be considered very carefully.  

 

30 

Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law, Vol. 3(2) 

 

8. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

Steganography has a long history of both legitimate and illicit uses (Schmidt et 
al,  2004).  With  rapid  development  and  improvements  of  information 
technology,  the  potential  for  use  and  abuse  will  continue  to  increase.  Some 
legitimate  uses  exist,  but  the  focus  has  been  predominantly  on  detection  of 
abuse and illicit use. 
Legal  restrictions  are  difficult  to  enforce,  therefore  Information  Technology 
(IT)  staff  charged  with  organizational  security  should  act  proactively  by 
seeking management support to limit or banish use of steganography that has 
no  distinct  organizational  benefit.  The  specifics  of  the  limitations  should  be 
incorporated as an integral part of the organizational policies and procedures, 
and should be actively enforced. If a ban on all steganographic software is not 
possible  or  desirable,  specific  exceptions  of  applications,  individuals,  and/or 
job  categories  allowed  to  use  the  software  should  be  explicitly  specified.  To 
foster active prevention, managers must establish organizational policies which 
discourage or ban the use of steganography.  Furthermore, these policies must 
be instantiated with specific procedures and guidelines that are communicated 
to  all  employees  and  other  stakeholders  during  initial  and  ongoing  routine 
Security Awareness, Training, and Education (SATA) programs.  Compliance 
with  these  policies  and  procedures  must  be  actively  enforced  as  part  of  the 
organizational  IT  governance  mechanisms.  Networked  computers  can  be 
actively scanned for steganographic software, similar to scanning for computer 
malware  infections  and  scanning  for  proper  software  versions  and  patches. 
Network  traffic  can  be  scanned  as  it  enters  and  leaves  the  organizational 
network  boundaries,  similar  to  scanning  for  email  security  threats.  Finally, 
Technical Support staff can be instructed in identification of banned software, 
as well as the proper organizational procedures when it is found.  
In  cases  of  steganography  uses  in  crimes  or  organizational  espionage,  where 
law  enforcement 
staff  members 
(respectively)  may  lack  the  specific  expertise,  managers  should  consider 
bringing in the expertise of digital forensics professionals.  Recommendations 
for specific steganalysis tools are likely to become rapidly stale as technology 
progresses, but a good starting point for selecting the proper tools could be to 
start with the major commercial steganalysis vendors in combination with the 
information  in  the  Steganography  Application  Fingerprint  Database  and  the 
National  Software  Reference  Library.  Together,  these  sources  would  provide 
optimal  capability  to detect  and  possibly  decipher  steganographic  content.  In 
any  case,  law  enforcement  and  IT  staff  should  consider  that  steganography 
may have advanced too far to be handled by non-security specialists, and that 
the specialized services of digital forensics professionals may be needed. 
Finally, individual users should consider that the steganography technology has 
advanced  well  beyond  the  use  by  amateur  enthusiasts,  and  that  the  mere 

investigators  or  organizational 

IT 

 

31 

Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law, Vol. 3(2) 

 
presence  of  steganographic  software  on  their  computers  could  have  serious 
professional  and  private  ramifications.  Users  should  be  aware  of  and  stay 
within  the  restrictions  of  corporate  policies  and  procedures,  as  well  as  legal 
limitations on possession and use of steganography software. When traveling 
abroad  with  steg  software  installed,  the  legal  limitations  of  destination 
countries should be investigated. 
Steganography also presents new challenges for digital forensic investigators, 
security personnel, enterprise managers, law enforcement officials, courts, and 
lawmakers.  It  will  add  to  the  complexity  and  quantity  of  the  digital  forensic 
workload, security measures, and development of case law. Future research of 
steganography and steganalysis should be encouraged for both academics and 
practitioners. 

REFERENCES 

(2003). 

Privacy  and  Technology, 

Steganography  Application  Fingerprint 

Act 328 of 1931, Michigan Penal Code. 750.540c (2004). 
Agrawal, R., Haas, P., and Kiernan, J. (2003).Watermarking Relational Data: 
Framework,  Algorithms  and  Analysis,  The  International  Journal  on  Very 
Large Databases, 12(2):157-159. 
American  Civil  Liberties  Union. 
http://www.aclu.org/Privacy/PrivacyMain.cfm, October 29. 
Anderson,  R.  J.,  and  Petitcolas,  F.  A.  P.  (1998).  On  the  limits  of 
Steganography,  IEEE  Journal  on  Selected  Areas  in  Communications,  16(4): 
474-481. 
Backbone  Security 
Database, http://www.sarc-wv.com/docs/safdb.pdf, June 20. 
Backbone  Security  (2008b).  Steganography  Analyzer  Artifact  Scanner, 
http://www.sarc-wv.com/docs/stegalyzeras.pdf, June 25. 
Bartlett,  J. 
http://www.sans.org/rr/paper.php?id=762, October 29. 
Charny,  B. 
http://news.com./2102-1033_3-273084.html?tag=st_util_print , October 15. 
Cohen, A. (2001). When Terror Hides Online, Time, November 12. 
Cole,  E.  (2003).  Hiding  in  plain  sight:  Steganography  and  the  art  of  covert 
communication, Wiley  Publishing, Inc., Indianapolis. 
Johnson, 
http://www.jjtc.com/stegdoc/steg1995.html, June 25. 
Johnson, 
http://www.jjtc.com/Steganography/tools.html, June 25. 

The  ease  of  steganography  and  camouflage, 

(2003). 

Disposable 

Steganography, 

Steganography 

cell 

phones 

spur 

debates, 

N. 

(2008). 

N. 

(2008). 

(2008a). 

(2003). 

Software, 

 

32 

Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law, Vol. 3(2) 

First 

Digital 

Forensic 

Research 

(2008). 

Summary  of 

International  Crypto  Controls,  

 
Johnson,  N.,  Duric,  Z.,  Jajodia,  S.  (2001)  Information  Hiding,  and 
Watermarking - Attacks and Countermeasures, Kluwer. 
Kahn,  D.  (1996).  Codebreakers:  The  Story  of  Secret  Writing.  Revised  ed. 
Scribner,  New  York.  Kerckhoff,  A.  (1883).  La  Cryptographie  Militaire, 
Journal des Sciences Militaires. 
Koops,  B-J. 
http://rechten.uvt.nl/koops/cryptolaw/cls-sum.htm, June 25. 
Mazurczyk, W. and Szczypiorski, K.(2008) Steganography of VOIP Streams, 
http://arxiv.org/ftp/arxiv/papers/0805/0805.2938.pdf, June 25. 
Moulin,  P.,  and  OSullivan,  J.  A.  (2003).  Information-theoretic  analysis  of 
information  hiding,  IEEE  Transactions  on  Information  Theory,  49(3):  563-
593. 
Palmer, G. (2008). A Road Map for Digital Forensic Research. Report from 
the 
Workshop, 
http://www.dfrws.org/2001/dfrws-rm-final.pdf, June 25. 
Petitcolas, F. (2000). Information Hiding: Techniques for Steganography and 
Digital Watermarking, Artech House Books. 
Pfitzmann,  B.  (1966).'Information  Hiding  Terminology  -  Results  of  an 
Informal  Plenary  Meeting  and  Additional  Proposals'.  First  International 
Workshop on Information Hiding, May 30 - June 1, Cambridge, U.K. 
Provos,  N. 
http://www.outguess.org/detection.php, June 20. 
Radcliff,  D. 
http://www.computerworld.com/securitytopics/security/story/0,10801,71726,0
0.html, June 10. 
Schmidt, M. B., Bekkering, E., and Warkentin, M. (2004). On the Illicit Use 
of  Steganography  and  Its  Detection.  ISOneWorld  International  Conference. 
April 14-16. Las Vegas, NV. 
Schotti, G. (1665). Steganographia. Unknown publisher. 
Standage, T. (1999). The Victorian Internet, Berkley Books. 
Trithemius, J. (ca. 1499). Steganographia, Unknown publisher. 
Warkentin, M., Schmidt, M.B., and Bekkering, E. (2006). Steganography and 
Steganalysis, in Warkentin, M. and R. Vaughn (eds.) Enterprise Information 
Systems  Assurance  and  System  Security:  Managerial  and  System  Security. 
Idea Group Publishing, Hershey, PA. 
Wetstone 
https://www.wetstonetech.com/cgi/shop.cgi?view,1, June 25. 

Steganography  Detection  with 

Quickstudy:  Steganography:  Hidden  Data,  

Technologies 

Stegdetect, 

(2008). 

Stego 

Suite, 

(2008) 

(2002). 

 

33 

Journal of Digital Forensics, Security and Law, Vol. 3(2) 

 
Wingate,  J.  (2007).  Digital  Steganography:  Threat  or  Hype?  Homeland 
Defense Journal, 5(4): 60-63. 
Wired  News. 
stymie 
(2003). 
http://www.wired.com/news/print/0,1294,58350,00.html, October 27 
 

Internet 

FBI, 

phone 

calls 

AUTHORS 

 
Merrill Warkentin is a Professor of MIS at Mississippi State University.  His 
research, primarily in computer security management, eCommerce, and virtual 
teams,  has  been  published  in  journals  such  as  MIS  Quarterly,  Decision 
Sciences,  Decision  Support  Systems,  Communications  of 
the  ACM, 
Communications  of  the  AIS,  Information  Systems  Journal,  Journal  of 
Organizational  and  End  User  Computing,  Journal  of  Global  Information 
Management,  and  others.    Professor  Warkentin  is  the  co-author  or  editor  of 
four  books,  and  is  currently  an  Associate  Editor  of  Information  Resources 
Management Journal, Journal of Information Systems Security, and the Special 
Issue of MIS Quarterly on computer security, and is the co-Guest Editor for the 
special  issue  of  the  European  Journal  of  Information  Systems  on  computer 
security.  His PhD is from the University of Nebraska.  
 
Ernst  Bekkering  is  an  Assistant  Professor  in  the  Department  of  IS  and 
Technology at Northeastern State University in Tahlequah, OK. Dr. Bekkering 
obtained  his  BS  in  Physical  Therapy  in  his  native  Holland,  and  his  MS  and 
PhD in Information Systems at Mississippi State University. His research has 
been published in Communications of the ACM, Journal of Organizational and 
End  User  Computing,  and  the  Journal  of  Advancement  in  Marketing 
Education.  
 
Mark B. Schmidt is an Associate Professor of Business Computer Information 
Systems at St. Cloud State University in St. Cloud, Minnesota. He holds a BS 
from Southwest State University in Business and Agri-Business, an MBA from 
St. Cloud State University, and MSIS and Ph.D, degrees from Mississippi State 
University.    He  has  works  published  in  the  Communications  of  the  ACM, 
Journal  of  Computer  Information  Systems,  Journal  of  End  User  Computing, 
Journal  of  Global  Information  Management,  Journal  of  Internet  Commerce, 
Mountain Plains Journal of Business and Economics, International Journal of 
Information Security and Privacy, Information System Frontiers, International 
Journal of Information Systems and Change Management, and in Information 
Systems Security: A Global Perspective. His research focuses on information 
security, end-user computing, and innovative information technologies. 
 

 

34 

