Classification of Ad Hoc Routing Protocols
Petteri Kuosmanen
Finnish Defence Forces
Naval Academy
P.O. Box 5, FIN-00191 Helsinki, Finland
petteri.kuosmanen@mil.fi

Abstract
Mobile ad hoc networks (MANET) are networks which
routing is based on multi-hop routing from a source to a
destination node or nodes. These networks have quite a
many constrains because of uncertainty of radio interface
and its limitations e.g. in available bandwidth. Also
some terminals have limitations concerning battery
energy in use.
There are numerous applicable protocols for ad hoc
networks, but one confusing problem is the vast number
of separate protocols. Each of these protocols is designed
to perform its task as well as it is possible according to
its design criteria. The protocol to be chosen must cover
all states of a specified network and never is allowed to
consume too much network resources by protocol
overhead traffic.
This seminar paper deals with a classification of ad hoc
routing protocols and also presents some specified
protocols according to that classification. Presented
protocols are selected according to an entity formed by
this paper and related papers to be published by
Networking Laboratory of HUT. The emphasis of this
paper is not to present protocols in detail but to present
main features of wide variety of different protocols and
evaluate their suitability and tradeoffs.

1

Introduction

Ad hoc network is a multi-hop wireless network, which
consists of number of mobile nodes. These nodes
generate traffic to be forwarded to some other nodes or a
group of nodes. Due to a dynamic nature of ad hoc
networks, traditional fixed network routing protocols are
not viable. Based on that reason several proposals for
routing protocols has been presented.
Ad hoc radio networks have various implementation
areas. Some areas to be mentioned are military,
emergency, conferencing and sensor applications. Each
of these application areas has their specific requirements
for routing protocols. For example in military
applications low probability of detection and interception
is a key factor such is routing efficiency during fading
and disturbed radio channel conditions. At sensor
applications low or minimum energy consumption is a
precondition for an autonomous operation. In conference

applications a guaranteed quality of service for
multimedia services is a needed feature.
All application areas have some features and
requirements for protocols in common. The routing
protocol overhead traffic is not allowed to drive the
network to congestion nor a local change in link is not
allowed to cause a massive control traffic storm
throughout the network.

2

A Taxonomy for Routing Protocols

Because of multiple and diverse ad hoc protocols there is
an obvious need for a general taxonomy to classify
protocols considered. Traditional classification is to
divide protocols to table-driven and to source-initiated
on-demand driven protocols [1].
Table-driven routing protocols try to maintain consistent,
up-to-date routing information from each node to every
other node. Network nodes maintain one or many tables
for routing information. Nodes respond to network
topology changes by propagating route updates
throughout the network to maintain a consistent network
view.
Source-initiated on-demand protocols create routes only
when these routes are needed. The need is initiated by
the source, as the name suggests. When a node requires a
route to a destination, it initiates a route discovery
process within the network. This process is completed
once a route is found or all possible route permutations
have been examined. After that there is a route
maintenance procedure to keep up the valid routes and to
remove the invalid routes.
This classification has though some drawbacks because
of its rough granularity. To that classification it is
possible to make some modifications (e.g. in [2]). These
modifications can make some assumption about if the
routing is flat or hierarchical and if any means to obtain
global positioning information is in use.
One very attractive taxonomy has been introduced by
Feeney [3]. This taxonomy is based on to divide
protocols according to following criteria, reflecting
fundamental design and implementation choices:

-

-

-

Communication model. What is the wireless
communication model? Multi- or singlechannel?
Structure. Are all nodes treated uniformly?
How are distinguished nodes selected? Is the
addressing hierarchical or flat?
State Information. Is network-scale topology
information obtained at each node?
Scheduling. Is route information continually
maintained for each destination?

This model does not take an account for if a protocol is
unicast, multicast, geocast or broadcast. Also the
taxonomy doesn’t deal with the question how the link or
node related costs are measured. These properties are
however worth to be considered in classification and
evaluating applicability of protocols.
Based on that lack the taxonomy has been slightly
modified by adding such features as type of cast and
cost function. Type of cast feature is an upper level
classification and so the protocols to be classified must
firstly divide by type of cast and after that the more
accurate taxonomy can be applied. The above mentioned
taxonomy is applied to unicast protocols, while in the
context of multicast and geocast protocols a specified
taxonomy has been introduced. The overall taxonomy
and specially the unicast protocol classification can be
seen in figure 1.
The cost function is a classification to be concatenated
after presented taxonomy. It is like a remark to be
noticed when considering the applicability of the
protocol to be chosen.

2.1

Communication Model

Protocols can be divided according to communications
model to protocols that are designed for multi-channel
or single-channel communications. Multi-channel
protocols are routing protocols generally used in TDMA
or CDMA-based networks. They combine channel
assignment and routing functionality. That kind of
protocol is e.g. Clusterhead Gateway Switched Routing
(CGSR) [4].
Single -channel protocols presume one shared media to
be used. They are generally CSMA/CA-oriented, but
they have a wide diversity in which extend they rely on
specific link-layer behaviors.

2.2

Structure

Structure of a network can be classified according to
node uniformity. Some protocols treat all the nodes
uniformly, other make distinctions between different
nodes. In uniform protocols there is no hierarchy in
network, all nodes send and respond to routing control
messages at the same manner.

In non-uniform protocols there is an effort to reduce
the control traffic burden by separating nodes in dealing
with routing information. Non-uniform protocols fall
into two categories: protocols in which each node
focuses routing activity on a subset of its neighbors and
protocols in which the network is topologically
partitioned. These two different methods for nonuniformity are called neighbor selection and
partitioning respectively.
With neighbor selection mechanism, every node has its
own criteria to classify network nodes to near or to
remote nodes. In partitioning protocols that
differentiation is to use hierarchical node separation.
Hierarchical protocols have some upper-level and lowerlevel nodes and certain information difference between
them.

2.3

State Information

Protocols may be described in terms of the state
information obtained at each node and / or exchanged
among nodes. Topology-based protocols use the
principle that every node in a network maintains largescale topology information. This principle is just the
same as link-state protocols use.
Destination-based protocols do not maintain large-scale
topology information. They only may maintain topology
information needed to know the nearest neighbors. The
best known such protocols are distance-vector protocols,
which maintain a distance and a vector to a destination
(hop count or other metric and next hop).

2.4

Scheduling

The way to obtain route information can be a continuous
or a regular procedure or it can be trigged only by on
demand. On that basis the protocols can be classified to
proactive and on-demand protocols. Proactive
protocols, which are also know as table-driven
protocols, maintain all the time routing information for
all known destinations at every source. In these protocols
nodes exchange route information periodically and / or
in response to topology change.
In on-demand i.e. in reactive protocols the route is only
calculated on demand basis. That means that there is no
unnecessary routing information maintained. The route
calculation process is divided to a route discovery and a
route ma intenance phase. The route discovery process is
initiated when a source needs a route to a destination.
The route maintenance process deletes failed routes and
re-initiates route discovery in the case of topology
change.

2.5

Type of Cast

Protocols can be assumed to operate at unicast,
multicast, geocast or broadcast situations.
In unicast protocols one source transmits messages or
data packets to one destination. That is the most normal
operation in any network. The unicast protocols are also
the most common in ad hoc environment to be
developed and they are the basis on which it is a
possibility to construct other type of protocols. Unicast
protocols have thought some lacks when there is a need
to send same message or stream of data to multiple
destinations. So there is an evitable need for multicast
protocols.
Multicast routing protocols try to construct a desirable
routing tree or a mesh from one source to several
destinations. These protocols have also to keep up with
information of joins and leave ups to a multicast group.
The purpose of geocast protocols are to deliver data
packets for a group of nodes which are situated on at
specified geographical area. That kind of protocol can
also help to alleviate the routing procedure by providing
location information for route acquisition.
Broadcast is a basic mode of operation in wireless
medium. Broadcast utility is implemented in protocols as
a supported feature. Protocol only to implement
broadcast function is not a sensible solution. That is the
reason not to classify protocols to broadcast protocols.
But it is worth to mention if a protocol is not supporting
that method.

2.6

Cost Function

When making routing decisions in ad hoc environments,
it is normally not enough to take only considerations to
hop count. In ad hoc networks there is a wide variety of
issues to consider such as link capacity, which can vary
in large scale, latency, link utilization percentage and
terminal energy issues to mention a few most relevant.
That is why there is a need to adapt cost functions to
route calculations.
Rough classification of protocols according to cost
function can be based on hop count approach (no
special cost function applied) and to bandwidth or
energy based cost functions. Also quite a different
approach to routing metrics is used by Associativity
Based Routing (ABR) protocol, which uses degree of
association stability for a metric to decide for a route.
That means that presumably more permanent routes are
preferred. [5]

Figure 1: Taxonomy of Protocols. Classification of
unicast protocols shown.

3

Overview of selected Protocols

There are unicast, single channel protocols, which are
uniform or non-uniform. Uniform protocols are divided
to topology-based protocols, in where nodes are aware of
the topology information of all other nodes in the
network or to destination-based protocols, in where
nodes only know the preferred next hop to a destination.
One protocol to belong to that topology-based class is
GSR (Global State Routing) and the other is DSR
(Destination Source Routing). One main difference
between these protocols is the scheduling method. GSR
is a proactive protocol, which will all the time have the
information needed for routing. DSR is on its behalf a
reactive protocol, which will obtain needed information
only on demand.
To destination-based protocols belong such protocols as
DSDV, AODV, TORA, ABR and WRP. The wellknown difference between e.g. DSDV and AODV is the
scheduling method. The DSDV is proactive as is WRP,
but AODV, TORA and ABR all are reactive protocols.
To be classified to single channel, non-uniform protocols
there are such protocols as ZRP, FSR, OLSR, CEDAR
and CBRP. Form these protocols ZRP, FSR, and OLSR
belong to neighbor selection protocols, which have a
commo n feature to select network subsets by individual
nodes themselves. In partitioning protocols there are
some kind of clustering and cluster head selection
mechanism. To partitioning protocols belongs e.g.
CEDAR and CBRP.
To unicast multi-channel protocols include such
protocols as CGSR and Epidemic. CGSR is a nonuniform protocol and Epidemic is a uniform protocol.
The unicast protocols presented here shortly are the
following:
GSR

-

3.1

WRP
OLSR
FSR
CEDAR
CGSR
Epidemic

Topology Based Protocols

3.1.1
GSR
Global State Routing (GSR) [6] is a uniform, topologyoriented, proactive routing protocol. It is a variant of
traditional link-state protocols, in which each node sends
link-state information to every node in the network each
time its connectivity changes. GSR reduces the cost of
disseminating link-state information by relying on
periodic exchange of sequenced data rather than
flooding.
In GSR, each node periodically broadcasts its entire
topology table to its immediate neighbors. The topology
table includes the node’s most recent assessment of its
local connectivity and its current link-state information
for the whole network topology. Each entry is tagged
with a sequence number. A destination’s link-state entry
is replaced only if the received entry has a larger
sequence number.
Based on the complete topology information in the
topology table, any shortest-path algorithm can be used
to compute a routing table containing the optimal next hop information for each destination. GSR defines a
variant of Dijkstra’s algorithm for this purpose.

3.2

(k): (p i jk ). The equivalent routing table contains the
distance to the destination (Di j ), the predecessor of the
chosen shortest path to destination (p ij ), the successor
(s ij ) of the chosen shortest path to destination and also a
marker (tag i j ) used to update routing table. The link-cost
table of a node lists the cost of relaying information
through each neighbor (li k ). Each entry of MRL contains
the sequence number of the update message, a
retransmission counter, an acknowledgement-required
flag with one entry per neighbor and a list of updates
sent in the update message. The MRL records which
updates in an update message need to be retransmitted
and which neighbors should acknowledge the
retransmissions.
In WRP nodes exchange routing-table update messages
only from a node to its neighbors. An update message
contains such components as an update list. An update
list entry specifies a destination, a distance to the
destination and a predecessor to the destination. When a
link fails or a link-cost changes, node recomputes the
distances and predecessors to all affected destinations,
and sends to all its neighbors an update message for all
destinations whose distance or predecessor have
changed.
In figure 2 there is a short example showing how WRP
updates node's routing tables, when a link failure occurs.
Link costs are as indicated in the figure. The arrows next
to links indicate the direction of update messages and the
label in parentheses gives the distances and the
predecessor to destination J. The figure focuses on
update messages to destination J only.

Destination Based Protocols

3.2.1
WRP
The Wireless Routing Protocol (WRP) [7] is a proactive,
destination-based protocol. WRP belong to the class of
path finding algorithms. The typical feature for these
algorithms is that they utilize information about distance
and second-to-last hop (predecessor) along the path to
each destination. Path-finding algorithms eliminate the
counting-to-infinity problem of distributed BellmanFord-algorithms by using that predecessor information,
which can be used to infer an implicit path to a
destination and thus detect routing loops.
In WRP there is a quite complicated table structure. Each
node maintains four different tables as in many other
table-driven protocols only two tables are needed. These
four tables are: 1) distance table, 2) routing table, 3) linkcost table and 4) message retransmission list (MRL)
table.
The distance table of a node (i) contains the distance of
each destination node (j) via each neighbor (k): (Di jk ) and
the predecessor of destination (j) reported by neighbor

Figure 2: An example of WRP-routing protocol’s
operation [7]
When link (J,K) fails, nodes J and K send update
messages to their neighboring nodes as shown in figure 2
(b). Node K is forced to report an infinite distance to J as
nodes B and I have reported node K as part of their path
to destination J. Node B processes node K's update and
selects link (B,J) to destination J. This is because of the
property of WRP to force node B to remove any path to

node J involving node K. Also, when node I gets node
K's update message, it updates its distance table entry
through neighbor K and checks for the possible paths to
destination J through any other neighboring nodes. This
results to select link (I,J) to the destination J as shown in
figure 2 (c). Nodes I and B send their update messages to
neighboring nodes, and K is able to get its path to node J
through node B. Finally as shown in figure 2 (d), node K
will send its update message to nodes B and I, but this
will not affect the routing tables.
In WRP nodes learn of the existence of their neighbors
form the receipt of acknowledgements and other
messages. If there are no such messages to be sent, a
node must send a HELLO message within a specified
time period to ensure connectivity.

3.3

Neighbor selection protocols

3.3.1
OLSR
Optimized Link State Routing (OLRS) [8] is a topologybased, neighbor selection protocol, in which each node
only maintains a subset of network topology
information. OLRS is a proactive protocol, because it
exchanges the topology information with other nodes
regularly to maintain information required for routing.
OLRS reduces the cost of distributing network-scale
link-state information by two ways. First, it uses multipoint relays (MRP) [9] to reduce redundant rebroadcasting during flooding operation. That is the key
concept of the protocol. MRPs are selected nodes, which
forward broadcast messages during the flooding process.
In figures 3 (a) and 3 (b) there is an illustrative example
what is the cost difference between broadcast by
flooding and by multipoint relays.

(a)

those neighbors, which belongs to the source node’s
MPR set and have not previously received the message
re-broadcast it. This reduces the number of broadcast
messages needed to flood a message through the
network. Since each node selects its MPR set
independently, it must know the topology of its two-hop
neighborhood, but additional inter-nodal coordination is
not required.
In the OLSR protocol, each node uses this flooding
technique to distribute the link-state of its own MPR set.
This is done periodically. The update period is in its
minimum when there is detected a change and when the
network is in its stabile state there is a updates only
between refresh intervals. Each node uses the attained
topology information to construct its routing tables.
For the neighbor sensing purposes the OLSR uses
HELLO-messages, because each node should detect the
neighbor interfaces with which it has a direct and
symmetric link. OLSR supposes bi-directional links and
so the connectivity must be checked in both directions.
HELLO-messages are broadcast to all one-hop
neighbors, but are not relayed to further nodes.
OLSR is well suited to large and dense mobile networks,
as the optimization achieved using the MRPs works well
in this context. The larger and more dense the network,
the more optimization can be achieved. OLSR is well
suited for networks, where traffic is random and sporadic
between several nodes rather than being almost
exclusively between a small specified set of nodes. [8]
3.3.2
FSR
Fisheye Source Routing (FSR) [10], [11] is based on a
method to divide each node’s neighborhood to blurred
zones so that the information details and accuracy is
better for nodes to be near. The name’s basis is on the
phenomenon of fish eye’s ability to see objects the better
the nearer they are. In FSR zones are classified
according to the distance, measured by hops, from the
node. In figure 4 there can be seen three differed zones.

(b)

Figure 3: Diffusion of broadcast message using pure
flooding (a) and multipoint relays (b) [9].
Secondly each node only broadcast the state of nodes in
its own multi-point relay set. That is a method to reduce
the contents of the control messages. A node’s multipoint relay set is the minimal subset of its one-hop
neighbors, which must rebroadcast a message so that it is
received by all of its two-hop neighbors.
When a node sends a broadcast message, all of its
neighbors receive and process the data. However, only

Figure 4: Scope of fisheye [10]

FSR is a protocol to be built on top of another protocol.
It can be applied to work together with some link-state
protocols as GSR. In GSR link state packets are not
flooded but nodes maintain a link state table based on the
up-to-date information received from neighboring nodes
and periodically exchange it with their local neighbors.
The drawbacks of GSR are the large size update
messages and the latency of the link state change
propagation. FSR is applied to alleviate that situation by
reducing the size of update messages without seriously
affecting routing accuracy.
The reduction of update message size is obtained by
using different exchange periods for different entries in
the table. The entries corresponding to nodes within the
smaller scope are propagated to the neighbors with the
highest frequency. As a result, a considerable fraction of
link state entries are suppressed, thus reducing the
message size. The imprecise knowledge of best path to a
distant destination is compensated by the fact that the
route becomes progressively more accurate as the packet
gets closer to its destination.

3.4

Partitioning Protocol

3.4.1
CEDAR
Core Extraction Distributed Ad hoc Routing (CEDAR)
[12] is a partitioning protocol, emphasizing QoS support.
Each partition includes a core node. The core nodes use
a reactive source routing protocol to outline a route from
a source to a destination.
Partitioning uses minimum dominating set (MDS). This
is the minimum subset of nodes such that all nodes are at
most one hop away from a dominating node. The core
consist of the dominators and tunnels, which are unicast
paths to connect each core node with nearby core nodes.
By definition of MDS, these tunnels consist of at most
two intermediate non-core nodes and form a connected
graph. In order to discover their core neighbors and
select tunnels, core nodes advertise their presence in the
three-hop neighborhood.

When a source has no route to destination, it forwards a
“route request”-message to its dominator. Instead of
using broadcast flooding to disseminate the request,
CEDAR uses a unicast mechanism, which is called core
broadcast. That causes the request to be forwarded to all
dominators core neighbors. This mechanism is used to
discover a core path or source route from the dominator
of source to the dominator of the destination. A “route
reply” message containing this route is sent back to the
source.

Figure 6: CEDAR core broadcast [12]
CEDAR has three key components: 1) the
establishments and maintenance of self-organizing
routing infrastructure (core) for performing route
computations, 2) the propagation of the link-states of
high-bandwidth and stable links in the core through
increase/ decrease waves 3) a QoS route computation
algorithm that is executed at the core nodes using only
locally available state.
QoS routing in CEDAR is achieved by propagating the
bandwidth availability information of stable links in the
core sub-graph. The propagation of link-state is
performed by slow-moving increase-waves, which
denotes increase of bandwidth and by fast moving
decrease waves, which denotes decrease of bandwidth
correspondingly.

3.5

Multichannel Protocols

The main distinct feature for multichannel protocols is
the ability to support different communications channels.
Some nodes may have access to more than one physical
medium or a node may be allowed to change the channel
during routing operation.

Figure 5: CEDAR core with dominators (large dots)
and tunnels (small dots) [12]

Multichannel protocols may also be divided at the same
way as single channel protocols to different subclasses.
They can be treated as uniform or non-uniform as is the
case with the two protocols presented in here. The two
protocols appearing here is CGSR (Clusterhead Gateway
Switch Routing) protocol and quite an exceptional
protocol called Epidemic. CGSR is a non-uniform
hierarchical protocol, which is based to forming clusters
among nodes and selecting a cluster head to control
routing to outside the cluster area. Epidemic is a uniform

protocol where routing is based to “infect” a node with a
message and spread the message over nodes by that way.
3.5.1
CGSR
Clusterhead Gateway Switch Routing protocol [4] is a
multichannel operation capable protocol. It enables code
separation among clusters. The clusters are formed by
cluster head election procedure, which is quite intensive
process. On that reason the protocol uses so called Least
Cluster Change (LCC) algorithm for that election. By
using LCC can cluster heads only changed when two
cluster heads come into contact with each other or when
a node moves out of contact of all other cluster heads.
CGSR is not an autonomous protocol. It uses DSDV as
the underlying routing scheme. The DSDV approach is
modified to use a hierarchical cluster head-to-gateway
routing. A packet sent by a node is first routed to its
cluster head, and then the packet is routed from the
cluster head to a gateway to another cluster head, until
the destination node’s cluster head is reached. That
destination cluster head then transmits the packet to the
destination node.

Epidemic routing supports the eventual delivery of
messages to arbitrary destinations with minimal
assumption regarding the underlying topology and
connectivity of the underlying network. Only periodic
pair-wise connectivity is required to ensure eventual
message delivery.
The protocol relies upon the transitive distribution of
messages through ad hoc networks, with messages
eventually reaching their destination. Each host
maintains a buffer consisting of messages that it has
originated as well as messages that it has received from
other nearby hosts. Each hosts stores a bit vector called
the summary vector that indicates which entries in their
local hash tables are set. When two hosts come into
communication range of one another, the host with the
smaller identifier initiates an anti-entropy session with
the host with the larger identifier. To avoid redundant
connections, each host maintains a cache of hosts that it
has spoken recently.
During anti-entropy session the two hosts exchange their
summary vectors to determine which messages stored
remotely have not been seen by the local host. In turn,
each host then requests copies of messages that it has not
yet seen. The receiving host maintains total autonomy in
deciding whether it will accept a message.

Figure 7: CGSR routing example [4]
In figure 7 there is a example how the protocols manages
to transmit a packet from node A to node C in CMDA
network:
1. Node A (cluster head of C1) must get the
permission to transmit (receives a token) in
cluster C1.
2. Node B (gateway) must select the same code as
node A to receive the packet from node A.
3. Node B must select the same code as node C
(cluster head of C2) and get the permission to
transmit in cluster C2 (receives a token from
node C).

(a)

Figure 8: Delivering a message between two
separated networks [13]
In figure 8 a source S wants to transmit a message to a
destination but no connected path is available (a).
Carriers, C1-C3 are leveraged to transitively deliver the
message to its destination at some later point in time (b).

3.6
3.5.2
Epidemic
Epidemic [13] is a routing protocol which is aimed for
separated networks never having a connected path form
source to a destination node. The goals of epidemic
routing are to maximize message delivery rate, minimize
message latency and minimize the total resources
consumed in message delivery rate.

(b)

Other than Unicast Protocols

3.6.1
Multicast Protocols
There is a need for multicast traffic also in ad hoc
networks. The value of multicast features with routing
protocols is even more relevant in ad hoc networks,
because of limited bandwidth in radio channels. Some
multicast protocols are based to form and maintain a
routing tree among group of nodes. Some other are based
on to use routing meshes that have more connectivity
than trees. This approach is justified by the reason that

maintaining a routing tree can have remarkable control
traffic. The problem with a mesh is a tendency to form
long-term or permanent routing loops. [14]

Also location based multicast routing protocols could be
classified to belong to the multicast categories, but it is
even more reasonable to deal these protocols in their
own group called geocasting.
Some multicast protocols to be worth mentioning at least
by name are DVMRP, CAMP, ODMRP and multicastAODV.

Figure 9: Difference between multicast mesh and tree
[14].
The multicast routing protocols can be classified into the
following categories: [15]
Flooding, in which the multicast packet is
flooded to all nodes in the network and with
some simple method a broadcast storm will be
prevented.
Source-based multicast tree (SBT), in which a
multicast tree is established and maintained for
each multicast source node in each multicast
group. The multicast packet is forwarded along
that tree to every multicast group member.
Core-based multicast tree (CBT), in which a
single shared multicast tree is used to connect
all different multicast groups and their
members.
Multicast mesh, in which a multicast mesh is
constructed instead of a tree.
Group-based multicast forwarding, in which
a group of nodes acts as multicast forwarding
nodes for each multicast group. Multicast
packets are forwarded only by these forwarding
nodes. All received multicast packets that are
not duplicated are rebroadcast by forwarding
nodes to their neighbors.

Figure 10: Taxonomy of Multicast Protocols

The Distance Vector Multicast Routing Protocol
(DVMRP) is a multicast routing protocol initially
designed for wired networks. The modifications to apply
the protocol to wireless environments are a method for
leaf-node detection, dynamic grafting/pruning and the
use of packet duplication check. DVMRP maintains
source-based multicast trees so it is a SBT-protocol. The
source-based tree is created by first flooding the whole
network with the multicast traffic. After that the normal
prune operations are conducted. [14]
Core-Assisted Mesh Protocol (CAMP) [14] is a meshbased multicast routing protocol, which establishes a
multicast mesh for each multicast group. One or more
core nodes are delegated to assist in join operations so
that flooding is not needed. To join a multicast group, a
node first checks if any of its neighbors already is a
member of the multicast mesh. If this is true, the node
announces a membership request to its neighboring
nodes. If there are no nodes to belong the mesh, node
sends a join message to one of the core node. The core
nodes are not necessarily needed. Because if there is no
available core nodes, an expanded ring search is used to
find at least one node to belong the mesh.
Table 1: Characteristics of Various Ad Hoc Mobile
Multicast Routing Protocols [15]
Parameters
Multicast
delivery
structure
Use of
centralized
node
Core node
recovery
Routing
scheme
Dependence
on unicast
routing
protocol
Routing
approach
Routing
metric

DVMRP
Sourcebased
tree
No

AODV
Core-based tree

CAMP
Multicast
mesh

ODMRP
Groupbased

Yes (Multicast
group leader

No

N/A

Yes

Yes
(Core
nodes)
Yes

Tabledriven
No

On-demand
No

Tabledriven
Yes

Ondemand
No

Flat

Flat

Flat

Flat

Shortest
path

Shortest path to
another
multicast
member along
the existing
shared tree

Shortest
path

Shortest
path

N/A

3.6.2
Geocast Protocols
The goal of geocast protocols is to deliver data packets
to a group of nodes that are inside a specified
geographical area. Geocast could be understood to a
some kind of enlargement of multicast operations. In
multicasting nodes may join or leave multicast group as
desired. In geocasting nodes join or leave the group by
entering or leaving the defined geocast region.
The applications of geocast can vary from military
purposes to civil traffic coordination areas. The
applicability of these protocols require some location
information at hand. Systems to provide location
information can be e.g. GPS-based systems. Also other
integrated location systems to be based on e.g.
communication base stations are probably to be viable.
The protocols to perform geocast operations can be
divided to two categories: data-transmission oriented
protocols and routing-creation oriented protocols.
To the data-transmission oriented category belons such
protocols as Location Based Multicast (LBM), Voronoi
diagram based geocasting and GeoGRID. To routingcreation oriented category belongs protocols GeoTora
and Mesh-based Geocast Routing Protocol.
As an example of geocast protocols one could mention
GeoTORA, which uses the unicast routing protocol
TORA to transmit geocast packets to a geocast region. In
GeoTORA a source node performs an anycast to any
geocast group member via TORA. When a node in the
geocast region receives the geocast packet, it floods the
packet such that the flooding is limited to the geocast
region. [16]

3.7

Protocols by Cost Function

The classification of protocols according to cost function
is based on the idea that there is some variable in
network to be minimized or maximized. For example
that variable can be the energy consumed by nodes,
available bandwidth for a connection or latency.
In ad hoc environment battery energy constrains has gain
much attention. This is because of battery energy is more
limited from its nature as is e.g. available memory space
or computing power.
Protocols to minimize energy used will have the
following advantages:
Minimizing emitted power will allow spatial
reuse of frequencies. That will increase the total
throughput of network
Multiuser interference will be minimized. That
will improve the quality of communications
channels

-

The battery driven terminals will have longer
operation time
In military applications low probability of
intercept and low probability of detection could
be attained.

One protocol to minimize the energy consumed or as it is
said – energy conscious protocol - is Minimum Power
Routing (MPR). It incorporates physical layer link and
link layer statistic to conserve power, while
compensating for the propagation path loss, shadowing
and fading effects and also interference effects.
The main idea of MRP is to select the path between a
given source and destination that will require the least
amount of total power expected, while still maintaining
an acceptable signal-to-noise ratio at each receiver. [17]
[18]

4
4.1

Applicability of different Protocols
Evaluation criteria

Different kind of ad hoc routing protocols are suitable
for different kind of network structures and node
behaviors. When evaluating protocols one needs some
appropriate classification also for the features of
performance metrics.
The critical features for ad hoc networks can be
classified according to Subbaro [19] to following
quantitative and qualitative features. Quantitative
features are:
Network settling time, which is the time for a
network to reach a stable state and be able to
send its first message reliably.
Network join time, which is the time for an
entering node or group of nodes to become
integrated into the ad hoc network.
Network depart time , which is the time
required for the ad hoc network to recognize the
loss of one or more nodes, and reorganize itself
to manage lacking links.
Network recovery time, which is the time for a
network to recover after a condition that
dictates reorganization of the network.
Frequency of updates, which is the number of
control packets or overhead bytes inside packets
to be sent in a given time to maintain proper
network operation. This means also same as
overhead.
Memory required, which is the storage space
required for routing tables and other
management tables.
Network scalability number, which is the
number of nodes that a network can scale to and
still preserve communications.

According to RFC 2501 [20] quantitative metrics for
network routing protocol performance are:
End-to-end data throughput and delay.
Route acquisition time , which is a particular
concern for on-demand protocols
Percentage out-of-order delivery, which can
affect how efficiently transport layer protocols
can perform it’s own task
Efficiency, which is an internal measure of
protocols effectiveness. It deals with the
protocol overhead questions. It could be said to
be some kind of utilization ratio between
routing effectiveness and overhead.
Network recovery time is an important factor for fast
changing dynamic networks. If the recovery time is too
long, it causes the network to maintain a too long a time
an unstable state. That causes routing errors to happen,
which on its side causes lost packets and needs for
retransmissions.
Frequency of updates is also a meaningful parameter for
bandwidth constrained radio networks. If the protocol
needs too often or too large update packets to be sent, it
will consume in dynamic networks too much available
total capacity.
Network scalability number has a meaning when there is
a need for large scale networks to be constructed. The
large scale is not a clear term, but the number of nodes
can surpris ingly grow up, when ad hoc environments
reach their success. In military environments scalability
is an essence.
The qualitative critical features are the following:
Knowledge of nodal locations. Does the
routing algorithm require local or global
knowledge of the network?
Effect to topology changes. Does the routing
algorithm need complete restructuring or
incremental updates?
Adaptation to radio communications
environment. Do nodes use estimation
knowledge of fading, shadowing or multiuser
interference on links in their routing decisions?
Power Consciousness. Does the network
employ routing mechanisms that consider the
remaining battery life of a node?
Single or multichannel. Does the routing
algorithm utilize a separate control channel?
Bidirectional or unidirectional links. Does the
routing algorithm perform efficiently on
unidirectional links.
Preservation of network security. Does the
routing algorithm uphold the fidelity of the
network, for example low probability of
detection or interception and overall security
features.

-

-

QoS routing and handling of priority
messages. Does the routing algorithm support
priority messaging and reduction of latency for
delay sensitive real time traffic? Can the
network send priority messages even when it is
overloaded with routine traffic levels.
Real-time voice and video services. Can the
network support simultaneously real-time
multicast voice and/ or video on-demand
services while supporting other routine traffic
services?

The RFC 2501 also mention some qualitative properties.
One feature not mentioned above is ability to use
multiple routes to avoid congestion
One very important question is, if a protocol is able to
use only bi-directional links. Decision not to use
unidirectional links, may have noticeable effects to total
network throughput. Quite many ad hoc protocols are
only operating at bi-directional links, some to mention
are e.g. DSDV and AODV. Unidirectional links in ad
hoc environment are not exceptions, because of
asymmetrical nature of radio channel caused by
interference, jamming and different receiver or
transmitter characteristics.
Quality of services and support for real time services,
including priority messages and data packets, is an acute
problem to be solved. Applications to need these
services will emerge most probably in all ad hoc network
solutions, so the implemented routing method should
support that need. Also scalability and congestion
avoidance / management will be a main feature for any
routing protocol to be used in any real life
implementations.

4.2

Small Scale Static Networks

When choosing a routing protocol for a small-scale static
network there is not so many constrains to take into
account. Because of small size and minor node
movements, proactive protocols have no problems to
keep up with their tables. Non-uniform protocols would
surely be overkill. The question to be important may be
closely associated to energy constrain issues, when
dealing with e.g. sensor networks or with laptop
computers. Also questions related to real time voice or
video services may be relevant.
Ability to use multiple routes could be an important
issue. That is because of ever increasing interference
phenomena, typical for license-free radio bands. A
sudden appearing interference should not interrupt the
ongoing voice transmission, but the routing protocol
should be able to manage that situation seamlessly.
From presented protocols GSR or WRP may be the right
selection, but also one should consider to use some mesh

based multicast protocols e.g. CAMP. The advantage for
the mesh-based approach is the ability to maintain
several routes, which is a robust method against
interference as well as for managing the movement.
Also with small scale static networks there can be quite
heterogeneous assortment of devices, each of these
having different capabilities to forward traffic. So even
when selecting a protocol for an "easy" case there is still
some constrain to be considered. But if a protocol is able
to use e.g. different metrics per link, this is probably a
resolvable question.

4.3

Large Scale Networks

Scalability is a problem to suddenly pop-up. Normally
engineers are able to forecast the use of their inventions,
but there are too many opposite examples. In military
and also in civil defence areas there is an evitable need
to scale networks up to several hundreds or even
thousands nodes. Normally networks simulations have
been conducted only node numbers around 20-50 nodes
[21], [7]. Although sometimes simulation has been
conducted by node numbers e.g. 500 [22].
In large-scale networks some kind of node partitioning
comes its right value. The traditional method has been to
use hierarchy for partitioning, but neighbor selection
methods are emerging. With the hierarchical structures
there is a problem that routes not necessarily are not
always the best possible. Nearby nodes to belonging
different clusters are not able to use the shortest and in
many cases the best route. Neighbor selection protocols
as FSR, ZPR and OLSR may be the answer to scalability
problems in large networks.
In large-scale networks there is also a problem of
separated networks lately to join as a part of the main
network. There will be quite much control traffic to join
two, say as an example one 100 nodes and the other 20
nodes, networks together. If we could use a protocol like
Epidemic to carry with some probability the control
traffic between networks before the actual joining, the
control traffic storm would be alleviated.

4.4

Dynamic Networks

Dynamic networks are the main challenge, because we
are able to manage with many large different networks,
as is the case with the Internet. But when we have same
problems in dynamic environments, there is vast number
of trade-offs to consider. If we want the route acquisition
time to be modest we should prefer table-based i.e.
proactive protocols, but when using proactive protocols
with dynamic networks, there is a burden of too many
and too frequent update messages.
With dynamic networks we obviously have to apply
reactive protocols and admit some kind of increase in
route acquisition time and also we have to accept that in
case of route interrupt it will take some time to reestablish a connection. The use of unidirectional links
comes at stage in that situation. If we have remaining
unidirectional link towards receiving node, it makes no
sense to interrupt the whole connection if we still can use
that route for voice stream to one direction. At the same
time a route acquisition process could be started and a
new route should be taken in use when it is operational.
For dynamic networks some kind of reactive protocols
are most probably the right selection. But at the same
time we have to think if there are some parts of the
network, which are not in dynamic state. These static
nodes could be used to maintain some kind of core for
routing purposes. The core nodes could be used by
mobile nodes to behave as some kind of base-stations,
and a mobile node should only to decide if it directs its
traffic to a neighboring node or to a core node. That is
exactly the idea used by hierarchical protocols, but that
time the application area is to manage the mobility not as
much the size.

4.5

Summary of Applicability

It is possible to construct some kind of suitability chart
to be used for protocol evaluation. Below there is one
such chart, which is based only to intuitive assumptions
about earlier mentioned design principles.

One obvious feature for large-scale networks is that not
every node is equal. Obviously some nodes require to
use energy saving protocols as some would like to use
protocols to ensure maximum QoS. The question arises
if we need to separate large networks to cluster, which
inside uses different protocols according their needs. Or
should we have a meta-protocol to deal with all different
kind of protocols that are needed to cover all states of a
large network.
Figure 11: Suitability of Different kind of Ad hoc
Routing Protocols

The assumptions made are the following:
Proactive protocols have poorer performance
characteristics with high mobility networks than
reactive have. This is based on the fact that with
high mobility it is not an easy task to manage
consistent network information in all nodes.
Topology-based protocols have the
disadvantage to disseminate the topology
information over the network. As the network
size grows, it is a complicated task to transfer
high amount of topology information especially
over low bandwidth wireless links. Destination
based protocols are assumed to scale a little bit
better, because of smaller control traffic
amounts.
With very large size some kind of
differentiation is an essence. The differentiation
can be based on hierarchical structures, but
these are hard to maintain while the network is
in high mobile state. So the neighbor selection
protocols are preferred over partitioning
protocols when mobility increases.

5

Conclusion

As it can be seen, there is vast number of different kinds
of protocols. Only minority of the presented protocols
will attain a technical or commercial success, one would
forecast. Each of these protocols has some common
goals. Every protocol has the ability of distributed
routing calculations and every protocol try to manage the
consequences caused by mobility of nodes. But the
means are such different as they can be.
The presented taxonomy of routing protocols is a
meaningful attempt to clarify the vast field of ad hoc
routing protocols. It is so because it tries to reveal the
main design and implementation principles behind
protocols. The taxonomy is a little bit complicated and it
is not always an easy task to classify a protocol
according to that taxonomy, but the meaning of
classifying is try to get some rough basis for protocol’s
performance evaluation. It should be assumed that same
kinds of protocols behave quite the same way in
simulations.
When comparing the simulation result of presented
protocols, there is a little difficult situation to reach a
common understanding about the results. This is because
of every simulation has been conducted according to
different premises. One question arises if there should be
a common framework for tests and simulations. That
definition could be a part of e.g. RFC 2501, which
concentrates to routing performance issues and
evaluation of protocols.
When choosing a protocol to a specified network one
should consider the following issues:

-

-

-

What is the size of the network. If the network
could be considered or forecasted to be large,
the chosen protocol should support scaling
issues.
What is the degree of mobility; how often links
are assumed to cut off. Some protocols (usually
reactive) have better performance over some
other protocols (usually proactive) when
mobility is high
What are the requirements of user applications
for the underlying network. Real-time
applications require quite different services
compared to non-time critical message delivery.

When the network structure and the node behaviors are
understood, the right or at least near optimal protocol
could be chosen. It is quite inevitable that inside the
same network many different protocols should be
implemented to cover all the networks states. Some kind
of mixture of mutually compatible protocols could be
needed. The other way to reach the goal is that protocols
will merge and form a protocol, which has all the wished
properties, but none of the weak ones. This can be a way
to make a giant protocol to be good at theory, but in
practice not a viable solution.
To fulfill all different demands some kind layer-based
approach would be a considerable solution. One layer of
the protocol stack could perform the task of managing
scalability, as is the case with FSR, the other layers
could handle the needs for power consciousness, multior geocast operations and unicast respectively.

References
[1] E.M. Royer, C-K. Toh, A Review of Current
Routing Protocols for Ad-Hoc Mobile Wireless
Networks, IEEE Personal Communications
Magazine, April 1999, pp. 46-55.
http://www.cs.ucsb.edu/~eroyer/publications.html
[2] N. Nikaein, H. Labiod, C. Bonnet, “DDRDistributed Dynamic Routing Algorithm for Mobile
Ad-Hoc Networks”, Proceedings of the First Annual
Workshop on Mobile Ad Hoc
Network&Computing, MobiHOC 2000, Boston,
pages 19-27, August 2000.
http://www.eurecom.fr/~nikaeinn/ddr.pdf
[3] L.M. Feeney: “A Taxonomy for Routing Protocols
in Mobile Ad Hoc Networks”, SICS Technical
Report T99/07, October 1999.
http://www.sics.se/~lmfeeney/research.html

[4] C.C. Chiang, H.K. Wu, W. Liu, M. Gerla, “Routing
in Clustered Multihop Mobile Wireless Networks
with Fading Channel”, Proceeding of IEEE
Singapore International Conference on Networks
SICON’97, pages 197-212, April 1997.
http://www1.ics.uci.edu/~atm/adhoc/papercollection/gerla-routing-clustered-sicon97.pdf
[5] C-K. Toh, “Associativity-Based Routing Protocol to
Support Ad-Hoc Mobile Computing”, Wireless
Personal Communications Journal, Special Issue on
Mobile Networking and Computing Systems, Vol.
4, No. 2, pp.103-139, March 1997.
http://citeseer.nj.nec.com/context/738649/0
[6] T. Chen, M. Gerla, “Global State Routing: A new
Routing Scheme for Ad-Hoc Wireless Networks”,
Proceedings of IEEE ICC’98, pages 171-175,
August 1998.
http://www1.ics.uci.edu/~atm/adhoc/papercollection/papers.html
[7] S. Murphy, J.J. Garcia-Luna-Aceves, “An Efficient
Routing Protocol for Wireless Networks”, ACM
Mobile Networks and Applications Journal, pages
183-197, Nov.1996.
http://citeseer.nj.nec.com/10238.html
[8] Philippe Jaquet, Paul Muhlethaler, Amir Qayyum,
“Optimized Link State Routing Protocol”, IETF
Draft, 2001. http://www.ietf.org/internetdrafts/draft-ietf-manet-olsr-06.txt
[9] A. Qayym, L. Viennot, A. Laouiti. Multipoint
relaying: An efficien technique for flooding in
mobile wireless networks. INRIA research report
RR-3898, 2000. http://www.inria.fr/rrrt/rr3898.html

[10] A. Iwata, C.C. Chiang, G. Pei, M. Gerla, T.W.
Chen, “Scalable Routing Strategies for Ad-Hoc
Wireless Networks”, IEEE Journal on Selected
Areas in Communications, pages 17(8): 1369-1379,
August 1999.
http://www.cise.ufl.edu/~tld/research/resources.html
[11] M Gerla, X. Hong, G. Pei. Fisheye State Routing
Protocol (FSR) for Ad Hoc Networks, IETF Draft,
2001. http://www.ietf.org/internet-drafts/draft-ietfmanet-fsr-02.txt
[12] R. Sivakumar, P. Sinha, V. Bharghavan. CEDAR: a
Core-Extraction Distributed Ad hoc Routing
algorithm. IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in
Communications, Vol 17, No 8, August 1999.

http://www.cs.cornell.edu/People/egs/615/sivakuma
r99cedar.pdf
[13] A. Vahdat, B. Becker: Epidemic Routing for
Partially-Connected Ad Hoc Networks.
http://www.cs.duke.edu/~vahdat/ps/epidemic.pdf

[14] E.L. Madruga, J.J. Garcia -Luna-Aceves. Scalable
Multicasting: The Core-Assisted Mesh Protocol.
1999.
http://www.ee.surrey.ac.uk/Personal/G.Aggelou/PA
PERS/madruga.monet99.pdf
[15] C-K Toh. Ad Hoc Mobile Wireless Networks,
Protocols and systems. Prentice Hall PTR. 2002.
ISBN 0-13-007817-4.
[16] Jiang X, Camp T: “A review of Geocasting
Protocols for a Mobile Ad Hoc Network, Grace
Hopper Celebration (GHC), 2002,
http://toilers.mines.edu/papers/

[17] M.W. Subbarao: “Dynamic Power-Conscious
Routing for MANET:s An Initial Approach”,
Proceeding of IEEE VTC Fall 1999, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands, 1999.
http://www.nvl.nist.gov/pub/nistpubs/jres/104/6/j46s
ub.pdf
[18] M.W. Subbarao: Mobile Ad Hoc Data Networks for
Emergency Preparedness Telecommunications –
Dynamic Power-Conscious Routing Concepts.
Submitted as an interim project for Contract
Number DNCR086200 to the National
Communications Systems. 2000
http://www.w3.antd.nist.gov/~subbarao/MANET/m
anet.html
[19] M.W. Subbarao: Ad Hoc Networking Critical
Features and Performance Metrics, 1999.
http://w3.antd.nist.gov/pubs99.shtml
[20] M.S. Corson and J. Macker. Mobile Ad Hoc
Networking (MANET): Routing Protocol
Performance issues and Evaluation Considerations.
Request for Comments 2501, IETF, January 1999.
http://www.rfc.net/rfc2501.html
[21] S.R.Das, R Castaneda. J Yan. Comparative
Performance Evaluation of Routing Protocols for
Mobile, Ad hoc Networks.
http://www.ececs.uc.edu/~sdas/pub.html
[22] C. E. Perkins (ed). Ad hoc Networking. AddisonWesley. 2001. ISBN 0-201-30976-9

