Chapter 20

Global climate change

Anthony J. McMichael,
Diarmid Campbell-Lendrum, Sari Kovats,
Sally Edwards, Paul Wilkinson, Theresa Wilson,
Robert Nicholls, Simon Hales, Frank Tanser,
David Le Sueur, Michael Schlesinger and 
Natasha Andronova

Summary
Accumulating evidence suggests that the global climate (i.e. conditions
measured over 30 years or longer) is now changing as a result of human
activitiesmost importantly, those which cause the release of greenhouse
gases from fossil fuels. The most recent report (2001) from the United
Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) estimates
that the global average land and sea surface temperature has increased
by 0.6 0.2C since the mid-19th century, with most change occurring
since 1976. Patterns of precipitation have also changed: arid and semi-
arid regions are becoming drier, while other areas, especially mid-to-high
latitudes, are becoming wetter. Where precipitation has increased, there
has been a disproportionate increase in the frequency of the heaviest pre-
cipitation events. Based on a range of alternative development scenarios
and  model  parameterizations,  the  IPCC  concluded  that  if  no  specific
actions were taken to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, global tempera-
tures would be likely to rise between 1.4 and 5.8C from 1990 to 2100.
Predictions  for  precipitation  and  wind  speed  were  less  consistent,  but
also suggested significant changes.

Risks  to  human  health  from  climate  change  would  arise  through  a
variety  of  mechanisms.  In  this  chapter,  we  have  used  existing  or  new
models that describe observed relationships between climate variations,
either over short time periods or between locations, and a series of health
outcomes. These climatehealth relationships were linked to alternative
projections of climate change, related to unmitigated future emissions of
greenhouse gases, and two alternative scenarios for greenhouse gas emis-
sions.  Average  climate  conditions  during  the  period  19611990  were
used  as  a  baseline,  as  anthropogenic  effects  on  climate  are  considered
more  significant  after  this  period.  The  resulting  models  give  estimates 
of  the  likely  future  effects  of  climate  change  on  exposures  to  thermal
extremes  and  weather  disasters  (deaths  and  injuries  associated  with

1544

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

floods), the distribution and incidence of malaria, the incidence of diar-
rhoea, and malnutrition (via effects on yields of agricultural crops). As
there  is  considerable  debate  over  the  extent  to  which  such  short-term
relationships  will  hold  true  under  the  longer-term  processes  of  climate
change, we made adjustments for possible changes in vulnerability, either
through  biological  or  socioeconomic  adaptation.  Estimates  of  future
effects  were  interpolated  back  to  give  an  approximate  measure  of  the
effects of the climate change that have occurred since 1990 on the burden
of disease in 2000.

The  effects  considered  here  represent  only  a  subset  of  the  ways  in
which climate change may affect health. Other potential consequences
include  influences  of  changing  temperature  and  precipitation  on  other
infectious diseases (including the possible emergence of new pathogens),
the  distribution  and  abundance  of  agricultural  pests  and  pathogens,
destruction of public health infrastructure, and the production of pho-
tochemical air pollutants, spores and pollens. Rising sea levels may cause
salination of coastal lands and freshwater supplies, resulting in popula-
tion  displacements.  Changes  in  the  availability  and  distribution  of
natural resources, especially water, may increase risk of drought, famine
and conflict.

Our  analyses  suggested  that  climate  change  will  bring  some  health
benefits, such as lower cold-related mortality and greater crop yields in
temperate zones, but these will be greatly outweighed by increased rates
of  other  diseases,  particularly  infectious  diseases  and  malnutrition  in
developing regions. We estimated a small proportional decrease in car-
diovascular  and  respiratory  disease  mortality  attributable  to  climate
extremes  in  tropical  regions,  and  a  slightly  larger  benefit  in  temperate
regions, caused by warmer winter temperatures. As there is evidence that
some temperature-attributable mortality represents small displacements
of deaths that would occur soon in any case, no assessment was made
of the associated increase or decrease in disease burden. Climate change
was estimated to increase the relative risk of diarrhoea in regions made
up mainly of developing countries to approximately 1.011.02 in 2000,
and 1.081.09 in 2030. Richer countries (gross domestic product [GDP]
>US$ 6000/year),  either  now  or  in  the  future,  were  assumed  to  suffer
little or no additional risk of diarrhoea. This modest change in relative
risk relates to a major cause of ill-health, so that the estimated associ-
ated  disease  burden  in  2000  is  relatively  large  (47 000  deaths  and  1.5
million  disability-adjusted  life  years  [DALYs]).  Effects  on  malnutrition
varied markedly even across developing subregions,1 from large increases
in SEAR-D (RR= 1.05 in 2000, and 1.17 in 2030) to no change or an
eventual  small  decrease  in  WPR-B.  Again,  these  are  small  relative
changes to a large disease burden, giving an estimated 77 000 deaths and
2.8  million  DALYs  in  2000.  We  calculated  much  larger  proportional
changes in the numbers of people killed in coastal floods (RR in EUR-B
of up to 1.8 in 2000, and 6.3 in 2030), and inland floods (RR in AMR-

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1545

A  of  up  to  3.0  in  2000,  and  8.0  in  2030).  Although  the  proportional
change  is  much  larger  than  for  other  health  outcomes,  the  baseline
disease  burden  is  much  lower.  The  aggregate  health  effect  in  2000  is
therefore  comparatively  small  (2000  deaths  and  193 000  DALYs).  We
estimated  relatively  large  changes  in  the  relative  risk  of  falciparum
malaria  in  countries  at  the  edge  of  the  current  distribution.  However,
most of the estimated attributable disease burden (27 000 deaths and 1
million DALYs) is associated with small proportional changes in regions
that are already highly endemic, principally in Africa.

Overall, the effects of global climate change are predicted to be heavily
concentrated  in  poorer  populations  at  low  latitudes,  where  the  most
important  climate-sensitive  health  outcomes  (malnutrition,  diarrhoea
and  malaria)  are  already  common,  and  where  vulnerability  to  climate
effects is greatest. These diseases mainly affect younger age groups, so
that the total burden of disease due to climate change appears to be borne
mainly by children in developing countries.

Considerable  uncertainties  surround  these  estimates.  These  stem
partly  from  the  complexity  of  climate  models,  partly  from  gaps  in 
reliable  data  on  which  to  base  climatehealth  relationships,  and,  most
importantly,  from  uncertainties  around  the  degree  to  which  current
climatehealth relationships will be modified by biological and socioe-
conomic adaptation in the future. These uncertainties could be reduced
in  subsequent  studies  by  (i)  applying  projections  from  several  climate
models;  (ii)  relating  climate  and  disease  data  from  a  wider  range  of 
climatic and socioeconomic environments; (iii) more careful validation
against  patterns  in  the  present  or  recent  past;  and  (iv)  more  detailed 
longitudinal  studies  of  the  interaction  of  climatic  and  non-climatic 
influences on health.

1.

1.1

Introduction

Evidence for climate change in the recent past and
predictions for the future

Humans are accustomed to climatic conditions that vary on daily, sea-
sonal and inter-annual time-scales. Accumulating evidence suggests that
in addition to this natural climate variability, average climatic conditions
measured over extended time periods (conventionally 30 years or longer)
are  also  changing,  over  and  above  the  natural  variation  observed  on
decadal  or  century  time-scales.  The  causes  of  this  climate  change  are
increasingly  well  understood.  Climatologists  have  compared  climate
model  simulations  of  the  effects  of  greenhouse  gas  (GHG)  emissions
against observed climate variations in the past, and evaluated possible
natural  influences  such  as  solar  and  volcanic  activity.  They  concluded
that . . . there is new and stronger evidence that most of the warming
observed  over  the  last  50  years  is  likely  to  be  attributable  to  human 
activities (IPCC 2001b).

1546

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

The  Third  Assessment  Report  of  the  IPCC  (IPCC  2001b)  estimates
that globally the average land and sea surface temperature has increased
by  0.6 0.2C  since  the  mid-19th  century,  with  much  of  the  change
occurring  since  1976  (Figure  20.1).  Warming  has  been  observed  in  all
continents,  with  the  greatest  temperature  changes  occurring  at  middle
and high latitudes in the Northern Hemisphere. Patterns of precipitation
have also changed: arid and semi-arid regions are apparently becoming
drier,  while  other  areas,  especially  mid-to-high  latitudes,  are  becoming
wetter. Where precipitation has increased, there has also been a dispro-
portionate increase in the frequency of the heaviest precipitation events
(Karl and Knight 1998; Mason et al. 1999). The small amount of cli-
matic  change  that  has  occurred  so  far  has  already  had  demonstrable
effects on a wide variety of natural ecosystems (Walther et al. 2002).

Climate model simulations have been used to estimate the effects of
past, present and likely future GHG emissions on climate changes. These
models are primarily based on data on the heat-retaining properties of
gases  released  into  the  atmosphere  from  natural  and  anthropogenic
(man-made)  sources,  as  well  as  the  measured  climatic  effects  of  other
natural phenomena, as described above. The models used by the IPCC
have  been  validated  by  back-castingthat  is,  testing  their  ability  to
explain climate variations that already occurred in the past. In general,
the models are able to give good approximations of past patterns only

Figure 20.1 Observed global average land and sea surface temperatures

from 1860 to 2000

)

C


l

(
 
y
a
m
o
n
a

 

e
r
u

t

a
r
e
p
m
e

t
 

n
a
e
m

-
l
a
b
o
G

l

Observations
30-year running average

Average
19611990

0.6

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.6

1860

1880

1900

1920

1940

1960

1980

2000

Year AD

Source: Climatic Research Unit, Norwich, England.

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1547

when anthropogenic emissions of non-GHG air pollutants (particulates,
dust, oxides of sulfur, etc.) are included along with natural phenomena
(IPCC  2001b).  This  emphasizes  that  (i)  the  models  represent  a  good
approximation of the climate system; (ii) natural variations are impor-
tant contributors to climatic variations, but cannot adequately explain
past trends on their own; and (iii) anthropogenic GHG emissions are an
important contributor to climate patterns, and are likely to remain so in
the future.

Considering  a  range  of  alternative  economic  development  scenarios
and  model  parameterizations,  the  IPCC  concluded  that  if  no  specific
actions were taken to reduce GHG emissions, global temperatures would
rise between 1.4 and 5.8C from 1990 to 2100. The projections for pre-
cipitation and wind speed are less consistent in terms of magnitude and
geographical  distribution,  but  also  suggest  significant  changes  in  both
mean  conditions  and  in  the  frequency  and  intensity  of  extreme  events
(Table 20.1).

Estimating the effects of climate change on health

1.2
Human  health  is  sensitive  to  temporal  and  geographical  variations  in
weather  (short-term  fluctuations  in  meteorological  conditions)  and
climate (longer-term averages of weather conditions). Weather has not
historically been considered as subject to alteration by human actions,
although its effects may be lessened by adaptation measures (e.g. Kovats
et al. 2000b). While adaptation is also a very important determinant of
the health consequences of climate change, the effect of anthropogenic
GHG emissions on climate means that climate change can in principle
be considered a risk factor that could potentially be altered by human
intervention, with associated effects on the burden of disease.

The effects of GHG emissions on human health differ somewhat from
the effects of other risk factors in that they are mediated by a diversity
of causal pathways (e.g. Figure 20.2; McMichael et al. 1996; Patz et al.
2000; Reiter 2000) and eventual outcomes, typically long delays between
cause  and  effect,  and  great  difficulties  in  eliminating  or  substantially
reducing the risk factors. An additional challenge is that climate change
occurs  against  a  background  of  substantial  natural  climate  variability,
and its health effects are confounded by simultaneous changes in many
other influences on population health (Kovats et al. 2001; Reiter 2001;
Woodward  et  al.  1998).  Empirical  observation  of  the  health  conse-
quences  of  long-term  climate  change,  followed  by  formulation,  testing
and then modification of hypotheses would therefore require long time-
series  (probably  several  decades)  of  careful  monitoring.  While  this
process may accord with the canons of empirical science, it would not
provide the timely information needed to inform current policy decisions
on  GHG  emission  abatement,  so  as  to  offset  possible  health  conse-
quences  in  the  future.  Nor  would  it  allow  early  implementation  of 
policies  for  adaptation  to  climate  changes,  which  are  inevitable  owing

1548

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

Table 20.1

Estimates of confidence in observed and projected changes
in extreme weather and climate events

Confidence in observed 
changes (latter half of 1900s)

Likelya

Confidence in projected
changes (during 
the 21st century)

Very likelya

Very likelya

Very likelya

Very likelya

Very likelya

Likely,a over many areas

Likely,a over many northern
hemisphere mid- to high-
latitude land areas
Likely,a in a few areas

Very likely,a over most 
areas
Very likely,a over many 
areas

Likely,a over most 
mid-latitude continental 
interiors. (Lack of 
consistent projections in
other areas)
Likely,a over some areas

Likely,a over some areas

Changes in phenomenon

Higher maximum temperatures 
and more hot days over nearly 
all land areas
Higher minimum temperatures,
fewer cold days and frost days 
over nearly all land areas
Reduced diurnal temperature 
range over most land areas
Increase of heat indexb over 
land areas
More intense precipitation 
eventsa

Increased summer continental 
drying and associated risk of 
drought

Increase in tropical cyclone peak 
wind intensitiesc
Increase in tropical cyclone 
mean and peak precipitation 
intensitiesd

Not observed in the few 
analyses available
Insufficient data for 
assessment

a

b

c

d

Judgement estimates for confidence: virtually certain (greater than 99% chance that the result is
true); very likely (9099% chance); likely (6690% chance); medium likelihood (3366% chance);
unlikely (1033% chance); very unlikely (110% chance); exceptionally unlikely (less than 1% chance).
Past and future changes in tropical cyclone location and frequency are uncertain.
For other areas, there are either insufficient data or conflicting analyses.
Based on warm season temperature and humidity.

Source: Adapted from IPCC (2001b).

to both natural variations and past GHG emissions. Therefore, the best
estimation of the future health effects of climate change will necessarily
come from modelling based on current understanding of the effects of
climate (not weather) variation on health from observations made in the
present and recent past, acknowledging the influence of a large range of
mediating factors.

Since the early 1990s, IPCC Working Group II has collated some of
the accumulating predictions of climate effects on health (IPCC 2001a).
The  health  effects  of  climate  variability  and  change  have  also  been
reviewed  by  a  national  committee  in  the  United  States  of  America

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1549

Figure 20.2 Pathways through which climate change may affect health

Moderating 
influences 

Air pollution 
levels 

Contamination 
pathways 

Transmission 
dynamics 

Natural ecosystems 
and agriculture  

Health effects 
Temperature-related
illness, death

Extreme weather-
related health effects

Air pollution-related
health effects

Water- and food-borne
diseases

Vector- and rodent-
borne diseases

Effects of food and water 
shortages 

Effects of population
displacement

Adaptation 
measures 

Global
climate
change

Regional
weather
changes:
- heatwaves

- extreme
weather

- temperature

- precipitation

Source: Adapted from Patz et al. (2000).

(National Research Council 2001a) and, more recently, in a book by the
World  Health  Organization  (WHO)  (McMichael  et  al.  2003).  As  yet,
however, there has been no concerted attempt to integrate these various
research  findings  into  a  single  standardized  estimate  of  the  likely  net
health effects of climate change, nor to estimate the possible health gains
associated with different mitigation and amelioration strategies. In addi-
tion to the uncertainties of future climate projections, there are several
obstacles to achieving this aim.

 Not all of the probable health outcomes have been modelled, often
due  to  lack  of  parameterization  data  and  the  complexity  of  causal
pathways.  Modelling  efforts  so  far  have  tended  to  concentrate  on
those  causal  relationships  that  can  more  easily  be  modelled,  rather
than those with the potentially greatest effects (e.g. extreme temper-
atures on cardiovascular disease mortality, rather than sea-level rise
on the health of displaced populations).

 Little  emphasis  has  been  given  to  the  validation  of  models  relating
climate change to health. Validation would provide a basis for making
uncertainty estimates around projections, and would afford an objec-
tive  criterion  for  choosing  between  different  models  or  modelling
approaches.

1550

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

 Adaptations to climate change (i.e. autonomous or planned responses
that  reduce  the  vulnerability  of  populations  to  the  consequences  of
climate change) are often not addressed.

 Interactions between the effects of climate change and other changes
to human populations (e.g. investment in health infrastructure, level
and equity of distribution of wealth) are seldom explicitly estimated.

 The various disease-specific models invariably generate outputs in dif-
ferent units, which may be only indirectly related to disease burden
(e.g. populations at risk of disease transmission, rather than disease
incidence). This hampers estimation of the aggregated health impacts
of different scenarios.

 Little  effort  has  previously  been  directed  to  describing  and  under-

standing the geographical variations in likely impacts.

The first four obstacles are likely to be at least partially addressed in
the  future,  as  disease-specific  models  become  more  sophisticated  and,
perhaps more importantly, through the accumulation of greater quanti-
ties  of  reliable  data  for  model  parameterization  and  testing.  In  this
chapter, we have estimated the relative risk of a series of health outcomes
under  a  range  of  scenarios  of  climate  change,  variously  mitigated  by
reducing GHG emissions. In all cases, care was taken to describe explic-
itly the scientific basis for our estimation, the assumptions that were built
into the quantitative models, and to give realistic uncertainty estimates
around projections. Later sections describe ways in which specific disease
models may be improved.

2.

Risk factor definition and measurement

Definitions of risk factor and exposure scenarios

2.1
The  risk  factor was  defined  as  current  and  future  changes  in  global
climate attributable to increasing atmospheric concentrations of green-
house gases (GHGs).

Composite climate scenarios are adopted instead of the (more prefer-
able) continuous measurements of individual climate variables because
(i) climate is a multivariate phenomenon, including temperature, precip-
itation, wind speed, etc., and therefore cannot be measured on a single
scale; (ii) climate changes will vary significantly with geography and time:
these are not fully captured in global averages of climate variables; and
(iii) all aspects of climate are likely to be altered by GHG levels in the
atmosphere.

The exposure categories considered here are global climate scenarios
resulting at specified points in time over the coming half-century from:

1. unmitigated  emissions  trends,  that  is,  approximately  following  the

IPCC IS92a scenario;

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1551

2. emissions reduction, resulting in stabilization at 750 ppm CO2 equiv-

alent by the year 2210 (s750);

3. more severe emissions reduction, resulting in stabilization at 550 ppm

CO2 equivalent by the year 2170 (s550);

4. average climate conditions for 19611990, the World Meteorological

Organization (WMO) climate normal (baseline).

Although  future  GHG  emissions  are  inherently  uncertain,  the  un-
mitigated emissions scenario adopted here was, until recently, the IPCC
mid-range projection, and was very widely used in climate impact model-
ling.  The  stabilization  categories  used  here  represent  plausible,  though 
economically and technically challenging, projections that are dependent
on there being major efforts to curtail emissions. Estimated changes in
CO2 concentrations, and associated changes in global temperature and
sea level, are shown in Table 20.2 and Figure 20.3. Although alternative
emissions scenarios for climate stabilization are available, they have not
been applied to a wide range of impact models.

We  do  not  attempt  to  estimate  all  health  outcomes  of  specific
policy/development pathways through which these, or other, GHG levels
could  be  achieved:  for  example,  compliance  with  the  Kyoto  Protocol 
of  the  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change
(UNFCCC), or of the world following one or other of the IPCC Special
Report  on  Emissions  Scenarios  (SRES)both  of  which  also  include
descriptions  of  alternative  future  global  socioeconomic  development 
scenarios.  The  costs  or  additional  benefits  of  specific  interventions  to

Table 20.2

Successive measured and modelled CO2 concentrations,
global mean temperature and sea-level rise associated with
alternative emissions scenarios

Carbon dioxide concentration (ppm) by volume

HadCM2 unmitigated emissions
S750
S550

Temperature (oC change)

HadCM2 unmitigated emissions
S750
S550

Sea-level (cm change)

HadCM2 unmitigated emissions
S750
S550

No data.


Source: McMichael et al. (2000a).

196190

1990s

2020s

2050s

334
334
334

0
0
0

0
0
0

354
354
354

0.3
0.3
0.3





441
424
410

1.2
0.9
0.8

12
11
10

565
501
458

2.1
1.4
1.1

25
20
18

1552

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

Figure 20.3 The global average temperature rise predicted from the

unmitigated emissions scenario (upper trace), and emission
scenario which stabilizes CO2 concentrations at 750 ppm
(middle trace) and at 550 ppm (lower trace)

4

3

2

1

0

)

C


(
 
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i
 

e
r
u

t

a
r
e
p
m
e
T

2210

Stability

Stability

1990

2170

1900

2000

2100

2200

Year

Note:

All values are relative to mean values for the period 19611990, and may therefore be either
positive or negative.

Source: Hadley Centre (1999).

achieve this reduction are artificially separated from the resulting health
benefits. For such a distal risk factor, this separation of intervention from
exposure  and  resulting  health  consequences  may  potentially  introduce
inconsistencies: for example, the economic changes necessary to achieve
GHG stabilization are more consistent with some projections of levels
and  distribution  of  population  and  GDP  than  others.  These  socioeco-
nomic factors are themselves likely to effect disease rates, potentially in
interaction with climate. Integrated assessment of all effects of interven-
tions  would  be  conceptually  more  consistent,  but  this  has  not  been
attempted  here,  since  it  would  introduce  an  additional  layer  of  uncer-
tainty  and  assumptions  into  the  models  and  has  previously  only  been
explored for a few health outcomes (Tol and Dowlatabadi 2001).

The choice of baseline or theoretical minimum exposure follows the
WMO and IPCC practice of using the observed global climate normal
(i.e.  averages)  for  19611990  (New  et  al.  1999)  as  a  reference  point.
Alternative  baselines,  such  as  pre-industrial  climate,  are  not  used,

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1553

because  of  the  absence  of  a  published  consensus  among  climatologists
on  definitions  of  an  appropriate  time  period  and  the  relative  roles  of
anthropogenic and natural influences before 19611990. This choice of
a 19611990 baseline will therefore generate relatively conservative esti-
mates of change in exposure and associated disease outcomes, as it does
not address any human-induced climate change that occurred before this
period. Indeed, as explained in section 2.6 below, the further choice of
1990  as  the  actual  baseline  year  for  linear-regression  based  estimates 
at  current  and  future  years  heightens  the  conservative  nature  of  these
estimates.

The  approach  here  treats  climate  change  as  a  slowly  evolving  and 
continuous exposure, with the majority of disease models linked to those
changes for which climate models make the most consistent predictions:
gradual changes in temperature and, to a lesser extent, precipitation. This
is again a limited approach. As shown in Table 20.1, it is very likely that
climate  change  will  also  increase  the  frequency  of  extreme  conditions,
with likely effects on health. However, quantitative estimates of increased
frequency have only very recently become available for some measures
of extremes (e.g. wet winters; Palmer and Ralsanen 2002), and are not
yet  available  for  different  GHG  scenarios.  The  consequences  of  such
changes  are  modelled  here  only  in  the  context  of  inland  flooding, 
but they could potentially be applied to other health end-points in the
future.

Finally,  there  is  some  concern  that  disruption  of  the  climate  system
may  pass  critical  thresholds,  resulting  in  abrupt  rather  than  gradual
changes (Broecker 1997; National Research Council 2001a) and associ-
ated rapid impacts on health. There is no consensus on the probability
of such events, and they have therefore not been included in any pub-
lished health outcome assessment studies. However, they should be borne
in mind as a worst-case scenario.

Methods for estimating risk factor levels

2.2
Projections of the extent and geographical distribution of climate change
were  generated  by  applying  the  various  emissions  scenarios  described
above  to  the  HadCM2  global  climate  model  (GCM)  of  the  Hadley
Centre  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  Great  Britain  and  Northern  Ireland
(Tett et al. 1997). This is one of several alternative GCMs used by the
IPCC;  it  generates  projections  of  changes  in  temperature  and  other
climate properties which have been verified by back-casting (Johns et al.
2001), and which lie approximately in the middle of the range generated
by alternative models.

The HadCM2 model generates estimates of the principal characteris-
tics of climate, including temperature, precipitation and absolute humid-
ity, for each cell of a global grid at resolution 3.75 longitude by 2.5
latitude. As for most climate change models, HadCM2 generates daily
projections representing both long-term trends and the degree of natural

1554

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

climate variability, but not necessarily its specific temporal pattern (i.e.
the  models  do  not  accurately  predict  the  climate  of  specific  days  or
months). In order to account for such natural variability, the outputs that
are most commonly used for modelling consequences of climate change
are  monthly  means  for  average  30-year  periods  centred  on  the  2020s,
2050s, 2080s, etc. The baseline climate (19611990) describes the same
properties for the land surface of the world at 0.5 0.5 resolution.

The  climate  model  projections  describe  forecast  changes  in  global
climate conditions. Therefore, we did not attempt to estimate the expo-
sure prevalence: the entire world population was assumed to be exposed
to one or other global climate scenario (i.e. exposure prevalence= 100%).
However, it should be noted that the climate scenarios incorporate geo-
graphical variation in both current climate (e.g. the lower temperatures
in  higher  latitudes)  and  projected  climate  change  (e.g.  more  rapid  and
intense warming is predicted in high northern latitudes than elsewhere).
Different populations will therefore experience different climate condi-
tions under any one climate-change scenario.

Uncertainties in risk factor levels

2.3
Two  major  sources  of  uncertainty  surround  the  forecasting  of  future
climate scenarios: (i) uncertainty in changes in factors such as popula-
tion, economic growth, energy policies and practices on GHG emissions;
and (ii) uncertainties over the accuracy of any climate model in predict-
ing the effects of specified emissions scenarios on future climate in spe-
cific  locations,  against  the  background  of  substantial  natural  climate
variability over time, and in space (i.e. downscaling). Climatologists have
only  very  recently  provided  probabilistic  measurements  of  uncertainty
incorporating one or both of these sources (Knutti et al. 2002; Stott and
Kettleborough  2002),  and  there  is  still  debate  over  the  reliability  and
utility of such measures (Schneider 2002). They have not previously been
applied  in  impact  studies  (Katz  2002),  and  were  therefore  not  used  in
this assessment. More importantly, however, there remains considerable
uncertainty over the accuracy with which any single model can predict
future climate. This is usually addressed by using outputs from a range
of models, from independent groups. This was not possible here, as the
particular GHG stabilization scenarios have only been applied, and fed
through to estimates of likely consequences, for the HadCM2 model.

For this analysis, we did not address the first and last sources of uncer-
tainty  explicitly,  and  assumed  that  it  is  incorporated  in  the  various 
alternative  exposure  scenarios,  reflecting  different  trajectories  of  GHG
emissions. The second source of uncertainty was partially addressed by
using  30-year  averages  of  climate  conditions,  which  helps  to  smooth
out the effects of natural climate variability. Further, the single model
used  was  run  with  slight  variations  in  initial  conditions,  allowing  the 
calculation of an ensemble mean. Four runs were used to generate an
ensemble  mean  for  the  unmitigated  emissions  scenario.  However,  only

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1555

single climate runs were available for the stabilization scenarios. There-
fore, the climate scenarios associated with those emissions scenarios are
more uncertain.

Although it was not feasible to generate formal uncertainty ranges and
feed these through the disease models, the approximate degree of uncer-
tainty is illustrated in Appendix A. Here, the stabilization scenarios were
run on a suite of 14 simple climate models, making different plausible
assumptions about climate sensitivity to GHG emissions using the sim-
plified  COSMIC  climate  model  described  by  Schlesinger  and  Williams
(1997). This illustrates the degree of variation between the projections
for future temperature and precipitation patterns. (Note that projections
for  precipitation  vary  more  between  models  than  does  temperature
therefore  models  that  rely  on  precipitation  estimates  from  single 
scenarios have an additional component of uncertainty.)

3.

Risk factordisease relationship

Outcomes included

3.1
The  health  outcomes  addressed  here  were  selected  on  the  basis  of
observed  sensitivity  to  temporal  and  geographical  climate  variation,
importance in terms of mortality and/or burden of disease (Longstreth
1999; McMichael et al. 1996; Patz et al. 2000) and availability of quan-
titative global models (or feasibility of constructing informative models
in the time available) (Table 20.3). More detail on evidence for causal-
ity and quantitative estimation methods for each health outcome is given
below.

Climate  change  is  by  and  large  a  relatively  distal  risk  factor  for  ill-
health,  often  acting  through  complex  causal  pathways  which  result  in
heterogeneous effects across populations. There is, therefore, a series of
additional  likely  outcomes  that  have  not  yet  been  formally  modelled.
They include the potential health consequences of climate change on:

Table 20.3

Health outcomes considered in this analysis

Outcome class

Direct effects of heat and cold
Foodborne and waterborne diseases
Vector-borne diseases
Natural disastersa

Risk of malnutrition

Incidence/
prevalence

Incidence
Incidence
Incidence
Incidence
Incidence
Prevalence

Outcome

Cardiovascular disease deaths
Diarrhoea episodes
Malaria cases
Deaths due to unintentional injuries
Other unintentional injuries (non-fatal)
Non-availability of recommended daily 
calorie intake

a All natural disaster outcomes are separately attributed to coastal floods and inland floods/landslides.

1556

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

 changes in pollution and aeroallergen levels;

 the  rate  of  recovery  of  the  ozone  hole,  affecting  exposure  to  ultra-

violet radiation (Shindell et al. 1998);

 changes in the distribution and transmission of other infectious dis-
eases,  particularly  other  vector-borne  diseases,  geohelminths  and
rodent-borne diseases, and possible emergence of new pathogens;

 the distribution and abundance of plant and livestock pests and dis-
eases,  affecting  agricultural  production  (Baker  et  al.  2000;  Rosen-
zweig et al. 2001);

 the  probability  of  crop  failure  through  prolonged  dry  weather  and

famine, depending on location and crisis management;

 population displacement due to natural disasters, crop failure, water

shortages; and

 destruction of health infrastructure in natural disasters.

3.2

Methods for estimating risk factordisease
relationships

Various methods have been developed for the quantitative estimation of
health  outcomes  of  climatic  change  (reviewed  by  Martens  and
McMichael 2002; McMichael and Kovats 2000). It is not yet feasible to
base future projections on observed long-term climate trends, for three
reasons:  (i)  the  lack  of  standardized  long-term  monitoring  of  climate-
sensitive diseases in many regions; (ii) methodological difficulties in mea-
suring  and  controlling  for  non-climatic  influences  on  long-term  health
trends;  and  (iii)  the  small  (but  significant)  climate  changes  that  have
occurred so far are an inadequate proxy for the larger changes that are
forecast for coming decades (Campbell-Lendrum et al. 2002).

Instead, estimates are based on observations of the effects of shorter-
term climate variation in the recent past (e.g. the effects of daily or inter-
annual  climate  variability  on  specific  health  outcomes)  or  the  present
(e.g. climate as a determinant of current disease distribution), or on spe-
cific processes that may influence health states (e.g. parasite and vector
population dynamics in the laboratory, determining the transmission of
infectious diseases). These quantitative relationships were then applied
to future climate scenarios (Figure 20.3). Such an approach makes the
important assumption that such associations will be maintained in the
future, despite changes in mediating factors such as socioeconomic vari-
ables,  infrastructure  and  technology.  This  introduces  significant  uncer-
tainty, and possibly bias, in the estimates.

The  extent  and  type  of  modelling  applied  to  different  health  effects
vary considerably. Consequently, several outcomes can only be estimated
by  crude  adaptation  of  the  outputs  of  available  models.  For  example,
some of the predictive models generate health-relevant outputs that do

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1557

not correspond directly to categories of disease states used in the Global
Burden  of  Disease  (GBD)  study.  These  include  the  incidence  of  deaths
and  injuries  due  to,  specifically,  floods  (rather  than  injuries  due  to  all
causes), or populations at risk of hunger or malaria infection (rather than
prevalence of malnutrition, or incidence of clinical malaria). Currently,
there  are  spatial  resolution  differences  between  models,  which  is  not
ideal. These relate to how the models account for geographical variation
in:  (i)  baseline  climate  (potentially  differentiated  to  0.5 globally,  or
higher resolutions for some regions); (ii) climate change (usually at the
level of the GCM projections: 3.75 longitude by 2.5 latitude); and (iii)
aggregation of the final results (occasionally according to regions other
than subregions, depending on the purpose of the original model). Levels
of spatial resolution for each disease model are described in section 3.6
and  onwards.  All  of  the  above  considerations  are  represented  in  the
descriptions of strength of evidence and quantitative estimates of uncer-
tainty for specific health outcomes.

ASSUMPTIONS
Simplifying assumptions have been made to facilitate clear definition of
scenarios and associated consequences.

Different mechanisms for reducing GHG emissions
The  alternative  GHG  emissions  scenarios  outlined  above  could  be
achieved through an almost infinite variety of changes to economic and
social development and energy use policies. As outlined in section 2.1,
we did not attempt to estimate the secondary effects of GHG mitigation
policies on health. These effects are potentially large. They include rela-
tively direct mechanisms which may be negative, such as the potential
negative  effects  of  GHG  emissions  policies  on  economic  development,
personal  wealth  and  vulnerability  to  disease  (Tol  and  Dowlatabadi
2001),  or  positive,  such  as  reduction  in  the  levels  of  ozone  and  other
outdoor (Kunzli et al. 2000) and indoor air pollutants (Wang and Smith
1999). They may also act through more complex routes, for example,
avoiding  production  of  aeroallergens  in  CO2-enriched  environments
(Wayne et al. 2002; Ziska and Caulfield 2000).

Population growth
The models described below estimated the relative per capita incidence
of specific health outcomes under the different climate scenarios. The size
and  distribution  of  current  and  future  populations  therefore  affect  the
relative risk estimates either (i) where the climate hazard is not evenly
distributed geographically throughout the region, or (ii) where popula-
tion is an integral part of the modelfor example, in the risk-of-hunger
model, where population size has an influence on food availability per
capita. In adjusting the relative risks for these population effects, the dis-
tribution  of  future  populations  was  estimated  by  applying  the  World

1558

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

Bank  mid-range  estimate  of  population  growth  either  at  the  national
level (for malnutrition), or to a 1 1 resolution grid map of popula-
tion distribution (Bos et al. 1994) for all other outcomes.

Modifying factors: adaptation and vulnerability
Factors such as physiological adaptation, technological and institutional
innovation and individual and community wealth will influence not only
the exposure of individuals and populations to climate hazards, but also
the associated hazards (e.g. IPCC 2001a; Reiter 2000; Woodward et al.
1998). For some assessments, simpler modifying factors are integrated
into  the  models  for  both  present  and  future  effects.  For  example, 
estimates of changes in the number of people at risk of hunger incorpo-
rate  continental  projections  of  economic  growth,  affecting  capacity  to
buy  food  (Parry  et  al.  1999).  Other  models  incorporate  the  effects  of
existing  modifiers  when  defining  current  climatedisease  relationships,
such as estimates of the global distribution of malaria based on current
climate  associations  (Rogers  and  Randolph  2000).  Such  models  im-
plicitly  capture  the  current modifying  effects  of  socioeconomic  and 
other influences on climate effects, but do not attempt to model future
changes  in  these  modifiers.  Finally,  some  models  make  no  estimate  of
such modifying influences in either the present or future; for example,
models that estimate future changes in the geographical range which is
climatically  suitable  for  malaria  transmission,  and  associated  popula-
tions at risk (Martens et al. 1999). To generate consistent estimates in
this analysis:

 we  attempted  to  account  for  current  geographical  variation  in  vul-
nerability to climate, where not already incorporated into the predic-
tive models.

 we  attempted  to  account  for  future  changes  in  disease  rates  due  to
other factors (e.g. decreasing rates of infectious disease due to tech-
nological advances/improving socioeconomic status), and for changes
in population size and age structure (e.g. potentially greater propor-
tion of older people at higher risk of mortality related to cardiovas-
cular disease in response to thermal extremes). This was addressed by
calculating  only  relative  risks  under  alternative  climate  change  sce-
narios, which should be applied to GBD projections of disease rates
and population size and age structure. The GBD projections take into
account the effects of changing GDP, human capital (as measured
by average years of female education), and time (to account for trends
such as technological development) (Murray and Lopez 1996) on the
overall envelope of cause-specific mortality and morbidity for dis-
eases affected by climate change.

 all quantitative estimates of the health effects of climate change were
based on observed effects of climate variations either over short time

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1559

periods,  or  between  locations.  They  therefore  made  the  important
assumption  that  these  relationships  are  also  relevant  to  long-term
climate  change.  To  avoid  unrealistic  extrapolation  of  short-term 
relationships,  we  included  consideration  of  mechanisms  by  which
climate-health relationships may alter over time (i.e. adaptation). We
considered whether each disease in turn was likely to be significantly
affected  by  biological  adaptation  (i.e.  either  behavioural,  immuno-
logical or physiological) and/or by generally improving socioeconomic
conditions  (i.e.  increasing  GDP)  (see  Table  20.4).  In  each  case  we
defined appropriate adjustments to the relative risk estimates, in line
with published studies. The different factors for each health outcome
were  then  applied  to  the  same  projections  of  future  GDP  (WHO/
EIP/GPE,  unpublished  data,  2001)  and  changing  climate  (from  our
models), to adjust the relative risks over the time course of the assess-
ment. There is, however, substantial uncertainty over the most likely
degree of adaptation under different conditions. This was reflected in

Table 20.4

Assumptions on adaptation and vulnerability

Biologicala adaptation 
affecting RRs

Socioeconomic adaptation
affecting RRs

Direct physiological effects of 
heat and cold

Diarrhoea

Yes. Temperature associated
with lowest mortality was 
assumed to change directly 
with temperature increases 
driven by climate change 
None

Malnutrition

None

Disasters: coastal floods

None

Disasters: inland floods and 
landslides

None

Vector-borne diseases: malaria

None

None

Assumed RR= 1 if GDP 
per capita rises above 
US$ 6000/year
Food-trade model 
assumed future increases 
in crop yields from 
technological advances,
increased liberalization 
of trade, and increased 
GDPb
Model assumed the RR of 
deaths in floods decreases 
with GDP, following Yohe 
and Tol (2002)
Model assumed the RR of 
deaths in floods decreases 
with GDP, following Yohe 
and Tol (2002)
None (for RR)

a Physiological, immunological and behavioural.
b GDP scenarios are developed from EMF14 (Energy Modeling Forum 1995).

1560

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

the uncertainty estimates for the relative risks for each disease. Quoted
uncertainty estimates therefore describe uncertainties around climate
change  predictions,  about  current  exposureresponse  relationships,
and around the degree to which these are likely to be maintained in
the future. Since, to date, these have not been formally modelled, they
were generated here by qualitative assessment in collaboration with
the original modelling group. The uncertainty estimates should there-
fore be interpreted with caution.

 we  ignored  more  complex  aspects  of  future  vulnerability.  Whereas
projected trends for average income (which is included in estimating
baseline rates and, where possible, relative risks) are broadly positive,
other factors may have opposite effects. These include income distri-
bution, maintenance of disease surveillance, control and eradication
programmes, technological change and secondary or threshold effects,
such as the protective effect of forests in reducing the frequency and
intensity of flooding (e.g. Fitzpatrick and Knox 2000).

 we made no attempt to estimate the effects of actions taken specifi-
cally to adapt to the effects of climate change (e.g. the upgrading of
flood  defences  specifically  to  cope  with  sea-level  rise  attributable  to
climate  change).  Therefore,  our  estimates  represent  a  business-as-
usual  scenario  of  the  health  effects  associated  with  global  climate
change.

Estimation for different time points

3.3
As  stated  above,  climate  model  outputs  are  usually  presented  as  aver-
ages over 30-year periods, for example, centred on 2025 and 2055. In
order to generate estimates for any specific year, we defined 1990 (i.e.
the last year of the baseline climate period) as year 0. Central, lower and
upper  estimates  of  relative  risks  were  calculated  for  the  2020s  (i.e.
centred  on  2025)  and  the  2050s,  using  models  described  elsewhere.
Quoted estimates for the years 2001, 2005, 2010 and 2020 were esti-
mated by linear regression against time between 1990 and 2025. Esti-
mates for 2030 were estimated by linear regression between 2025 and
2055. Using this method, our choice of 1990 as the baseline year rather
than the middle of the 19611990 period led to conservative estimates
of health consequences, particularly in the near future.

Risk reversibility

3.4
In the context of this assessment, risk reversibility describes the propor-
tion of the health consequences that would be avoided if the population
were  shifted  to  a  different  exposure  scenario.  Given  the  definition  of
exposure scenarios, complete avoidance of climate change (i.e. popula-
tions  exposed  to  baseline  climate  conditions  rather  than  unmitigated
climate change) would avoid all of the health consequences that we have
described. Risk reversibility would therefore be 100% in this case.

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1561

3.5

Criteria for identifying relevant studies and for
estimating strength of evidence

In  identifying  relevant  studies,  we  have  considered  all  publications
reviewed in the IPCC Third Assessment Report (IPCC 2001a), as well
as those found in more recent literature searches (Appendix B). However,
as the field is relatively new and expanding rapidly, we have also used
some studies that are either in-press or submitted for publication (mate-
rial available on request). As these may not be easily accessible to readers
of this report, the major underlying assumptions are described.

There are still relatively few models that link climate change models
to  quantitative  global  estimates  of  health  or  health-relevant  outcomes
(e.g.  numbers  of  people  flooded  or  at  risk  of  hunger).  Where  global
models did not exist, we have extrapolated from models that make local
or regional projections. Methods for extrapolating to the subregions are
described separately for each disease. Where there was more than one
published model for a particular outcome, decisions on model selection
were  based  as  much  as  possible  on  validation  against  historical/
geographical patterns. We excluded models: (i) that have been shown to
be  significantly  less  accurate  than  equivalent  models  in  predicting  his-
torical or geographical trends; or (ii) that have been superseded by later
models by the same group; or (iii) that are based on unrealistic biologi-
cal assumptions; or (iv) that cannot be plausibly extrapolated to a wider
area.  Given  the  very  limited  means  for  model  validation,  these  results
involved choices made in this work among models and resulted in very
large uncertainty.

As climate change impact assessment is, at this stage, predominantly
a model-based exercise, the assessment of strength of evidence for causal-
ity  is  necessarily  indirect.  It  is  based  on  two  considerations:  (i)  the
strength of evidence for the current role of climate variability in affect-
ing  the  health  outcome,  and  (ii)  the  likelihood  that  this  relationship
between  climate  and  health  will  be  maintained  through  the  process  of
long-term climate change.

Several of the uncertainties involved in this exercise, particularly those
relating  to  climate  modelling  and  those  around  the  quantitative  rela-
tionships between climate and health, should decrease through improve-
ments  in  modelling,  and  more  importantly,  through  better  empirical
research.  However,  estimation  of  climate  change  effects  is  currently  a
predictive exercise, based on some form of indirect modelling (e.g. analy-
sis of temporal or geographical variation in climate), rather than direct
experience (i.e. of a change process that has previously occurred). It is
therefore possible that some of the health outcomes listed above may not
respond in the predicted manner. On the other hand, we do not yet have
direct experience of the full range of health outcomes that may be asso-
ciated with exposure.

1562

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

The  analyses  described  here  were  specifically  to  estimate  the  future
disease  burden,  which  may  be  avoided  by  climate  change  mitigation 
policies.  However,  it  must  be  emphasized  that  these  burdens  may  also
be  reduced  by  adaptation  interventions  to  reduce  the  vulnerability  of
populations.  Given  the  exposure  commitment  (unavoidable  climate
change  due  to  past  GHG  emissions),  and  the  large  gap  between  even
plausible mitigation scenarios and the baseline climate, adaptation strate-
gies  are  essential  to  the  goal  of  reducing  adverse  health  effects.  These
include early warning systems and defences for protection from natural
disasters, and improved health infrastructure (e.g. water and sanitation,
control  programmes  for  vector-borne  diseases)  to  reduce  the  baseline
incidence of climate-sensitive diseases.

Direct effects of heat and cold on mortality

3.6
An association between weather and daily mortality has been shown con-
sistently  in  many  studies  in  diverse  populations.  The  effect  of  extreme
temperature  events  (heat-waves  and  cold  spells)  on  mortality  has  also
been  well  described  in  developed  countries.  However,  temperature-
attributable mortality has also been found at moderate temperatures
(Curriero et al. 2000; Kunst et al. 1993).

Causality is supported by physiological studies of the effects of very
high or very low temperatures in healthy volunteers. High temperatures
cause  some  well  described  clinical  syndromes  such  as  heat-stroke  (see
review  by  Kilbourne  1989).  Very  few  deaths  are  reported  as  directly
attributed to heat (International Classification of Diseases, ninth revi-
sion [ICD-9 code 992.0]) in most countries. Exposure to high tempera-
tures increases blood viscosity and it is therefore plausible that heat stress
may trigger a vascular event such as heart attack or stroke (Keatinge et
al. 1986a). Studies have also shown that elderly people have impaired
temperature regulation (Drinkwater and Horvath 1979; Kilbourne 1992;
Mackenbach et al. 1997; Vassallo et al. 1995). Clinical and laboratory
studies  indicate  that  exposure  to  low temperatures  causes  changes  in
haemostasis, blood viscosity, lipids, vasoconstriction and the sympathetic
nervous  system  (e.g.  Keatinge  et  al.  1986b,  1989;  Khaw  1995;
Woodhouse et al. 1993, 1994). The strongest physiological evidence is
therefore for cardiovascular disease.

Population-based  studies  also  provide  evidence  that  environmental
temperature affects mortality due to both cardiovascular and respiratory
disease.  The  best  epidemiological  evidence  is  provided  by  time-series
studies of daily mortality. These methods are considered sufficiently rig-
orous to assess short-term associations (days, weeks) between environ-
mental exposures and mortality, if adjustment is made for longer-term
patterns in the data series, particularly the seasonal cycle and any long-
term  trends,  such  as  gradually  decreasing  mortality  rates  over  decades
(Schwartz et al. 1996).

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1563

The effect of a hot day is apparent for only a few days in the mor-
tality series; in contrast, a cold day has an effect that lasts up to two
weeks. Further, in many temperate countries, mortality rates in winter
are 1025% higher than death rates in summer. The causes of this winter
excess are not well understood (Curwen and Devis 1988). It is therefore
plausible  that  different  mechanisms  are  involved  and  that  cold-related
mortality in temperate countries is related in some part to the occurrence
of seasonal respiratory infections.

Although the physiological evidence for causality of an effect of tem-
perature on mortality is greatest for cardiovascular, followed by respi-
ratory, diseases, temperature has been shown to affect all-cause mortality
in areas where cardiovascular disease rates are relatively low and infec-
tious  disease  mortality  is  relatively  high.  Many  studies  report  the  sea-
sonal patterns of infectious disease in developing countries, but the role
of temperature is not well described. It is likely that seasonal rains influ-
ence  the  seasonal  transmission  of  many  infectious  diseases.  High 
temperatures  encourage  the  growth  of  pathogens  and  are  associated 
with an increased risk of diarrhoeal disease in poorer populations (see
section 3.7).

Studies have also described mortality and morbidity during extreme
temperature  events  (heat-waves).  However,  these  events  are,  by  defini-
tion, rare. It is therefore difficult to compare heat-waves in different pop-
ulations and for different intensities. The studies that have been used to
describe  the  effects  of  heat-waves  (episode  analyses)  also  use  different
methods for estimating the expected mortality, which makes compar-
ison difficult (Whitman et al. 1997). An assessment of the health conse-
quences of climate change on thermal stress requires estimation of past
and  future  probabilities  of  extreme  temperature  events.  The  current
methods of assessment use 30-year averages of monthly data, and few
scenarios  consider  change  in  the  frequency  or  magnitude  of  extreme
events.  This  is  because:  (i)  suitable  methods  have  not  been  developed,
and  (ii)  climate  model  output  at  the  appropriate  spatial  and  temporal
resolution is not readily available (Goodess et al. 2001).

There is little published evidence of an association between weather
conditions  and  measures  of  morbidity  such  as  hospital  admissions  or
primary care consultations (Barer et al. 1984; Ebi et al. 2001; Fleming
et al. 1991; McGregor et al. 1999; Rothwell et al. 1996; Schwartz et al.
2001). A study of general practitioner consultations among the elderly
in Greater London found that temperature affected the rate of consul-
tation  for  respiratory  diseases  but  not  that  for  cardiovascular  diseases
(Hajat et al. 2001). However, it is not clear how these end-points relate
to quantitative measures of health burden.

ESTIMATING THE TEMPERATUREMORTALITY RELATIONSHIP
A review of the literature was undertaken to identify studies that report
relationships between daily temperature and mortality (see Appendix B).

1564

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

The  following  criteria  were  used  to  select  studies  for  deriving  the 
modelled estimates.

 A  study  that  uses  daily  time-series  methods  to  analyse  the  relation-

ship between daily mean temperature and mortality.

 A  study  that  reports  a  coefficient  from  linear  regression  which  esti-
mates  the  percentage  changes  in  mortality  per  degree  centigrade
changes  in  temperature  above  and  below  a  reported  threshold 
temperature.

Several studies have estimated future temperature-related mortality for
a range of climate scenarios (e.g. Guest et al. 1999; Kalkstein and Greene
1997;  Langford  and  Bentham  1995;  Martens  1998a).  These  methods
were  not  considered  appropriate  for  this  project,  as  described  in 
Appendix B.

The best characterized temperaturemortality relationships are those
for total mortality in temperate countries. Fewer studies have also looked
at  the  particular  causes  of  death  for  which  physiological  evidence  is
strongest:  cardiovascular  disease,  and  to  a  lesser  extent  respiratory
disease. In this study, we used the specific relationships for cardiovascu-
lar  disease  where  these  were  available  (temperate  and  cold-climate
zones), and the general relationships for all-cause mortality for climatic
regions where such disease-specific relationships could not be found in
the literature review (all tropical populations) (Table 20.5).

As outlined in section 2.2, it was assumed that everybody is exposed
to the ambient temperatures prevailing under the different climate sce-
narios.  However,  populations  differ  in  their  responses  to  temperature
variability, which is partly explained by location or climate.

The global population distribution was divided into five climate zones
(Table 20.6), according to definitions developed for urban areas by the

Table 20.5

Temperature-related mortality: summary of exposure
response relationships, derived from the literaturea

Climate zone

Hot and dry
Warm humid
Temperate
Cold

Threshold (Tcutoff)

23
29
16
16

Medical all-cause 

mortalityb

Cardiovascular 

mortality

Heat

3.0
5.5
NA
NA

Cold

1.4
5.7
NA
NA

Heat



2.6
1.1

Cold



2.9
0.5

 No data.
NA Not applicable.
a

Change in mortality per 1 C change in mean daily temperature (%).
Excludes external causes (deaths by injury and poisoning).

b

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1565

Table 20.6

Climate zones

Zone

Hot/dry

Warm/humid

Temperate

Cold

Polar

Climate definition 

Temperature of warmest 
month >30C 
Temperature of the coldest 
month >18C, warmest 
month <30C
Average temperature of the
coldest month <18C and 
>-3C, and average 
temperature of warmest 
month >10C
Average temperature of 
warmest month >10C
and that of coldest month
<-3C
Average temperature of the
warmest month <10C

NA Not applicable.

% of world
population
in zone  
(1990s)

City from which
representative
daily temperature 
distribution was 
derived

17

21

44

Delhi

Chiang Mai

Amsterdam

14

Oslo

Mean 

temperature

(C)

(5th95th 
percentile)

25.0

(13.535.2)

26.3

(21.629.5)

9.6

(2.017.8)

5

(-6.316.5)

0.2

NA

NA

Australian Bureau of Meteorology (BOM 2001). The population in the
polar zone is small (0.2% of world population) and was excluded.

It was necessary to estimate daily temperature distributions in order
to calculate the number of attributable deaths. Daily temperature distri-
butions clearly vary a great deal, even between localities within the same
country. However, it was not feasible within this assessment to obtain
sufficient meteorological data to estimate daily temperature distributions
throughout the world at a fine spatial resolution. Therefore, a single dis-
tribution was chosen to represent each climate zone. New daily temper-
ature  distributions  were  then  estimated  for  each  climate  scenario,  by
shifting the currently observed temperature distributions by the projected
change in mean temperatures for each month, and of the variability of
daily temperatures as well as changes in the mean.

ESTIMATING TEMPERATURE-ATTRIBUTABLE MORTALITY
An  exposureresponse  relationship  and  threshold  temperature  (Tcutoff)
was  applied  within  each  climate  zone  (Table  20.7).  The  average  tem-
perature difference above (hot days) and below (cold days) this temper-
ature  was  calculated  for  baseline  climate  and  each  of  the  climate
scenarios.

The  short-term  relationships  between  daily 

temperature  and 
mortality  (Table  20.5)  were  used  to  estimate  the  annual  attributable 
fraction of deaths due to hot days and cold days for each of the climate

1566

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

Table 20.7

Climate zone

Cold
Temperate
Warm/humid
Hot/dry

Threshold Tcutoff for each scenario in each climate zone
(original Tcutoff+ Dtsummer rounded to integers)
S550 
2050s

S750 
2020s

S550 
2020s

Baseline

BaU 
2020s

BaU 
2050s

16
16
29
23

17
17
29
25

18
19
31
26

17
17
29
24

17
17
29
25

17
17
29
24

S750 
2050s

17
18
30
25

BaU Business-as-usual scenario.

scenarios  (i.e.  annual  temperature  distributions  based  on  averages 
over  30  years).  Deaths  attributable  to  climate  change  were  calculated 
as  the  change  in  proportion  of  temperature-attributable  deaths  (i.e. 
heat-attributable deaths plus cold-attributable deaths) for each climate
scenario  compared  to  the  baseline  climate.  The  1 1 resolution  grid
map  of  population  distribution  (Bos  et  al.  1994)  was  then  overlaid 
on  the  maps  of  climate  zones  in  a  geographical  information  system 
(GIS),  to  estimate  the  proportion  of  the  population  in  each  subregion
who live in each climate zone. The proportional changes in temperature-
attributable deaths were therefore calculated by taking the average of the
changes in each climate zone represented in the subregion, weighted by
the proportion of the subregions population living within that climate
zone.

Adaptation
Acclimatization  includes  autonomous  adaptation  in  the  individual 
(physiological adaptation, changes in behaviour) and autonomous and
planned  population-level  adaptations  (public  health  interventions  and
changes  in  built  environment).  Acclimatization  to  warmer  climate
regimes is likely to occur in individuals and populations, given the rate
of  change  in  mean climate  conditions  currently  projected  by  climate
models. However, it is uncertain whether populations are able to adapt
to non-linear increases in the frequency or intensity of daily temperature
extremes (heat-waves). Even small increases in average temperature can
result in large shifts in the frequency of extremes (IPCC 2001b; Katz and
Brown 1992).

Few studies have attempted to incorporate acclimatization into future
projections  of  temperature-related  mortality  (Kalkstein  and  Greene
1997), but all studies report that acclimatization would reduce potential
increases  in  heat-related  mortality.  Our  estimates  incorporated  an
assumption regarding acclimatization of the populations to the chang-
ing climate that describes this reduced effect. We assumed that the thresh-
old  temperature  (Tcutoff)  is  increased  as  populations  adapt  to  a  new

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1567

climate regime, reflecting physiological and behavioural acclimatization
that  can  take  place  over  the  time-scale  of  decades.  Changes  in  Tcutoff
are  region  and  scenario  specific,  as  they  reflect  the  rate  of  warming 
experienced.  Therefore,  they  were  assumed  to  be  proportional  to  the 
projected  change  in  average  summer  temperature  (Dtsummer,  equal  to 
the  mean  of  the  three  hottest  months)  from  the  climate  scenario.  The
temperaturemortality  relationships  were  assumed  not  to  change  over
time; that is, populations biologically adapt to their new average tem-
peratures, but remain equally vulnerable to departures from these con-
ditions. We made no explicit adjustment for an effect of socioeconomic
development and technological change on temperature-related mortality.
The resulting relative risks are given in Table 20.8.

Short-term mortality displacement
Evidence suggests that the increase in mortality caused by high temper-
atures is partially offset by decreased deaths in a subsequent rebound
period  (Braga  et  al.  2001).  This  indicates  that  some  of  the  observed
increase in heat-related mortality may be displacement of deaths among
those with pre-existing illness, which would have occurred soon in any
case. However, this effect has not been quantified for temperature expo-
sures  and  was  not  included  in  the  model.  The  estimates  are  therefore
used to calculate only attributable deaths, but not DALYs, as the esti-
mate of attributable years of life lost was highly uncertain.

In subregions with predominantly temperate and cold climates, reduc-
tions in cold-related mortality are likely to be greater than increases in
heat-related mortality. Therefore, all climate scenarios show a net benefit
on mortality in these subregions, consistent with the IPCC conclusions
described  above.  The  effect  of  the  adaptation  assumption  is  to  reduce
relative risks and therefore net mortality.

UNCERTAINTY ESTIMATES
The  principal  uncertainty  in  these  estimates,  and  for  all  other  health
effects  of  climate  change,  relates  to  the  extrapolation  of  a  short-term
climate-health  relationship  to  the  long-term  effects  of  climate  change.
The  degree  to  which  this  is  a  reasonable  extrapolation  relates  to  the
degree to which populations will adapt to changing temperatures, both
in  terms  of  reducing  the  additional  mortality  attributable  to  heat,  and
the possible benefits of avoiding cold deaths. This outcome is unusual,
in that the predicted health effects of climate change are negative in some
regions, but positive in others. We therefore use slightly different termi-
nology  to  describe  the  range  of  uncertainty  around  the  estimates.  The
mid-range  estimate  was  given  by  applying  the  model  described  above
(i.e. making an adjustment for biological adaptation). The high-impact
estimate assumes that there was no physiological or behavioural adap-
tation, and therefore no change in the doseresponse relationship over
time. This maximizes both positive and negative effects. The low-impact

1568

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

h
g
H

i

8
0
0
1

.

9
0
0
1

.

3
1
0
1

.

6
0
0
1

.

7
0
0
1

.

0
1
0
1

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

4
0
0
1

.

5
0
0
1

.

7
0
0
1

.

5
0
0
1

.

7
0
0
1

.

9
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

7
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

5
0
0
1

.

7
0
0
1

.

0
3
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

i

d
M

h
g
H

i

4
0
0
1

.

5
0
0
1

.

7
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

5
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

5
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

6
0
0
1

.

8
0
0
1

.

1
1
0
1

.

5
0
0
1

.

6
0
0
1

.

8
0
0
1

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

6
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

5
0
0
1

.

7
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

5
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

5
0
0
1

.

0
2
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

i

d
M

h
g
H

i

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

5
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

5
0
0
1

.

7
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

5
0
0
1

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

5
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

0
1
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

i

d
M

h
g
H

i

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

5
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

5
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

i

d
M

h
g
H

i

2
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

i

d
M

h
g
H

i

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

i

d
M

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

b
e
t
a
m

i
l

C

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

i

n
o
g
e
r
b
u
S

D
-
R
F
A

E
-
R
F
A

A
-
R
M
A

B
-
R
M
A

D
-
R
M
A

B
-
R
M
E

D
-
R
M
E

e
t
a
m

i
l
c
 
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
a
 
r
o

i

f
 
)
s
e
g
a
 
l
l
a
(
 
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
 
r
a
l
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
c
 
f
o
 
k
s
i
r
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
e
h
t
 
f
o
 
s
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e
 
h
g
i
h
 
d
n
a
 
w
o

l

,
l
a
r
t
n
e
C

.

8
0
2
 
e
b
a
T

l

a
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
e
n

i
l

e
s
a
b
 
o
t
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
s
o
i
r
a
n
e
c
s

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1569

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

8
9
9
0

.

8
9
9
0

.

8
9
9
0

.

7
9
9
0

.

9
0
0
1

.

1
1
0
1

.

4
1
0
1

.

8
0
0
1

.

9
0
0
1

.

3
1
0
1

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

8
9
9
0

.

4
0
0
1

.

5
0
0
1

.

7
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

5
0
0
1

.

7
0
0
1

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

8
9
9
0

.

8
9
9
0

.

7
9
9
0

.

7
0
0
1

.

9
0
0
1

.

1
1
0
1

.

6
0
0
1

.

8
0
0
1

.

1
1
0
1

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

4
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

6
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

5
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

8
9
9
0

.

5
0
0
1

.

6
0
0
1

.

8
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

5
0
0
1

.

7
0
0
1

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

4
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

6
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

5
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

2
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

3
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

9
9
9
0

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

3
0
0
1

.

4
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

1
0
0
1

.

2
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

0
0
0
1

.

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

A
-
R
U
E

B
-
R
U
E

C
-
R
U
E

B
-
R
A
E
S

D
-
R
A
E
S

A
-
R
P
W

B
-
R
P
W

h
t
i

i

w
 
s
p
h
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
n
o
 
d
e
s
a
b
 
e
r
o
f
e
r
e
h
t
 
e
r
a
 
y
e
h
t

i

;
y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m
 
c
fi
i
c
e
p
s
-
e
s
a
e
s
i
d
 
r
a
l
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
c
 
d
n
a
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t
 
n
e
e
w
t
e
b
 
p
h
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
e
h
t
 
f
o
 
s
e
d
u
t
s
 
e
b
a
t
i
u
s
 
o
n
 
e
r
a
 
e
r
e
h
t

l

i

i

,

B
-
R
A
E
S
 
r
o

f
 
t
a
h
t
 
e
t
o
N

.
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e
 
d
e
t
a
g
i
t
i

m
n
u

=
 
4

,

0
5
7
s

=
 
3

,

0
5
5
s

=
 
2

.

y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m
 
e
s
u
a
c
-
l
l
a

a

b

1570

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

estimate assumes complete adaptation to a changing climate, and there-
fore no change in the relative risk as the climate changes.

There  is  therefore  a  need  for  further  time-series  studies,  applying  a
standard approach to populations living in as wide a range of climates
as possible. Previous analyses have focused mainly on temperate zones,
where the winter effects are greatest, potentially causing over-estimation
of  the  reduced  burden  attributable  to  climate  change  (e.g.  Martens
1998a). More analyses of temperaturemortality relationships are there-
fore required in tropical developing countries.

Such studies should attempt to estimate formally the degree to which
adaptation may decrease mortality, and to which observed associations
between  climate  and  mortality  reflect  displaced  rather  than  additional
deaths.  Finally,  there  is  a  need  for  greater  investigation  of  the  health
burden  of  morbidity  associated  with  temperature  extremes,  including,
for example, inability to work in extreme temperatures.

Diarrhoeal disease

3.7
Diarrhoeal  diseases  are  highly  sensitive  to  climate,  showing  seasonal 
variations in numerous sites (Drasar et al. 1978). This observation is sup-
ported by regression analyses of the effects of seasonal and longer-term
variation in a limited number of sites (Checkley et al. 2000; Singh et al.
2001). The results of a literature search on the associations between diar-
rhoeal  disease  and  climate  are  shown  in  Appendix  B,  Table  B.2.  The
climate-sensitivity  of  diarrhoeal  disease  is  consistent  with  observations
of  the  direct  effects  of  climate  variables  on  the  causative  agents.  Tem-
perature and relative humidity have a direct influence on the rate of repli-
cation  of  bacterial  and  protozoan  pathogens,  and  on  the  survival  of
enteroviruses in the environment (Blaser et al. 1995). Rainfall may affect
the  frequency  and  level  of  contamination  of  drinking  water  (Curriero 
et al. 2001).

Quantitative relationships can be defined between climate variations
and  incidence,  which  can  in  turn  be  directly  linked  to  the  outputs  of
global climate change models. There are, however, challenges and uncer-
tainties in estimating the magnitude of effects.

 The  sites  from  which  these  relationships  were  defined  cover  only  a
small part of the spectrum of global climate variation. Different rela-
tionships may apply at higher or lower temperatures.

 The  relative  importance  of  different  pathogens  and  modes  of 
transmission (e.g. via water, food, insects or humanhuman contact)
varies between locations, and is heavily influenced by level of sanita-
tion (Black and Lanata 1995). As the pathogens are known to vary
in their response to climate (e.g. Cook et al. 1990; Chaudhury et al.
1996), this will cause uncertainty in extrapolating temperature rela-
tionships from local studies to other regions with different levels of
development.

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1571

 Pathogens  vary  in  the  severity  of  clinical  symptoms,  and  the  likeli-
hood that they will be reported to health services (e.g. Wheeler et al.
1999).  Therefore,  climatedisease  relationships  derived  only  from
passive  reporting  may  differ  from  those  based  on  other  methods  of
surveillance.

 While several studies describe climate effects on particular diarrhoea
pathogens  (e.g.  Eberhard  et  al.  1999;  Konno  et  al.  1983;  Purohit 
et al. 1998), these cannot be used directly to estimate effects on diar-
rhoeal disease without information on: (i) their relative contribution
to overall disease incidence, and (ii) equivalent data on climate sensi-
tivity and relative prevalence for all other diarrhoea pathogens.

 Despite convincing evidence on the effect of extreme rainfall on water-
borne  outbreaks  of  diarrhoea,  even  in  highly  developed  countries
(Curriero et al. 2001), this cannot easily be generalized to the total
burden of diarrhoeal disease without information on the relative con-
tribution of such outbreaks to overall diarrhoea incidence.

 Rainfall effects on overall diarrhoea (where observed) are non-linear,

and cannot easily be extrapolated to other regions.

In order to minimize these uncertainties, we restricted our estimates
to the effect of increasing temperatures on the incidence of all-cause diar-
rhoea reported to health services (i.e. without attempting to make sepa-
rate estimates for different pathogens, transmission routes, severities, or
for  the  more  complex  associations  with  rainfall).  There  are  important
residual  uncertainties  related  to  the  extrapolation  of  temperature  rela-
tionships from specific study sites to others with different temperature
regimes and levels of development, and climate effects on reported diar-
rhoea compared to the true burden of disease. Projections of increasing
frequency of extreme wet seasons are very large (e.g. two to five times
increase  in  the  regions  analysed;  Palmer  and  Ralsanen  2002),  and
extreme  precipitation  is  associated  with  increased  diarrhoea  in  both
developed  (Curriero  et  al.  2001)  and  developing  (Singh  et  al.  2001) 
countries. 

Graded maps of 3.75 longitude by 2.5 latitude resolution showing
the change in temperature under the alternative scenarios were overlaid
with  0.5 0.5 resolution  maps  of  predicted  population  distributions
for  the  2020s  and  2050s  in  a  GIS.  The  GIS  was  used  to  calculate  the
average change in exposure (temperature) for each population grid-cell.
Although  seasonality  of  diarrhoeal  disease  is  well  recognized,  the
quantitative  relationship  between  climate  and  overall  diarrhoea  inci-
dence  has  only  been  explicitly  measured  in  two  studies.  Both  studies
described  relationships  with  all-cause  diarrhoea,  that  is,  specific
pathogens were not differentiated. Checkley et al. (2000) used time-series
analysis to correlate measurements of temperature and relative humid-
ity  against  daily  hospital  admissions  at  a  single  paediatric  diarrhoeal

1572

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

Figure 20.4 Hospitalizations for diarrhoea (upper line) correspond closely

with temperature (lower line) at a clinic in Lima, Peru 

a
e
o
h
r
r
a
d
 
r
o

i

i

f
 
s
n
o
s
s
m
d
A

i

)

C


t

(
 
e
r
u
a
r
e
p
m
e
T

80

60

40

20

0

26

24

23

20

18

16

14

Shaded region corresponds to the 19971998 El Nino event.

Note:
Source: Checkley et al. (2000).

disease clinic in Lima, Peru (Figure 20.4) for just under 6 years. A total
of  57 331  admissions  were  recorded  during  the  study.  The  analysis
showed  a  4%  (95%  CI  25%)  increase  in  admissions  for  each  degree
centigrade increase in temperature during the hotter months, and a 12%
(95% CI 1014%) per degree centigrade increase in the cooler months,
averaging at an 8% (95% CI 79%) per degree centigrade increase over
the  course  of  the  study.  During  the  19971998  El  Nino  period  there 
was an additional increase in admissions above that expected on the basis
of pre-El Nino temperature relationships, but no association with rela-
tive  humidity  independent  of  temperature.  No  rainfall  during  that
period.

In the Checkley et al. study, exposure (climate) data were recorded at
local meteorological stations, and can be considered to have negligible
measurement error at the population level. The analysis independently
controlled for seasonal variations and long-term trends, imparting high
confidence  to  the  observed  effect  of  temperature  on  the  outcome
recorded. The positive correlation with temperature is also biologically
plausible, as a high proportion of diarrhoea cases in many tropical devel-
oping countries are caused by bacteria, entamoeba and protozoa (Black

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1573

and Lanata 1995), which are favoured by high temperatures. The prin-
ciple  limitations  of  the  study  by  Checkley  et  al.  are  that  the  outcome
recorded may not be representative of climate effects on: (i) less severe
disease (i.e. not requiring hospitalization) or more severe disease (diar-
rhoeal deaths), or (ii) disease in adults rather than children.

Singh  et  al.  (2001)  used  similar  time-series  analyses  to  correlate
monthly reported incidence of diarrhoea throughout Fiji against varia-
tions  in  temperature  and  rainfall,  after  allowing  for  the  effects  of  sea-
sonal  variation  and  long-term  trend.  The  study  covered  the  period
between 1978 and 1998, with an average of some 1000 reported cases
for  each  of  the  228  study  months.  Reported  incidence  increased  by
approximately  3%  (95%  CI  1.25.0%)  for  each  degree  centigrade
increase in temperature, by 2% (95% CI 1.52.3%) per unit increase in
rainfall  above  average  rainfall  conditions  (5 105 kg/m2 per  min),  and
by 8% per unit decrease below average conditions. The pattern is sup-
ported by a positive geographical correlation between temperature and
incidence in 18 Pacific Island countries (Singh et al. 2001). Climate mea-
surements were from a 2.5 2.5 cell of a global gridded data set cor-
responding to Fiji. The use of monthly averages of climate data from this
large geographical area may not have reflected the full range of climate
exposures of the population; this would have introduced random error
and  decreased  sensitivity.  Low  rainfall  may  force  use  of  contaminated
water, while high rainfall may contaminate water through flooding. The
major limitations of this study are lack of a clear clinical or laboratory
definition for diarrhoea, and lack of information on the age distribution
of cases.

We are not aware of any similar studies of climate effects on all-cause
diarrhoea in developed regions, although studies have been carried out
on  some  subsets  of  total  incidence.  Bentham  (1997)  showed  that  the 
incidence  of  food  poisoning,  usually  caused  by  bacteria,  increased  by
approximately 9% per degree centigrade in England and Wales. Konno
et  al.  (1983)  demonstrated  a  non-linear  inverse  relationship  between
rotavirus infection and temperature in Japan. The relative importance of
pathogens that thrive at lower temperatures appears to be greater in pop-
ulations with higher standards of living, who have access to clean water
and sanitation and for whom there is no clear and consistent evidence
for peaks in all-cause diarrhoea in warmer months. This is in contrast
to the situation of less well-off populations, where diarrhoea is usually
more common in warmer, wetter months, as well demonstrated by clear
summer  peaks  of  diarrhoea  in  black,  but  not  white,  infants  in  Johan-
nesburg during the 1970s (Robins-Browne 1984).

For this assessment we defined developing countries as those with per
capita incomes lower than the richer of the two study countries (Fiji) in
the  year  2000approximately  US$ 6000/year  in  1990  US  dollars.  For
such countries, we applied a doseresponse relationship of 5% increase
in diarrhoea incidence per degree centigrade increase in temperature, to

1574

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

both sexes and all age groups. This is consistent with the relationships
derived from the two studies described above. We chose 5% rather than
the  arithmetic  mean  of  the  constants  from  the  two  studies  (5.5%)  for
two reasons: (i) to avoid giving a false impression of precision based on
only two estimates, each with their own confidence intervals, and (ii) in
order to be conservative.

Although the confidence intervals around the estimates from the indi-
vidual studies are relatively small, these clearly cover only a small range
of climatic and socioeconomic environments. As described above, Check-
ley et al. (2000) showed that even in a single socioeconomic setting the
temperature dependence of diarrhoeal disease may vary across the tem-
perature range or, less plausibly, with non-climatic seasonal variations.
This  introduces  uncertainty  when  extrapolating  such  a  single  relation-
ship.  There  is  also  potential  bias:  if  the  temperature-responsiveness  is
indeed  greater  at  low  temperatures,  extrapolation  of  an  average  value
will tend to underestimate effects in areas that are on average colder, and
overestimate  in  hotter  regions.  However,  the  average  annual  tempera-
tures experienced by the residents of the areas to which we extrapolated
this  relationship  was  20.3C,  as  calculated  by  averaging  the  tempera-
tures in each 1 1grid-cell weighted by the population. This is in the
mid-range of the temperatures experienced throughout the year in Lima
(1626C), and cooler than those in the capital of Fiji (2327C) (World
Climate  2002).  Our  extrapolation  tended  towards  being  conservative,
but with significant uncertainty. Therefore, we place a wide uncertainty
range (010%) on this value.

As there are no such studies published for developed regions, we made
the  assumption  that  overall  diarrhoea  incidence  in  richer  countries  is
insensitive to climate change, that is, 0% (-5 to +5%) change per degree
centigrade  temperature  change.  Relative  risks  for  each  country  under
each  scenario  were  calculated  by  multiplying  the  projected  increase  in
temperature by the relevant exposureresponse value. The quoted esti-
mate for each subregion is the population-weighted average of the rela-
tive risks for each country in the subregion (Table 20.9). In addition to
changes  in  baseline  diarrhoeal  disease  over  time,  we  assumed  that  the
climate sensitivity of diarrhoea in developing countries will decrease as
they become better off. For projections of relative risks for years after
2000,  we  used  projections  of  future  changes  in  GDP  (WHO/EIP/GPE,
unpublished data, 2000) to apply the relationship used abovethat is,
overall  diarrhoea  incidence  does  not  respond  to  temperature  in  any
country that attains a per capita GDP of at least US$ 6000/year. Relative
risks for each time point were then calculated as above.

The  quantitative  estimates  in  this  analysis  were  highly  sensitive  to 
the  exposureresponse  relationship,  around  which  there  is  substantial
uncertainty  due  to  the  very  small  number  of  analysed  time-series. 
The  estimates  could  be  rapidly  improved  by  analysis  of  climate 
exposureresponse  relationships  from  sites  from  a  wider  climatic  and

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1575

h
g
H

i

0
1
1

.

3
1
1

.

6
1
1

.

1
1
1

.

3
1
1

.

6
1
1

.

6
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

6
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

2
1
1

.

3
1
1

.

9
1
1

.

0
3
0
2

w
o
L

9
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

5
9
0

.

4
9
0

.

3
9
0

.

5
9
0

.

4
9
0

.

2
9
0

.

6
9
0

.

6
9
0

.

5
9
0

.

4
9
0

.

4
9
0

.

1
9
0

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c

i

d
M

5
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

h
g
H

i

8
0
1

.

1
1
1

.

4
1
1

.

8
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

3
1
1

.

5
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

0
1
1

.

5
1
1

.

0
2
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

9
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

6
9
0

.

6
9
0

.

4
9
0

.

6
9
0

.

6
9
0

.

4
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

7
9
0

.

7
9
0

.

5
9
0

.

5
9
0

.

3
9
0

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

h
g
H

i

6
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

0
1
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

9
9
0

.

7
9
0

.

7
9
0

.

6
9
0

.

7
9
0

.

7
9
0

.

6
9
0

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

9
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

h
g
H

i

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

5
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

8
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

7
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

7
9
0

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

9
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

h
g
H

i

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

1
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

8
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

9
9
0

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

h
g
H

i

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

0
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

9
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

9
9
0

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

a
e
t
a
m

i
l

C

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

i

n
o
g
e
r
b
u
S

D
-
R
F
A

E
-
R
F
A

A
-
R
M
A

B
-
R
M
A

D
-
R
M
A

B
-
R
M
E

D
-
R
M
E

 
o
t
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
s
o
i
r
a
n
e
c
s
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
a
 
r
o

f
 
a
e
o
h
r
r
a
i
d
 
f
o
 
k
s
i
r
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
e
h
t
 
f
o
 
s
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e
 
h
g
i
h
 
d
n
a
 
w
o

l

,
l
a
r
t
n
e
C

.

9
0
2
 
e
b
a
T

l

e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
e
n

i
l

e
s
a
b

1576

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

e
n

i
l

e
s
a
b
 
o
t
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
s
o
i
r
a
n
e
c
s
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
a
 
r
o

f
 
a
e
o
h
r
r
a
i
d
 
f
o
 
k
s
i
r
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
e
h
t
 
f
o
 
s
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e
 
h
g
i
h
 
d
n
a
 
w
o

l

,
l
a
r
t
n
e
C

.

9
0
2
 
e
b
a
T

l

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c

h
g
H

i

6
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

3
1
1

.

5
1
1

.

9
1
1

.

5
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

0
3
0
2

w
o
L

4
9
0

.

4
9
0

.

2
9
0

.

4
9
0

.

4
9
0

.

3
9
0

.

4
9
0

.

4
9
0

.

2
9
0

.

5
9
0

.

4
9
0

.

2
9
0

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

5
9
0

.

5
9
0

.

3
9
0

.

5
9
0

.

5
9
0

.

2
9
0

.

i

d
M

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

h
g
H

i

5
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

2
1
1

.

5
1
1

.

4
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

0
2
0
2

 

w
o
L

5
9
0

.

5
9
0

.

4
9
0

.

7
9
0

.

7
9
0

.

6
9
0

.

6
9
0

.

6
9
0

.

5
9
0

.

7
9
0

.

5
9
0

.

4
9
0

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

6
9
0

.

6
9
0

.

4
9
0

.

6
9
0

.

6
9
0

.

3
9
0

.

i

d
M

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

h
g
H

i

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

3
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

0
1
0
2

 

w
o
L

7
9
0

.

7
9
0

.

6
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

7
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

7
9
0

.

6
9
0

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

7
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

6
9
0

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

h
g
H

i

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

5
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

8
9
0

.

7
9
0

.

7
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

0
0
1

.

9
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

8
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

7
9
0

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

h
g
H

i

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

1
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

8
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

9
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

h
g
H

i

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

0
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

8
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

9
9
0

.

9
9
0

.

8
9
0

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

e
t
a
m

i
l

C

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

i

n
o
g
e
r
b
u
S

A
-
R
U
E

B
-
R
U
E

C
-
R
U
E

B
-
R
A
E
S

D
-
R
A
E
S

A
-
R
P
W

B
-
R
P
W

.
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e
 
d
e
t
a
g
i
t
i

m
n
u

=
 
4

,

0
5
7
s

=
 
3

,

0
5
5
s

=
 
2

a

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1577

socioeconomic spectrum. Future studies should also explicitly measure
the  degree  to  which  economic  development  and  improved  levels  of 
sanitation  influence  vulnerability  to  the  effects  of  climate  variation  on
diarrhoeal disease.

Malnutrition

3.8
Multiple  biological  and  social  factors  affect  the  incidence  of  malnutri-
tion, but one of the fundamental determinants is the availability of staple
foods.  Climate  change  may  affect  this  through  the  balance  of  the
(broadly  negative)  effects  of  changes  in  temperature  and  precipitation,
and  (broadly  positive)  effects  of  higher  CO2 levels  on  yields  of  major
food  crops  (e.g.  IPCC  1996;  Rosenzweig  and  Parry  1994;  see  also 
Appendix B, Table B.4). These effects are likely to vary markedly with
geography:  productivity  is  projected  to  increase  in  higher-latitude  pro-
ducers such as Canada and the United States, but to decrease closer to
the equator. The global food trade system may be able to absorb these
effects  at  the  global  level.  However,  climate  change  can  be  expected 
to  have  significant  effects  on  food  poverty  in  some  regions,  owing  to 
variation in both productivity and in economic capacity to cope (Parry
et al. 1999).

Crop  models  have  been  validated  at  124  sites  in  18  countries  over 
a wide range of environments (e.g. Otter-Nacke et al. 1986). However,
estimation  of  changes  in  food  availability  (and  by  inference  malnutri-
tion) requires additional analyses of the geographical variation in effects
on  food  production,  and  of  food  trade  patterns.  Only  one  modelling
group  (Parry  et  al.  1999)  has  integrated  a  basic  physiological  model 
of climate change effects on region-specific crop production with food
trade  models,  in  order  to  make  projections  of  the  numbers  of  people
actually  at  risk  of  hunger.  All  results  presented  here  were  based  on 
the model described in Parry et al. (1999) and other work by the same
group.

As for other potential effects of climate change, there is considerable
uncertainty over the degree to which current relationships, such as those
between climate and crops, and food trade systems will remain constant
over time. The most important uncertainties probably relate to the ability
of the world food trade system to adapt to changes in production (Dyson
1999;  Waterlow  et  al.  1998).  Although  these  are  the  most  complete
models  currently  available,  they  do  not  describe  the  likely  effect  of
climate change on more complex pathways, such as animal husbandry,
or  the  relative  importance  of  fruit  and  vegetable  production.  These  in
turn  may  affect  micronutrient  (e.g.  vitamin  A,  iodine,  iron  and  zinc) 
deficiency.

Global  distribution  of  temperature,  rainfall  and  CO2 were  mapped 
for  each  of  the  alternative  scenarios,  as  described  above.  Climate
doseresponse relationships have been defined for yields of major grain
cereals  and  soybean,  which  account  for  85%  of  world  cereal  exports.

1578

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

Effects  of  temperature  and  precipitation,  and  the  beneficial  effects  of
higher CO2 levels, have been defined using the IBSNAT-ICASA dynamic
crop  growth  models  (IBSNAT  1989).  The  exposure  distributions
described  above  were  applied  to  these  crop  growth  models,  and  the
derived yield functions were extrapolated to other crops and regions on
the basis of agro-climatic similarity.

These  crop  yield  estimates  are  used  as  inputs  for  the  Basic  Linked
System  world  food  trade  model.  This  consists  of  a  linked  series  of  40
national  and  regional  food  models,  representing  food  production,  the
effects of market forces and government policies on prices and trade, and
trends in agricultural, economic and technological conditions over time
(see Fischer et al. 1988 for a full description).

The  model  is  represented  schematically  in  Figure  20.5.  Principal 

characteristics of this model are:

 no major changes in the political or economic context of world food

trade or in food production technology;

 population  growth  to  occur  following  the  World  Bank  mid-range 

estimate (World Bank 1994) i.e. 10.7 billion by the 2080s;

 GDP to accumulate as projected by EMF14 (Energy Modeling Forum

1995);

 a 50% trade liberalization in agriculture is introduced gradually by

2020.

The model results in an estimation of national food availability. This
is  used  to  generate  an  estimate  of  per  capita  food  availability  in  each
country,  assuming  that  this  food  is  distributed  among  the  population 
following  a  skewed  (beta)  distribution.  The  final  model  output  is  the
number or proportion of the population in each subregion who do not
have access to sufficient food to maintain a basal metabolic rate of 1.4,
which is the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
(FAO) definition of undernourishment (FAO 1987).

The  model  generates  outputs  for  continents  made  up  principally  of
vulnerable  developing  countries  (thus  excluding  China  and  the  former
Soviet Union, countries in North America, and in western and eastern
Europe). As these model continents do not map directly on to the sub-
regions,  we  generated  estimates  for  each  subregion  by  calculating  the
proportion of the population that lives within each continent in the food
availability model. Where more than 90% of the subregion population
live within a single model continent, we quoted the model estimate for
that  continent.  Otherwise  an  average  was  calculated,  weighted  by  the
distribution of the subregion population among the various continents.
While  the  subregions  mapped  reasonably  well  on  to  the  climate
change/food  availability  model  continents,  the  aggregation  meant  that
some  of  the  geographical  variation  in  vulnerability  was  lost.  Most
notably, despite severe problems in some countries, EUR-C was assumed

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1579

Figure 20.5 Key elements of the crop yields and world food trade study

Trace gases 

GCMs

Observed 
climate 

Climate change 

scenarios 

Sensitivity tests 

CO2 effects 

Crop models: wheat, 
rice, maize, soybean

Farm level 
adaptations

Crop yield by site and 

scenario

ET, irrigation, season 

length

Aggregation of site 

results 

Agro-ecological zone 

analysis

Yield functions by

region

Yield = f (T, P, CO2) 

Technology 
projections

Economic
growth rates 

Adaptations

Yield change estimates 
commodity group and 

country/region 

World food trade model

Population 
trends

Greenhouse 
policies 

Economic consequences

Shifts in trade

Incidence of food poverty

Evapotranspiration.

ET
Source: Rosenzweig et al. (1993).

1580

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

not to suffer from malnutrition as it lies within the developed Euro-
pean continent of the food availability model.

Preliminary analysis correlating estimates for the 1990s at the level of
the model regions (data not shown) indicated that the model output was
positively related to more direct measures of malnutrition, such as the
incidence of underweight, and stunting and wasting in children aged <5
years, as measured by the WHO Global Database on Child Growth and
Malnutrition  (WHO  2002).  The  aggregation  of  the  food  availability
model means that this correlation was based on only a small number of
independent  data  points.  We  therefore  did  not  attempt  to  make  any
quantitative estimate of these relationships. Instead, the relative risk of
the incidence of energy shortfall (Table 20.10) was interpreted as being
directly proportional to the relative risk of suffering from the risk factor
underweight. The relative risk estimates were therefore applied to all
diseases  affected  by  the  underweight  risk  factor  (see  chapter  2).  These
include diarrhoea and malaria. We therefore assumed that these diseases
are affected in two distinct ways by climate changethrough meteoro-
logical effects on the pathogens and vectors, and through increased sus-
ceptibility of the human population due to undernutrition.

In  common  with  most  climate  change  impact  assessments,  the  pub-
lished studies do not quote uncertainties around the various relationships
in  the  model,  either  separately  or  aggregated.  Small  variations  in  the
initial conditions of a single climate model (the HadCM2 ensemble) gen-
erated only slight variations in projections of crop production and inci-
dence  of  food  shortfall.  Using  a  different  climate  model  (HadCM3),
however,  generated  markedly  different  projections  (Parry  et  al.  1999).
These comparisons relate to only part of the possible error, as they do
not  address  uncertainties  in  the  trade  and  social  components  of  the
model.

From the published descriptions of the model, there is no reason to
assume  that  the  estimates  generated  were  systematically  biased  either
upward or downward. In the absence of formal sensitivity analyses of
the  complete  model,  however,  uncertainty  estimates  are  arbitrary.  We
presented the relative risks generated above as mid-range estimates, with
the  upper  and  lower  range  covering  a  complete  adaptation  to  any
changes in agricultural output (i.e. no change in risk), to a doubling of
the estimate of the relative risk calculated above. However, this uncer-
tainty range should be treated with caution. Priorities for the future are
investigations of:

 variation  in  output  when  using  a  wider  range  of  food  production

models as inputs to the food trade/availability models;

 sensitivity of estimates to the various climate scenarios;

 sensitivity  analyses  to  estimate  uncertainty  around  the  exposure

response relationships;

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1581

h
g
H

i

6
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

2
2
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

2
2
1

.

0
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

3
1
1

.

0
0
1

.

5
1
1

.

2
2
1

.

6
1
1

.

0
3
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c

i

d
M

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

1
1
1

.

0
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

1
1
1

.

0
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

1
1
1

.

8
0
1

.

h
g
H

i

6
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

0
2
1

.

1
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

0
2
1

.

1
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

2
1
1

.

1
0
1

.

3
1
1

.

0
2
1

.

5
1
1

.

0
2
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

0
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

0
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

7
0
1

.

h
g
H

i

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

3
1
1

.

0
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

3
1
1

.

0
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

3
1
1

.

0
1
1

.

0
1
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

h
g
H

i

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

0
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

0
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

7
0
1

.

5
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

h
g
H

i

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

1
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

h
g
H

i

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

0
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

a
e
t
a
m

i
l

C

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

i

n
o
g
e
r
b
u
S

D
-
R
F
A

E
-
R
F
A

A
-
R
M
A

B
-
R
M
A

D
-
R
M
A

B
-
R
M
E

D
-
R
M
E

o
t
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
s
o
i
r
a
n
e
c
s
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
a
 
r
o

f
 
n
o
i
t
i
r
t
u
n
l
a
m

 
f
o
 
k
s
i
r
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
e
h
t
 
f
o
 
s
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e
 
h
g
i
h
 
d
n
a
 
w
o

l

,
l
a
r
t
n
e
C

.

0
1
0
2
 
e
b
a
T

l

e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
e
n

i
l

e
s
a
b

1582

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

h
g
H

i

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

9
1
1

.

1
0
1

.

5
2
1

.

5
3
1

.

3
3
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
3
0
2

 

w
o
L

i

d
M

h
g
H

i

0
2
0
2

 

w
o
L

i

d
M

h
g
H

i

0
1
0
2

 

w
o
L

i

d
M

h
g
H

i

5
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

i

d
M

h
g
H

i

1
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

i

d
M

h
g
H

i

0
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
1
1

.

7
1
1

.

7
1
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

9
9
0

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

8
1
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
2
1

.

1
3
1

.

1
3
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
1
1

.

6
1
1

.

5
1
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

9
9
0

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

2
1
1

.

1
0
1

.

5
1
1

.

1
2
1

.

0
2
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

0
1
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
1
1

.

6
1
1

.

5
1
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

2
1
1

.

1
1
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

0
1
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

a
e
t
a
m

i
l

C

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

i

n
o
g
e
r
b
u
S

A
-
R
U
E

B
-
R
U
E

C
-
R
U
E

B
-
R
A
E
S

D
-
R
A
E
S

A
-
R
P
W

B
-
R
P
W

o
t
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
s
o
i
r
a
n
e
c
s
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
a
 
r
o

f
 
n
o
i
t
i
r
t
u
n
l
a
m

 
f
o
 
k
s
i
r
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
e
h
t
 
f
o
 
s
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e
 
h
g
i
h
 
d
n
a
 
w
o

l

,
l
a
r
t
n
e
C

.

0
1
0
2
 
e
b
a
T

l

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
e
n

i
l

e
s
a
b

.
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e
 
d
e
t
a
g
i
t
i

m
n
u

=
 
4

,

0
5
7
s

=
 
3

,

0
5
5
s

=
 
2

a

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1583

 back-casting of climate/hunger relationships for verification of model

accuracy;

 a finer geographical (e.g. country level) breakdown of the outputs of

malnutrition models;

 correlations  between  model  outputs  and  health  outcomes  at  a  high

spatial resolution; and

 investigation of the synergistic effects of water availability and poverty

on malnutrition.

3.9

Disasters caused by extreme weather events: 
coastal floods, inland floods and landslides

Natural disasters are ultimately a function of both the average and degree
of  variability  of  weather  conditions,  which  are  further  modulated  by
multiple aspects of population vulnerability such as topography, housing
quality  and  early  warning  systems  (Alexander  1993;  McMichael  et  al.
1996). They are therefore likely to be directly affected by the observed
and predicted trend towards increasingly variable weather.

In addition to the axiomatic link between extreme weather events and
weather-related  deaths  and  injuries,  there  is  strong  statistical  evidence
that long-term weather cycles (e.g. the ENSO quasi-periodic cycle) cor-
relate with incidence of deaths and injuries attributable to natural disas-
ters (Bouma et al. 1997a; Kovats et al. 1999). The evidence for increased
frequency of different categories of extreme events in the past, and the
likelihood of changes in the future (Table 20.1), has been strengthened
by  recent  demonstrations  of  increases  in  the  frequency  of  large  floods
during the 20th century (Milly et al. 2002). This evidence is reinforced
by projections of several-fold increases in the frequency of what are cur-
rently considered extreme wet seasons, for various regions over the world,
using a range of climate models (Palmer and Ralsanen 2002).

Based on this, we presented estimates of consequences of increasing
frequency of coastal flooding caused by sea-level rise, and inland flood-
ing and landslides caused by increased frequency of extreme precipita-
tion  events,  which  are  described  by  IPCC  as  very  likely  (9099%
probability) to increase in many areas under climate change. We did not
attempt  to  estimate  the  effects  of  changing  frequency  and  intensity  of
wind  storms,  owing  to  inconsistencies  between  models  (IPCC  2001b)
and a lack of quantitative projections of changes in exposure under dif-
ferent climate change scenarios. Our estimates excluded the direct effect
of  thermal  extremes  (e.g.  heatstroke,  increased  risk  of  cardiovascular
disease), which are dealt with elsewhere. We also excluded any potential
longer-term  health  consequences  arising  through  mechanisms  such  as
population displacement, economic damage to public health infrastruc-
ture,  increased  risk  of  infectious  disease  epidemics  and  mental  illness
(Jovel 1989; Menne et al. 1999; WHO 1992).

1584

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

Climate change is likely to have different effects on the frequency of
coastal versus inland floods. Changes in the frequency of coastal floods
were defined using published models (Hoozemans and Hulsburgen 1995;
Nicholls et al. 1999) that estimate change in sea level for each climate
scenario. These changes were applied to topographical and population
distribution  maps  to  estimate  the  change  in  incidence  of  exposure  to
flooding by subregion. The predictions did not account for changes in
frequency of storm surges. The global model used here has been shown
to be relatively accurate in validations against more detailed assessments
at the national level (summarized in Nicholls et al. 1999).

Inland floods and landslides are not affected by sea-level rise, but will
be influenced by any increase in the frequency of intense precipitation.
Despite the clear causal link, this relationship is poorly researched (Pielke
1999), and has not previously been modelled as a health exposure. There
are  no  published  analyses  of  global  relationships  between  intensity  of
precipitation, the likelihood of a declared disaster, or the magnitude of
health consequences. Clearly, at the local level the frequency of health
effects  will  be  determined  by  the  temporal  distribution  of  rainfall  (i.e.
not only by the average amount of rain over an extended period, but by
the  peak  amount  falling  in  a  week,  day  or  hour),  and  modulated  by
topography and social aspects of vulnerability (Kundzewicz and Kacz-
marek  2000).  However,  in  the  absence  of  detailed  data  on  these  vari-
ables  and  their  effects,  we  made  the  a  priori assumption  that  flood
frequency is proportional to the frequency with which monthly rainfall
exceeds  the  1  in  10  year  limit  (i.e.  upper  99.2%  CI)  of  the  baseline
climate. We also assumed that determinants of vulnerability are distrib-
uted  evenly  throughout  the  population  of  a  subregionso  that  the
change in relative risk of health consequences is proportional to the per
capita  change  in  risk  of  experiencing  such  an  extreme  event.  For  each 
1 1 population grid-cell, we estimated the 99.2% upper CI for the
baseline climate using means and standard deviations derived from the
19611990 averages for each month of the year. Using equivalent data
for  future  scenarios  and  time  points,  we  estimated  the  change  in  fre-
quency with which such a 1 in 10 year event occurs.

The difference (in standard deviates of the new distribution) between
the new mean and the previously defined 1 in 10 year limit is given
by:

(
(

X
1

+

2 41
.



u
1

) -

X u

2

)

2

where X1, u1= mean and intra-annual deviation from 19611990 and X2,
u2= mean and intra-annual deviation under new scenario.

The probability that this difference will be exceeded in any one month
under  the  new  distribution  was  taken  from  probability  tables.  This 
was divided by the frequency of occurrence under the baseline scenario
(= 0.008) to give the relative frequency of exceeding the 1 in 10 year limit

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1585

for each future scenario. Results were weighted by the population in each
cell,  and  averaged  across  the  countries  in  each  subregion.  The  final
measure  of  exposure  was  therefore  the  relative  frequency  with  which
each person in a subregion experiences 1 in 10 year rainfall events.

The  process  of  estimating  the  disease  burden  of  this  change  in  fre-
quency differs from that for other climate-sensitive health outcomes, as
flood effects do not have a specific GBD code. Relative risks should there-
fore be applied to estimates of health consequences such as deaths and
injuries attributable to these climate events under baseline climate (i.e.
rather than change in total incidence of this outcome).

The EM-DAT database records numbers of deaths and injuries attri-
buted to each natural disaster reported by the media or aid agencies in
the last 100 years. Disasters are defined as events that resulted in at least
one of the following conditions: (i) >10 people killed, (ii) >200 injured,
(iii) a call for international assistance. Although this is the best compre-
hensive  data  source  available  on  the  current  health  consequences  of
natural disasters, all such sources may be subject to underreporting (Noji
1997).  Estimates  of  attributable  burden  of  disease  derived  from  these
figures are therefore conservative.

Individual events in the database were classified as inland or coastal
floods on the basis of geography, or descriptions of events in the data-
base. Total numbers of deaths for each class of event were summed for
subregions. Although the EM-DAT database also records the number of
injuries in flooding events, these are not included in this assessment, as
they are considered particularly unreliable for floods (Guha-Sapir, per-
sonal  communication,  2002).  The  effects  of  events  that  could  not  be
identified as inland or coastal were assigned in proportion to the distri-
bution of consequences of classified events in each subregion. The annual
incidence of flood death under baseline climate conditions was estimated
by dividing the annual average over the last 20 years by the subregional
population in 1990.

These  baseline  incidence  rates  alter  over  time,  depending  on  the
balance  between  factors  that  decrease  vulnerability  (particularly  im-
proving flood defences as populations become richer), and those which
increase  vulnerability  (particularly  increasing  population  density  in
coastal zones and other flood-prone areas). Baseline estimates for future
years  were  therefore  adjusted  as  far  as  possible  for  these  effects.  For
coastal flooding, the effects of projected changes in population distribu-
tion  in  relation  to  coastline  and  improving  coastal  defences  in  line 
with GDP were incorporated in the model of Nicholls et al. (1999). The
baseline estimates of the incidence of deaths and injuries in years after
1990  were  therefore  scaled  by  the  ratio  of  the  model  projections  for
numbers  of  people  flooded  in  each  year  compared  to  that  in  1990 
(Table 20.11).

Such vulnerability effects have not been explicitly modelled for inland
flooding.  However,  Yohe  and  Tol  (2002)  have  carried  out  a  cross-

1586

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

Table 20.11 Annual incidence of deaths per 10 000 000 population

caused by coastal floods, in the absence of climate change

Subregion

19801999

2000

2001

2005

2010

2020

2030

AFR-D
AFR-E
AMR-A
AMR-B
AMR-D
EMR-B
EMR-D
EUR-A
EUR-B
EUR-C
SEAR-B
SEAR-D
WPR-A
WPR-B

0
0
0
2.00
0.40
0
0
0
0
0.10
0.10
1.20
0.10
0.90

0
0
0
1.59
0.41
0
0
0
0
0.11
0.11
1.39
0.10
0.98

0
0
0
1.56
0.41
0
0
0
0
0.11
0.11
1.40
0.10
0.99

0
0
0
1.43
0.41
0
0
0
0
0.12
0.11
1.47
0.10
1.03

0
0
0
1.29
0.41
0
0
0
0
0.12
0.12
1.54
0.10
1.07

0
0
0
1.08
0.41
0
0
0
0
0.14
0.12
1.69
0.11
1.15

0
0
0
0.96
0.34
0
0
0
0
0.15
0.11
1.78
0.11
1.22

Source: EM-DAT (2002) for the period19801999. Estimates are based on changing GDP for other time

points (see text).

sectional analysis of the effect of per capita income on the incidence of
death due to all natural disasters (as reported in the EM-DAT database)
for the period 19902000. They conclude that increasing wealth has a
protective effect, best described by:

)
Ln  proportion of population killed decade

(
=

4 7271 0 3858
.

.

-

(
)
  Ln GDP per capita

The  effect  of  income  is  marginally  non-significant  at  the  5%  level 
(P<0.07), generic to all natural disasters and does not take account of
the  magnitude  of  the  physical  hazard.  However,  this  is  likely  to  intro-
duce noise rather than bias in the relationship, and the relationship re-
presents the only published basis for projection of the protective effects
of economic development. The relationship is therefore applied to future
projections of GDP (WHO/EIP/GPE, unpublished data, 2000). Our pro-
jected baseline incidence of deaths for years after 1990 were scaled by
the ratio of the projections of deaths due to all natural disasters in that
year divided by the estimate for 1990 (Table 20.12).

Some evidence from studies of a small number of earthquakes (Beinin
1981) and famines (Rivers 1982) suggests that women and young chil-
dren are more vulnerable than men to the acute effects of natural disas-
ters. However, there are insufficient data to derive subregional estimates

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1587

Table 20.12 Annual incidence of deaths per 10 000 000 population

caused by inland floods and landslides, in the absence of
climate change

Subregion

19801999

2000

2001

2005

2010

2020

2030

AFR-D
AFR-E
AMR-A
AMR-B
AMR-D
EMR-B
EMR-D
EUR-A
EUR-B
EUR-C
SEAR-B
SEAR-D
WPR-A
WPR-B

2.7
6.5
2.2
52.2
52.1
14.9
32.2
1.3
8.9
1.2
9.9
20.3
3.7
13.8

2.7
6.6
2.1
48.4
49.0
13.8
30.9
1.2
9.2
1.4
8.2
17.7
3.3
10.6

2.7
6.6
2.1
48.1
48.7
13.7
30.6
1.2
9.1
1.4
8.1
17.5
3.3
10.4

2.7
6.5
2.0
46.6
47.2
13.4
29.5
1.1
8.7
1.3
7.5
16.5
3.0
9.6

2.6
6.4
1.9
44.8
45.4
13.1
28.2
1.1
8.2
1.2
6.8
15.4
2.7
8.7

2.4
6.0
1.8
41.0
41.6
12.1
25.6
0.9
7.4
1.1
5.8
13.5
2.3
7.4

2.2
5.4
1.6
36.9
37.4
11.0
23.0
0.8
6.6
1.0
5.1
12.0
2.0
6.5

Source: EM-DAT (2002) for the period19801999. Estimates are based on changing GDP for other time

points (see text).

of the relative vulnerability of different age groups and sexes to the con-
sequences  of  flooding:  we  therefore  made  the  assumption,  that  all  age
groups are equally at risk.

The models presented here for coastal flooding assumed that protec-
tion  evolves  over  time  in  proportion  to  projected  increases  in  GDP. 
The  mid-range  estimates  presented  therefore  incorporated  an  effect  of
increasing  wealth,  not  only  in  the  baseline  estimates,  but  assumed  the
same proportional change in the relative risks (i.e. as described by Yohe
and  Tol  2002).  This  accounted  for  the  effect  of  increasing  wealth  not
only in reducing the likely health consequences of baseline (i.e. climate
change independent floods), but also providing better adaptive capacity
for increases driven by climate change. The mid-range estimates did not
include any further adjustments for biological/behavioural adaptation to
increased flood risk (Table 20.13).

As for other health outcomes of climate change, the only published
sensitivity analyses relate to an unmitigated emissions scenario applied
to  the  HadCM2  model  with  four  slightly  varying  sets  of  initial  condi-
tions,  and  a  comparison  with  the  same  emissions  scenario  run  on  the
HadCM3 model. These resulted in almost no difference in model outputs
over  the  time-scale  considered  in  this  assessment.  Uncertainties  in  the
model relate to the degree and manner to which individuals respond to

1588

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

h
g
H

i

0
3
0
2

 

w
o
L

9
8
1

.

6
9
1

.

9
2
2

.

5
2
1

.

7
2
1

.

5
3
1

.

5
2
1

.

7
2
1

.

8
3
1

.

1
8
2

.

3
9
2

.

4
5
3

.

7
1
6

.

2
5
6

.

8
2
8

.

6
0
2

.

3
1
2

.

0
5
2

.

2
0
5

.

6
3
5

.

2
8
6

.

2
2
1

.

4
2
1

.

2
3
1

.

6
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

5
4
1

.

8
4
1

.

4
6
1

.

9
2
2

.

8
3
2

.

2
8
2

.

7
2
1

.

8
2
1

.

7
3
1

.

1
0
2

.

9
0
2

.

6
4
2

.

i

d
M

4
4
1

.

8
4
1

.

4
6
1

.

2
1
1

.

3
1
1

.

8
1
1

.

3
1
1

.

4
1
1

.

9
1
1

.

0
9
1

.

6
9
1

.

7
2
2

.

8
5
3

.

6
7
3

.

4
6
4

.

3
5
1

.

7
5
1

.

5
7
1

.

1
0
3

.

8
1
3

.

1
9
3

.

h
g
H

i

6
2
1

.

7
2
1

.

6
3
1

.

9
1
1

.

0
2
1

.

7
2
1

.

5
2
1

.

7
2
1

.

7
3
1

.

9
6
2

.

0
8
2

.

7
3
3

.

5
5
5

.

4
8
5

.

8
3
7

.

3
0
2

.

0
1
2

.

5
4
2

.

8
8
2

.

0
0
3

.

3
6
3

.

0
2
0
2

 

w
o
L

6
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

2
4
1

.

5
4
1

.

9
5
1

.

4
1
2

.

1
2
2

.

9
5
2

.

6
2
1

.

8
2
1

.

6
3
1

.

7
4
1

.

0
5
1

.

6
6
1

.

i

d
M

3
1
1

.

4
1
1

.

8
1
1

.

9
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

3
1
1

.

2
1
1

.

3
1
1

.

8
1
1

.

4
8
1

.

0
9
1

.

8
1
2

.

7
2
3

.

2
4
3

.

9
1
4

.

2
5
1

.

5
5
1

.

2
7
1

.

4
9
1

.

0
0
2

.

2
3
2

.

h
g
H

i

1
2
1

.

3
2
1

.

0
3
1

.

7
1
1

.

8
1
1

.

3
2
1

.

6
1
1

.

7
1
1

.

4
2
1

.

4
0
2

.

1
1
2

.

6
4
2

.

5
5
4

.

8
7
4

.

7
9
5

.

3
6
1

.

7
6
1

.

8
8
1

.

8
5
2

.

8
6
2

.

1
2
3

.

0
1
0
2

 

w
o
L

5
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

6
2
1

.

8
2
1

.

6
3
1

.

9
8
1

.

4
9
1

.

4
2
2

.

6
1
1

.

7
1
1

.

2
2
1

.

9
3
1

.

2
4
1

.

5
5
1

.

i

d
M

1
1
1

.

1
1
1

.

5
1
1

.

8
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

2
1
1

.

8
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

2
1
1

.

2
5
1

.

5
5
1

.

3
7
1

.

7
7
2

.

9
8
2

.

9
4
3

.

1
3
1

.

3
3
1

.

4
4
1

.

9
7
1

.

4
8
1

.

1
1
2

.

h
g
H

i

8
1
1

.

9
1
1

.

5
2
1

.

5
1
1

.

6
1
1

.

1
2
1

.

1
1
1

.

2
1
1

.

7
1
1

.

5
7
1

.

0
8
1

.

5
0
2

.

1
9
3

.

0
1
4

.

8
0
5

.

5
4
1

.

8
4
1

.

3
6
1

.

6
3
2

.

5
4
2

.

1
9
2

.

5
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

5
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

9
1
1

.

0
2
1

.

6
2
1

.

3
7
1

.

7
7
1

.

2
0
2

.

1
1
1

.

2
1
1

.

6
1
1

.

4
3
1

.

6
3
1

.

8
4
1

.

i

d
M

9
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

3
1
1

.

7
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

6
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

8
3
1

.

0
4
1

.

3
5
1

.

5
4
2

.

5
5
2

.

4
0
3

.

2
2
1

.

4
2
1

.

1
3
1

.

8
6
1

.

3
7
1

.

6
9
1

.

h
g
H

i

5
1
1

.

6
1
1

.

1
2
1

.

3
1
1

.

4
1
1

.

8
1
1

.

7
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

2
1
1

.

4
5
1

.

7
5
1

.

5
7
1

.

0
3
3

.

5
4
3

.

3
2
4

.

2
3
1

.

4
3
1

.

5
4
1

.

4
1
2

.

1
2
2

.

9
5
2

.

1
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

4
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
1
1

.

4
1
1

.

9
1
1

.

8
5
1

.

1
6
1

.

1
8
1

.

8
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

1
1
1

.

8
2
1

.

0
3
1

.

0
4
1

.

i

d
M

7
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

1
1
1

.

6
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

7
2
1

.

9
2
1

.

8
3
1

.

5
1
2

.

3
2
2

.

2
6
2

.

6
1
1

.

7
1
1

.

2
2
1

.

7
5
1

.

1
6
1

.

0
8
1

.

h
g
H

i

4
1
1

.

5
1
1

.

0
2
1

.

2
1
1

.

3
1
1

.

7
1
1

.

6
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

8
4
1

.

1
5
1

.

8
6
1

.

4
1
3

.

8
2
3

.

0
0
4

.

9
2
1

.

1
3
1

.

0
4
1

.

7
0
2

.

4
1
2

.

0
5
2

.

0
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

4
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

2
1
1

.

3
1
1

.

7
1
1

.

3
5
1

.

7
5
1

.

5
7
1

.

7
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

7
2
1

.

8
2
1

.

8
3
1

.

i

d
M

7
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

6
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

4
2
1

.

6
2
1

.

4
3
1

.

7
0
2

.

4
1
2

.

0
5
2

.

4
1
1

.

5
1
1

.

0
2
1

.

3
5
1

.

7
5
1

.

5
7
1

.

a
e
t
a
m

i
l

C

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

i

n
o
g
e
r
b
u
S

D
-
R
F
A

E
-
R
F
A

A
-
R
M
A

B
-
R
M
A

D
-
R
M
A

B
-
R
M
E

D
-
R
M
E

 
s
o
i
r
a
n
e
c
s
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
a
 
r
o

f
 
s
d
o
o
fl
 
l
a
t
s
a
o
c
 
n

i
 
h
t
a
e
d
 
f
o
 
k
s
i
r
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
e
h
t
 
f
o
 
s
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e
 
h
g
i
h
 
d
n
a
 
w
o

l

,
l
a
r
t
n
e
C

.

3
1
0
2
 
e
b
a
T

l

e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
e
n

i
l

e
s
a
b
 
o
t
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1589

8
1
1

.

0
2
1

.

9
2
1

.

5
5
8

.

5
0
9

.

1
6
1
1

.

6
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

6
5
1

.

9
5
1

.

8
7
1

.

5
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

9
8
2

.

1
0
3

.

5
6
3

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

4
1
1

.

5
1
1

.

0
2
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

4
1
1

.

8
7
4

.

2
0
5

.

1
3
6

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

8
2
1

.

0
3
1

.

9
3
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

9
0
7

.

9
4
7

.

4
5
9

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

9
4
1

.

2
5
1

.

8
6
1

.

4
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
5
2

.

2
6
2

.

4
1
3

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
1
1

.

3
1
1

.

7
1
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

5
0
4

.

4
2
4

.

7
2
5

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
2
1

.

6
2
1

.

4
3
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
9
3

.

0
1
4

.

8
0
5

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

8
3
1

.

0
4
1

.

3
5
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

3
7
1

.

7
7
1

.

2
0
2

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

3
1
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

5
4
2

.

5
5
2

.

4
0
3

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

9
1
1

.

0
2
1

.

6
2
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
9
2

.

3
0
3

.

8
6
3

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

1
3
1

.

3
3
1

.

3
4
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

8
4
1

.

1
5
1

.

7
6
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

1
1
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

5
9
1

.

2
0
2

.

4
3
2

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

5
1
1

.

6
1
1

.

2
2
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

7
2
2

.

6
3
2

.

9
7
2

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
2
1

.

6
2
1

.

4
3
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

2
3
1

.

4
3
1

.

5
4
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

4
6
1

.

8
6
1

.

9
8
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
1
1

.

3
1
1

.

7
1
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

3
1
2

.

1
2
2

.

9
5
2

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
2
1

.

4
2
1

.

2
3
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

8
2
1

.

0
3
1

.

0
4
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

7
5
1

.

0
6
1

.

9
7
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
1
1

.

2
1
1

.

6
1
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

A
-
R
U
E

B
-
R
U
E

C
-
R
U
E

B
-
R
A
E
S

D
-
R
A
E
S

A
-
R
P
W

B
-
R
P
W

.
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e
 
d
e
t
a
g
i
t
i

m
n
u

=
 
4

,

0
5
7
s

=
 
3

,

0
5
5
s

=
 
2

a

1590

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

the increased risk (Hoozemans et al. 1993). The lower estimates there-
fore assumed that 90% of the risk could be avoided either by highly effi-
cient  coastal  defences  or  individual  adaptations.  The  higher  estimates
assumed  no  adaptation  either  with  increasing  GDP  or  individual  level
measures.

The  model  for  inland  flooding  was  subject  to  the  same  uncertainty
over  adaptive  responses.  Both  the  baseline  and  relative  risks  were
assumed to change with GDP, as described for coastal flooding. As out-
lined above, however, the uncertainty is also greater for a hazard driven
by the magnitude and temporal variation of precipitation (which varies
considerably between climate models), rather than the more predictable
process  of  temperature-driven  sea  level  rise.  This  consideration  is  par-
ticularly  important  as  only  one  climate  model  was  used  in  this  assess-
ment. Although the relative risks estimated by our method (e.g. 5.53 for
our estimates for EUR-A by the year 2030 under an unmitigated emis-
sions scenario) were broadly comparable to estimates of changes in fre-
quency  of  extreme  wet  seasons  generated  using  multi-climate  model
analyses (fivefold for northern Europe for the period 20602080; Palmer
and Ralsanen 2002), more formal analyses would be necessary to give
more  accurate  estimates.  We  therefore  gave  a  larger  uncertainty  range
around these predictions than for coastal flooding, by assuming a 50%
greater  exposure  and  no  adaptation  with  GDP  for  the  high  estimate, 
and no increase in risk under any scenario for the lower estimate (Table
20.14). As for the other outcomes, this uncertainty range should be inter-
preted with caution.

The potential health consequences of changing frequency and inten-
sity of extreme weather events are surprisingly poorly researched. Sub-
stantial  improvements  in  assessment  could  be  made  through  better
estimates of the current health impacts of natural disasters, which suffer
from  poor  baseline  data  and  probably  severe  underreporting,  particu-
larly in developing countries (Noji 1997). Analyses could also be greatly
improved by geo-referencing and more detailed descriptions of disasters
to allow differentiation of inland and coastal events, detailed analysis of
the  relationships  between  intensity  of  precipitation  and  health  effects,
and  projections  of  future  precipitation  at  higher  temporal  and  spatial 
resolution,  using  output  from  a  range  of  climate  models.  In  order  to 
generate better uncertainty estimates, formal sensitivity analyses of the
contributions of each model parameter to the final uncertainty estimates
are required.

Finally,  it  should  be  stressed  that  the  estimates  given  here  represent
the immediate acute consequences of natural disasters, which are likely
to be only one component of the total attributable disease burden. Other
outcomes of these natural disasters need to be considered, such as the
probability of outbreaks of water, vector- and rodent-borne diseases, the
effects of sequential disasters on both public health defences and stabil-
ity of natural ecosystems limiting disease outbreaks (Epstein 1999), and

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1591

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c

h
g
H

i

3
1
3

.

4
6
2

.

8
0
2

.

8
1
3

.

5
6
2

.

4
4
2

.

9
6
8
1

.

1
6
5
1

.

9
7
2
1

.

7
6
3

.

5
6
4

.

9
3
4

.

0
2
4

.

0
1
3

.

3
3
3

.

3
6
4

.

3
0
6

.

1
0
6

.

7
1
8

.

4
9
6

.

5
1
7

.

0
3
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

h
g
H

i

 

w
o
L

0
2
0
2

i

d
M

h
g
H

i

0
1
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
3
2

.

9
9
1

.

6
6
1

.

0
3
2

.

9
9
1

.

6
8
1

.

.

5
1
1

6
6
9

.

9
9
7

.

0
6
2

.

8
1
3

.

3
0
3

.

2
9
2

.

6
2
2

.

0
4
2

.

0
2
3

.

4
0
4

.

4
0
4

.

9
2
5

.

6
5
4

.

8
6
4

.

9
7
2

.

4
3
2

.

1
8
1

.

4
6
2

.

2
2
2

.

9
9
1

.

0
0
6
1

.

9
2
3
1

.

4
5
0
1

.

6
0
3

.

1
9
3

.

7
6
3

.

8
4
3

.

0
5
2

.

0
7
2

.

7
9
3

.

9
1
5

.

1
3
5

.

4
2
7

.

4
0
6

.

0
3
6

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

9
0
2

.

3
8
1

.

0
5
1

.

3
0
2

.

5
7
1

.

2
6
1

.

9
1
2

.

9
8
1

.

4
5
1

.

0
1
2

.

1
8
1

.

6
6
1

.

.

5
0
1

.

0
1
1

7
7
8

.

3
0
7

.

6
2
2

.

8
7
2

.

3
6
2

.

2
5
2

.

2
9
1

.

3
0
2

.

3
8
2

.

7
5
3

.

4
6
3

.

8
7
4

.

5
0
4

.

0
2
4

.

9
1
9

.

6
3
7

.

7
3
2

.

4
9
2

.

9
7
2

.

5
6
2

.

1
0
2

.

3
1
2

.

8
9
2

.

9
7
3

.

7
8
3

.

6
1
5

.

6
3
4

.

3
5
4

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

7
7
1

.

8
5
1

.

5
3
1

.

1
7
1

.

3
5
1

.

3
4
1

.

3
3
7

.

9
1
6

.

3
0
5

.

8
8
1

.

5
2
2

.

3
1
2

.

6
0
2

.

3
6
1

.

3
7
1

.

9
2
2

.

2
8
2

.

8
8
2

.

6
6
3

.

4
1
3

.

6
2
3

.

h
g
H

i

9
8
1

.

8
6
1

.

1
4
1

.

3
8
1

.

0
6
1

.

0
5
1

.

0
5
8

.

5
1
7

.

7
7
5

.

4
0
2

.

6
4
2

.

4
3
2

.

5
2
2

.

5
7
1

.

4
8
1

.

9
4
2

.

9
0
3

.

5
1
3

.

2
1
4

.

2
5
3

.

4
6
3

.

5
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

0
6
1

.

4
4
1

.

6
2
1

.

3
5
1

.

9
3
1

.

3
3
1

.

6
7
5

.

0
9
4

.

3
0
4

.

6
6
1

.

3
9
1

.

7
8
1

.

9
7
1

.

8
4
1

.

4
5
1

.

8
9
1

.

7
3
2

.

1
4
2

.

1
0
3

.

2
6
2

.

0
7
2

.

h
g
H

i

6
6
1

.

0
5
1

.

0
3
1

.

0
6
1

.

5
4
1

.

6
3
1

.

1
5
6

.

0
5
5

.

0
5
4

.

5
7
1

.

7
0
2

.

8
9
1

.

2
9
1

.

6
5
1

.

2
6
1

.

0
1
2

.

3
5
2

.

8
5
2

.

8
2
3

.

5
8
2

.

4
9
2

.

1
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

4
4
1

.

2
3
1

.

0
2
1

.

0
4
1

.

0
3
1

.

4
2
1

.

6
6
4

.

0
0
4

.

4
3
3

.

0
5
1

.

2
7
1

.

6
6
1

.

0
6
1

.

6
3
1

.

2
4
1

.

1
7
1

.

1
0
2

.

5
0
2

.

1
5
2

.

3
2
2

.

9
2
2

.

h
g
H

i

0
6
1

.

5
4
1

.

7
2
1

.

4
5
1

.

1
4
1

.

3
3
1

.

0
0
6

.

0
1
5

.

8
1
4

.

9
6
1

.

8
9
1

.

9
8
1

.

3
8
1

.

0
5
1

.

7
5
1

.

9
9
1

.

0
4
2

.

4
4
2

.

9
0
3

.

8
6
2

.

7
7
2

.

0
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

0
4
1

.

0
3
1

.

8
1
1

.

7
3
1

.

6
2
1

.

2
2
1

.

9
1
4

.

2
6
3

.

2
0
3

.

3
4
1

.

9
5
1

.

6
5
1

.

3
5
1

.

2
3
1

.

6
3
1

.

1
6
1

.

5
8
1

.

9
8
1

.

2
3
2

.

7
0
2

.

3
1
2

.

a
e
t
a
m

i
l

C

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

i

n
o
g
e
r
b
u
S

D
-
R
F
A

E
-
R
F
A

A
-
R
M
A

B
-
R
M
A

D
-
R
M
A

B
-
R
M
E

D
-
R
M
E

e
t
a
m

i
l
c
 
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
a
 
r
o

f
 
s
e
d

i
l
s
d
n
a
l
/
s
d
o
o
fl
 
d
n
a
l
n

i
 
n

i
 
h
t
a
e
d
 
f
o
 
k
s
i
r
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
e
h
t
 
f
o
 
s
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e
 
h
g
i
h
 
d
n
a
 
w
o

l

,
l
a
r
t
n
e
C

.

4
1
0
2
 
e
b
a
T

l

e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
e
n

i
l

e
s
a
b
 
o
t
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
s
o
i
r
a
n
e
c
s

1592

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

h
g
H

i

0
3
0
2

 

w
o
L

i

d
M

h
g
H

i

 

w
o
L

0
2
0
2

i

d
M

h
g
H

i

0
1
0
2

 

w
o
L

8
2
8

.

0
2
8

.

5
6
8

.

2
2
3

.

5
6
4

.

5
4
3

.

2
4
3

.

6
4
6

.

4
0
5

.

0
6
3

.

7
3
5

.

7
3
3

.

2
2
2

.

8
6
1

.

6
3
1

.

9
2
4

.

0
8
2

.

8
2
3

.

0
5
2

.

0
7
2

.

3
1
3

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
3
5

.

7
2
5

.

3
5
5

.

2
3
2

.

6
1
3

.

6
4
2

.

5
4
2

.

1
3
4

.

5
4
3

.

1
5
2

.

7
5
3

.

9
3
2

.

3
7
1

.

9
3
1

.

1
2
1

.

1
9
2

.

4
0
2

.

2
3
2

.

8
8
1

.

0
0
2

.

0
3
2

.

8
4
6

.

1
5
6

.

3
9
6

.

2
3
2

.

5
7
3

.

6
5
2

.

5
2
2

.

8
0
5

.

2
7
3

.

7
7
2

.

3
3
4

.

2
6
2

.

0
1
2

.

7
5
1

.

0
3
1

.

7
3
3

.

1
0
2

.

9
4
2

.

4
0
2

.

3
2
2

.

9
7
2

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

9
9
3

.

1
0
4

.

4
2
4

.

9
7
1

.

6
6
2

.

4
9
1

.

5
7
1

.

9
4
3

.

7
6
2

.

1
0
2

.

9
8
2

.

2
9
1

.

5
6
1

.

3
3
1

.

8
1
1

.

5
3
2

.

6
5
1

.

5
8
1

.

8
5
1

.

0
7
1

.

9
0
2

.

6
6
4

.

8
6
4

.

5
9
4

.

9
8
1

.

3
8
2

.

4
0
2

.

3
8
1

.

2
7
3

.

2
8
2

.

9
1
2

.

2
2
3

.

8
0
2

.

4
7
1

.

8
3
1

.

0
2
1

.

9
5
2

.

8
6
1

.

9
9
1

.

9
6
1

.

3
8
1

.

9
1
2

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

4
4
3

.

4
4
3

.

4
6
3

.

5
5
1

.

5
1
2

.

6
6
1

.

2
5
1

.

8
6
2

.

1
1
2

.

1
7
1

.

4
3
2

.

5
6
1

.

5
4
1

.

4
2
1

.

3
1
1

.

5
9
1

.

0
4
1

.

9
5
1

.

2
4
1

.

9
4
1

.

7
7
1

.

h
g
H

i

5
7
3

.

6
7
3

.

7
9
3

.

6
6
1

.

8
3
2

.

8
7
1

.

2
6
1

.

4
0
3

.

7
3
2

.

9
8
1

.

7
6
2

.

1
8
1

.

6
5
1

.

9
2
1

.

5
1
1

.

9
1
2

.

0
5
1

.

5
7
1

.

1
5
1

.

2
6
1

.

9
8
1

.

5
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

7
6
2

.

9
6
2

.

2
8
2

.

2
4
1

.

8
8
1

.

0
5
1

.

9
3
1

.

6
2
2

.

4
8
1

.

6
5
1

.

4
0
2

.

0
5
1

.

4
3
1

.

9
1
1

.

9
0
1

.

3
7
1

.

1
3
1

.

5
4
1

.

1
3
1

.

9
3
1

.

0
6
1

.

h
g
H

i

1
0
3

.

3
0
3

.

8
1
3

.

8
4
1

.

1
0
2

.

7
5
1

.

5
4
1

.

0
5
2

.

9
9
1

.

5
6
1

.

3
2
2

.

0
6
1

.

1
4
1

.

1
2
1

.

1
1
1

.

7
8
1

.

8
3
1

.

4
5
1

.

8
3
1

.

5
4
1

.

6
6
1

.

1
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

4
3
2

.

4
3
2

.

4
4
2

.

2
3
1

.

7
6
1

.

8
3
1

.

0
3
1

.

0
0
2

.

6
6
1

.

3
4
1

.

1
8
1

.

0
4
1

.

6
2
1

.

4
1
1

.

8
0
1

.

8
5
1

.

4
2
1

.

6
3
1

.

6
2
1

.

9
2
1

.

4
4
1

.

h
g
H

i

3
8
2

.

3
8
2

.

8
9
2

.

4
4
1

.

2
9
1

.

3
5
1

.

2
4
1

.

7
3
2

.

0
9
1

.

9
5
1

.

1
1
2

.

4
5
1

.

6
3
1

.

0
2
1

.

1
1
1

.

0
8
1

.

3
3
1

.

0
5
1

.

5
3
1

.

1
4
1

.

0
6
1

.

0
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

3
1
2

.

3
1
2

.

2
2
2

.

1
3
1

.

4
6
1

.

5
3
1

.

3
3
1

.

5
0
2

.

0
7
1

.

3
3
1

.

1
6
1

.

0
3
1

.

1
2
1

.

0
1
1

.

5
0
1

.

6
4
1

.

0
2
1

.

0
3
1

.

7
1
1

.

2
2
1

.

0
4
1

.

e
t
a
m

i
l

C

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

i

n
o
g
e
r
b
u
S

A
-
R
U
E

B
-
R
U
E

C
-
R
U
E

B
-
R
A
E
S

D
-
R
A
E
S

A
-
R
P
W

B
-
R
P
W

e
t
a
m

i
l
c
 
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
a
 
r
o

f
 
s
e
d

i
l
s
d
n
a
l
/
s
d
o
o
fl
 
d
n
a
l
n

i
 
n

i
 
h
t
a
e
d
 
f
o
 
k
s
i
r
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
e
h
t
 
f
o
 
s
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e
 
h
g
i
h
 
d
n
a
 
w
o

l

,
l
a
r
t
n
e
C

.

4
1
0
2
 
e
b
a
T

l

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
e
n

i
l

e
s
a
b
 
o
t
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
s
o
i
r
a
n
e
c
s

.
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e
 
d
e
t
a
g
i
t
i

m
n
u

=
 
4

,

0
5
7
s

=
 
3

,

0
5
5
s

=
 
2

a

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1593

longer-term effects such as post-traumatic stress after floods (e.g. Phifer
1990) and of population displacement through coastal flooding. More
importantly,  it  is  necessary  to  expand  the  range  of  natural  disasters
beyond those considered in this chapter. There is an obvious causal chain
between  apparently  increasing  variability  in  precipitation  frequency  of
droughts  and  their  associated  health  consequences,  particularly  food
shortages  and  possible  famine  (UNDMTP  1990;  WHO/PTC  1995).
While these impacts may be expected to increase under climate change,
no models have yet been developed to link climate scenarios, frequency
of drought, and associated health effects, so that quantitative estimation
of  climate  change  effects  is  not  currently  possible.  Given  the  global
importance of drought-related disease (WHO/EHA 1998) and the effec-
tiveness  of  early  preparation  and  rapid  response  for  avoiding  health
impacts (Gupta 2000; WHO/EHA 2002), this is clearly a priority area
for research.

Vector-borne diseases

3.10
Viruses, bacteria, protozoa and helminths transmitted by biting insects
and  other  intermediate  hosts  are  among  the  most  important  causes  of
ill-health  in  tropical  regions  (WHO  2000b).  The  climate  sensitivity  of
such diseases has long been recognized (e.g. Celli 1933), and knowledge
of the relationships has been used to help predict epidemics of vector-
borne  diseases  since  at  least  the  early  years  of  the  last  century  (e.g.
Christophers 1911; MacDonald 1957). More recently, there have been
many quantitative studies of the effects of climate variables on the pop-
ulation biology of vectors and pathogens in the laboratory (e.g. reviews
by Martens 1998b; Massad and Forattini 1998), and on spatial and tem-
poral variations in vector abundance and disease incidence in the field
(review  by  Kovats  et  al.  2000a).  The  results  of  a  literature  review  are
shown in Appendix B, Tables B.5 and B.6.

This climate sensitivity has prompted several studies correlating long-
term  changes  in  vector  distribution  (Lindgren  et  al.  2000)  or  disease 
incidence (e.g. Bouma et al. 1996; Loevinsohn 1994) with local climate
trends, which apparently reflect global climate change. However, many
of the inferences about resulting health consequences have been called
into  question,  due  to  concurrent  local  changes  in  crucial  non-climatic
factors,  such  as  human  behaviour,  disease  reporting  or  control  pro-
grammes  (Hay  et  al.  2002;  Mouchet  1998;  Randolph  2001;  Reiter
2001).

As for other health effects, it is unlikely that simply correlating long-
term  trends  in  disease  against  trends  in  climate  will  soon  (or  perhaps
ever) give unequivocal evidence of the effects of gradual climate change.
As climate varies naturally between years, long time-series (i.e. two to
three decades) will be needed for statistical tests of association in long-
term trends. It is almost inevitable that non-climatic determinants of risk
will  also  change  over  such  long  periods,  either  obscuring  or  offering

1594

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

alternative explanations for any effects of climate change. In addition,
reliable multi-decadal time-series for vector-borne diseases in developing
countries  are  rare,  and  it  is  problematic  to  interpret  analyses  of  a  few
data sets as evidence of a general global pattern. Recent reviews there-
fore  suggest  that  a  general  effect  of  climate  change  on  vector-borne
disease, while suspected and possible, is highly dependent on other non-
climatic factors that act at a small scale (IPCC 2001a; Kovats et al. 2001,
Reiter 2001, Reiter et al. 2003).

Despite  the  practical  problems  in  making  direct  correlations  with
recent  trends,  the  extreme  climate  sensitivity  of  vector-borne  diseases
means that it is almost inevitable that they will respond in some way to
climate change, in some settings and to some degree. The most reliable
basis for estimating such changes should come from information on the
relationships between variations in climate and disease in either the past
or  present.  Several  studies  have  used  such  data  to  model  the  effect  of
predicted climate change on either the distribution of vector-borne dis-
eases, and/or measures of risk within existing or predicted newly endemic
areas. The data, techniques and assumptions used in the various analy-
ses are reviewed in detail in later sections.

Whatever the quality of the data and modelling techniques used for
predictions,  they  will  remain  contingent  upon  other  determinants  of
disease. Socioeconomic conditions, control programmes, human immu-
nity and the specific combinations of climate variables required by par-
ticular vector species or transmission cycles also affect disease incidence,
and may be more important than global climate trends, particularly at
small spatial scales (Mouchet and Manguin 1999; Randolph et al. 2000;
Reiter 2001; Rogers and Randolph 2000; Sutherst 1998).

The IPCC has reviewed the observed and predicted effects of climate
variability  and  change  in  the  context  of  the  other  factors  listed  above
(IPCC 2001a). On balance, the IPCC concludes that climate change is
likely to expand the geographical distribution of several vector-borne dis-
eases,  including  malaria,  dengue  and  leishmaniasis  to  higher  altitudes
(high confidence) and higher latitudes with limited public health defences
(medium/low  confidence),  and  to  extend  the  transmission  seasons 
in  some  locations  (medium/high  confidence).  For  some  vector-borne 
diseases  in  some  locations,  climate  change  may  decrease  transmission 
by  reductions  in  rainfall  or  temperatures  too  high  for  transmission
(medium/low confidence).

The  associations  between  climate  and  infectious  diseases  have  also
been reviewed by the United States National Research Council (National
Research Council 2001b). The review highlights the climate sensitivity
of vector-borne diseases, and describes some studies modelling the poten-
tial consequences of future climate change on vector-borne diseases. The
report re-emphasizes the need for caution when making future projec-
tions, and stresses the importance of public health provision in mitigat-
ing  increases  in  incidence  driven  by  climate  change.  No  judgement  is

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1595

made on the likely effects of future climate change on specific diseases,
owing to the limited evidence.

Aside  from  analyses  of  the  potential  effect  of  gradual  changes  in
average  climate  conditions,  predicted  increases  in  climate  variability,
including  possible  increases  in  the  frequency  and  intensity  of  El  Nino
events  (IPCC  2001b),  may  also  affect  vector-borne  diseases.  There  is 
evidence that the El Nino cycle causes inter-annual variations in disease
incidence in several areas (e.g. Bouma et al. 1997b). However, even in
these  sites,  other  determinants  such  as  seasonal  variations  and  control
programmes exert a larger influence, and epidemic cycles also occur in
areas where El Nino has little or no effect on climate, apparently driven
by gradual post-epidemic waning of herd immunity (Hay et al. 2000).
As  the  effect  of  climate  variability  differs  so  greatly  between  sites, 
global projections of the associations described so far are unlikely to be
informative.

MODELLING OF SPECIFIC DISEASES
Most modelling of the effects of climate change has focused on malaria,
and to a lesser extent dengue. These are therefore the only vector-borne
diseases  considered  here.  Some  preliminary  modelling  work  has  been
carried  out  on  schistosomiasis  (Martens  et  al.  1997),  but  this  is  based
on a relatively small data set and has not been validated against current
distributions.  Randolph  and  Rogers  (2000)  have  also  modelled  the
potential  effects  of  climate  change  on  tick-borne  encephalitis  (TBE)  in
Europe, demonstrating that increased temperatures are likely to reduce
the  endemic  range.  Although  TBE  is  a  relatively  small  public  health
problem  in  global  terms,  and  was  not  covered  in  this  assessment,  this
study  does  demonstrate  that  climate  change  may  potentially  decrease,
rather than increase, the transmission of some diseases. Effects on other
major  vector-borne  diseases  have  been  investigated  either  qualitatively
(e.g. Carcavallo and Curto de Casas 1996 for American trypanosomia-
sis) or in terms of distribution of vectors rather than human disease (e.g.
Rogers and Packer 1993 for African trypanosomiasis).

Falciparum malaria
Falciparum  malaria  is  unusual  in  that  several  research  groups  have 
independently  modelled  the  relationships  between  climate  and  disease
distribution (Appendix B, Table B.5). The models used can be broadly
classified  as  structural/biological,  based  on  aggregating  the  effect  of
climate on the individual components of the disease transmission cycle,
or statistical, derived from direct correlations between geographic or
temporal variations in climate, and associated variations in disease inci-
dence or distribution, either in the present or recent past.

Published biological models for the global distribution of falciparum
malaria use laboratory data to define the relationship between tempera-
ture  and  the  extrinsic  incubation  period  of  the  parasite,  and  therefore

1596

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

the  probability  of  completing  development  during  the  lifetime  of  the
mosquito and completing the transmission cycle (Martin and Lefebvre
1995).  Later  models  incorporate  temperature  effects  on  the  survival
probability  and  biting  frequency  of  mosquitoes  (Jetten  et  al.  1996;
Martens et al. 1995a, 1995b, 1999). In these later models, the various
temperature-dependent relationships are aggregated into the entomologi-
cal  version  of  the  equation  for  Ro,  the  number  of  cases  arising  from 
each  new  case  in  a  completely  susceptible  population  (Anderson  and
May 1991; Dye 1992; Garrett-Jones 1964). Because of the lack of data
on  several  key  parameters,  these  are  set  as  biologically  plausible  con-
stants, allowing the calculation of the critical vector density required for
sustainable  disease  transmission  (i.e.  Ro >1).  This  threshold  is  lower
under more suitable (generally warmer) climate conditions. The inverse
of the critical density threshold, the transmission potential, is used as
a  relative  measure  of  transmission  intensity  under  different  climatic 
conditions.  The  models  also  assume  a  threshold  level  of  transmission
potential required to sustain transmission, which allows the identifica-
tion of areas that are climatically suitable for transmission under both
observed and projected climate scenarios.

These studies highlight the extreme climate sensitivity of several stages
of  the  malaria  transmission  cycle.  By  aggregating  these  effects  into  a
single measure related to Ro, they demonstrate that even small tempera-
ture increases could potentially cause large relative increases in risk, par-
ticularly  at  the  edges  of  the  distribution  where  temperature  may  be  a
limiting  factor.  They  also  suggest  that  those  areas  climatically  suitable
for Plasmodium falciparum transmission could expand substantially.

While valid for their original purpose as sensitivity analyses for rela-
tive  changes  in  risk,  these  models  are  not  ideal  for  defining  the  most
probable changes in either geographical distribution or disease burden
within endemic areas. Both outputs require the calculation of absolute
rather  than  relative  values  of  Ro,  so  as  to  identify  areas  where  Ro>1,
allowing disease transmission to persist. In these incomplete biological
models,  such  calculations  are  partly  dependent  on  parameter  values 
that are arbitrarily defined in the absence of empirical data (Rogers and
Randolph 2000). As the models are based on temperature relationships
derived from the laboratory, they also rely on the assumption that mete-
orological station data accurately represent the climatic conditions that
mosquitoes and parasites experience in the fieldwhich disregards the
possibility that vectors might exploit microhabitats that are very differ-
ent from those in meteorological stations. Since the outputs from these
models have not been validated against current disease distributions, they
were not used in this assessment.

In the absence of data to generate complete biological models of all
stages in the transmission cycle, an alternative approach is to use statis-
tical  relationships  to  define  only  the  distributional  limits  of  disease.
Although  this  approach  does  not  allow  disaggregation  of  the  specific

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1597

mechanisms driving the climate-sensitivity of vector-borne diseases, it is
generally considered more objective than the use of incomplete biologi-
cal  models,  in  that  model  outputs  are  not  dependent  on  arbitrarily
defined parameter values.

The  international  MARA  (Mapping  malaria  risk  in  Africa)  collabo-
ration  generated  a  model  that  used  a  combination  of  biological  and 
statistical  approaches  to  define  the  limits  of  climate  suitability  for 
falciparum malaria in Africa (Craig et al. 1999). Laboratory data on the
rate of development of falciparum parasites (Detinova 1962) and labo-
ratory  and  localized  field  observations  of  temperature  effects  on  mos-
quito  survival  (Haddow  1943;  Jepson  et  al.  1947;  Le  Sueur  1991;
Maharaj 1995) were used to define upper and lower thresholds for mean
monthly  temperatures,  and  winter  minima,  which  would  allow  both
mosquito survival and the completion of the parasite extrinsic incuba-
tion period during the lifetime of mosquitoes, thereby permitting trans-
mission. Rainfall thresholds were defined by comparing regions with and
without  stable  malaria  transmission,  which  have  similar  temperature
conditions but different precipitation profiles. In order to take account
of uncertainty about the precise values of the upper and lower bounds
of  temperature  and  rainfall  necessary  for  transmission,  climatic  condi-
tions near to the thresholds were not defined as either entirely suitable
or  unsuitable.  Instead,  they  were  assigned  a  probability  of  suitability
between  0  and  1,  defined  by  a  fuzzy  membership  curve,  which  is
assumed to follow a pre-specified sigmoidal shape between the plausible
values for the upper and lower thresholds for each climate variable (e.g.
a decreasing probability of suitability between mean temperatures of 32
and 40C). These relationships were applied to high-resolution interpo-
lated  maps  of  climate  throughout  Africa  (Hutchinson  et  al.  1996)  to
define areas that meet all suitability conditions (i.e. both temperature and
rainfall) throughout the continent. For validation, model outputs were
visually compared with independent high-resolution maps of the edges
of the distribution, based either on field surveys or expert opinion. The
model showed a good fit to the observed distributions in both southern
Africa and East Africa.

The main advantages of this approach are that the model:

 describes only the cut-offs for any level of transmission, rather than
quantitative estimates of transmission risk: it therefore does not rely
on arbitrarily defined parameter values to complete the Ro equation;

 represents uncertainty around the edges of the distribution;

 allows description of seasonal patterns of transmission, based on the

suitability of individual months; and

 most  importantly,  has  been  compared  with  current  and  historical 
distribution  maps  which  are  apparently  independent  of  the  model
building process.

1598

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

The main caveats are:

 the reliance on laboratory data and a small number of field studies to

define climate cut-offs;

 apparent subjectivity in at least one parameter estimate (the propor-
tion of mosquitoes that need to survive the sporogonic cycle in order
to maintain transmission, which defines the precise value of the lower
temperature cut-off);

 the  need  to  make  an  assumption  about  the  shape  of  the  fuzzy 

membership curve; and

 lack of systematic empirical validation (validation by visual compar-

ison, rather than calculating diagnostic statistics).

While  each  of  the  assumptions  can  legitimately  be  questioned,  the
visual validation suggests that the data and assumptions used are at least
reasonably accurate. Again, there are further caveats in using the model
to  try  to  describe  the  true  global  distribution  of  falciparum  malaria
(rather than just climatically suitable areas), either now or in the future.
To use such models, it is necessary to make the assumptions that distri-
butions  vary  directly  with  climate,  without  any  interactive  effect  of
control programmes, or socioeconomic conditions. The comparisons of
model outputs with current data suggest that this is a reasonable assump-
tion for most of sub-Saharan Africa, although control programmes have
altered distributions in South Africa. The assumption is much less secure
for other endemic regions, which are invariably richer.

The relationship between climate variables and the global distribution
of malaria can also be defined in statistical terms. Rogers and Randolph
(2000)  converted  WHO  maps  (WHO  1997)  of  the  limits  of  reported
malaria distribution in the 1990s into 0.5 0.5 resolution grids, coding
each cell as either endemic or non-endemic. These grid maps were over-
laid  on  0.5 grid  maps  describing  climate  surfaces  for  the  period
19611990. A statistical model was generated by randomly selecting a
subsample of 50% of the observations of disease presence or absence.
First,  grid-cells  were  assigned  by  applying  k-means  clustering  to  six
groups  based  on  climatic  similarity,  thereby  allowing  for  potentially 
different  climatedisease  relationships  in  different  ecological  zones. 
Stepwise  discriminant  analysis  was  applied  to  find  the  combination  of
temperature, rainfall and humidity parameters that gave the greatest sta-
tistical differentiation between positive vs negative grid cells within each
cluster. The model was then applied to the remaining 50% of the obser-
vations to assess model accuracy. The fit of the predicted distributions
to the observed WHO malaria maps was found to be significantly better
than for previous falciparum malaria models: 77.71% of grid cells cor-
rectly  predicted  for  this  model  vs  75.79%  for  Martin  and  Lefebvre
(1995) and 67.26% for Martens et al. (1999).

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1599

The  principal  advantage  of  this  approach  is  that  it  is  entirely  data
driven. The relationships between global climate and malaria distribu-
tions  are  defined  using  transparent  statistical  techniques,  applied  to 
both  disease  and  climate  data  from  throughout  the  globe.  They  there-
fore do not require either unsupported assumptions of parameter values
in order to complete a biological model, or global extrapolation of data
from  a  limited  number  of  observations.  In  addition,  by  mapping  the
observed distribution rather than climatically suitable areas, such analy-
ses do not require the assumption that distributions are defined only by
climate.

Despite these advantages, the quality of the data available at the global
scale places several limitations on global statistical models. WHO maps
of observed distributions are based on a combination of field observa-
tions and expert opinion to draw inclusive boundaries of the extremes
of distributions. In many cases the maps define large areas as endemic
(e.g.  all  of  sub-Saharan  Africa  north  of  South  Africa,  Namibia  and
Botswana),  although  significant  areas  are  actually  disease  free,  often
apparently  due  to  unsuitable  climate.  WHO  maps  (and  therefore  the 
statistical relationships) also do not differentiate between malaria caused
by P. falciparum and Plasmodium vivax, which have quite different sen-
sitivities to temperature (Detinova 1962; MacDonald 1957). It is unclear
what effect these two simplifications may have on the climate sensitivity
of the model. 

For  this  assessment,  projected  changes  in  temperature  and  rainfall
under  each  of  the  alternative  climate  scenarios  relative  to  the  baseline
(19611990)  climate  were  mapped  at  the  resolution  of  the  HadCM2
climate model (3.75 longitude by 2.5 latitude). Maps of future climate
were then generated by adding these values to maps of baseline climate
for the 19611990 climate at 0.5 resolution (0.05 resolution for the
MARA malaria model in Africa; Hutchinson et al. 1996).

An adapted version of the MARA climate model described in detail
above (Tanser et al. 2003) was used to generate the mid-range estimates
for this assessment. This decision was based on the independent (though
continental rather than global) verification, plus the fact that the model
was developed and tested using data from throughout Africa (where the
overwhelming majority of the burden of malaria currently occurs, and
where accuracy is therefore most important), and the potential for devel-
oping projections of increased force of infection and disease incidence in
the near future.

The model was applied to the global climate maps for baseline climate,
and  for  the  unmitigated  emissions  scenario  for  the  2020s  and  2050s. 
Relative  risk  estimates  presented  here  were  the  ratios  of  the  projected
population at risk (i.e. living in areas climatically suitable for >1 month
falciparum  malaria  transmission  per  year)  in  each  subregion  under
climate change, relative to the population at risk under the 19611990
climate.  As  an  approximation,  estimates  for  the  s750  and  s550 

1600

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

scenarios were derived proportionately by multiplying the relative risks
under  unmitigated  climate  change  by  the  ratio  of  global  temperature
change under each scenario/change under unmitigated emissions (Table
20.15). This model gave considerably larger estimates of changes in pop-
ulation at risk than the statistical model of Rogers and Randolph (2000),
which predicted approximately no overall change under an unmitigated
emissions scenario by the 2050s. In the absence of further comparisons
and formal uncertainty assessments, our lower range estimate therefore
included the possibility of no change in risk in any subregion. The upper
range estimate is a doubling of the mid-range estimate from the MARA
model. We emphasize that given the difficulties in validating any specific
model and its suitability for extrapolation to other subregions, the choice
of MARA climate model over the other possible models was somewhat
arbitrary.

In  addition,  the  calculation  of  disease  burdens  requires  estimates  of
change  in  incidence  within  each  subregion,  rather  than  population  at
risk. In the absence of models for changes in malaria incidence within
endemic regions, we therefore made the assumption that relative changes
in incidence will vary in direct relation to predicted changes in popula-
tion at riskthat is, a doubling of the population at risk within a region
will lead to a doubling of the clinical disease incidence.

These measures are related in broad terms: countries or regions with
higher  populations  at  risk  tend  to  have  higher  incidence  and  disease
burdens.  However,  this  relationship  is  a  crude  generalization,  as  it
assumes that these relationships will remain constant as the population
at risk expands or contracts. This may lead to underestimation of effects,
if there is an increase in transmission within already at-risk populations,
driving up infection incidence. Alternatively, this relationship may over-
estimate  risk,  depending  on  the  extent  to  which  increasing  vectorial
capacity promotes herd immunity (Rogers et al. 2002), and causes first
infections to occur earlier in life, when patients suffer less severe clinical
symptoms  for  some  diseases,  potentially  conferring  immunity  on  the
more clinically vulnerable older age-groups (Coleman et al. 2001; Snow
and  Marsh  1995).  In  addition,  socioeconomic  conditions  and  control
programmes  clearly  influence  vector-borne  diseases.  Future  changes  in
these factors are likely to affect (and hopefully reduce) transmission, as
they have done in some regions in the past (e.g. Jetten and Takken 1994;
Reiter 2001). The role of adaptation was discussed in section 2.5.

By applying relative risks to baseline incidences of zero in some sub-
regions,  our  assessment  did  not  allow  for  the  spread  of  disease  from
endemic subregions to non-endemic subregions. This is a reasonable, but
conservative assumption: non-endemic subregions have better developed
health  systems  and  a  less  amenable  socioeconomic  environment,  in 
addition to usually being cooler. These factors may protect against re-
establishment of vector-borne disease transmission (IPCC 2001b; Kuhn
et al. 2003), providing they are maintained.

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1601

o
t
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
s
o
i
r
a
n
e
c
s
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
a
 
r
o

i

 

f
 
a
i
r
a
l
a
m
m
u
r
a
p
c
l
a
f
 
f
o
 
k
s
i
r
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
e
h
t
 
f
o
 
s
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e
 
h
g
i
h
 
d
n
a
 
w
o

l

,
l
a
r
t
n
e
C

.

5
1
0
2
 
e
b
a
T

l

e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
e
n

i
l

e
s
a
b

h
g
H

i

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

5
1
1

.

8
1
1

.

8
2
1

.

3
5
1

.

5
6
1

.

3
0
2

.

6
1
1

.

9
1
1

.

0
3
1

.

9
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

7
1
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
3
1

.

7
3
1

.

9
5
1

.

0
3
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c

i

d
M

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

4
1
1

.

7
2
1

.

3
3
1

.

1
5
1

.

8
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

5
1
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

5
1
1

.

9
1
1

.

9
2
1

.

h
g
H

i

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

2
1
1

.

5
1
1

.

3
2
1

.

6
4
1

.

6
5
1

.

8
8
1

.

3
1
1

.

6
1
1

.

6
2
1

.

7
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

3
1
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
2
1

.

4
2
1

.

8
3
1

.

0
2
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

2
1
1

.

3
2
1

.

8
2
1

.

4
4
1

.

7
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

3
1
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

2
1
1

.

9
1
1

.

h
g
H

i

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

6
1
1

.

0
3
1

.

7
3
1

.

9
5
1

.

9
0
1

.

1
1
1

.

7
1
1

.

5
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

3
1
1

.

6
1
1

.

6
2
1

.

0
1
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

5
1
1

.

9
1
1

.

9
2
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

3
1
1

.

h
g
H

i

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

2
1
1

.

3
2
1

.

8
2
1

.

4
4
1

.

7
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

3
1
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

2
1
1

.

9
1
1

.

5
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

1
1
1

.

4
1
1

.

2
2
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

h
g
H

i

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

7
1
1

.

0
2
1

.

2
3
1

.

5
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

4
1
1

.

1
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

6
1
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

h
g
H

i

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

5
1
1

.

9
1
1

.

9
2
1

.

4
0
1

.

5
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

3
1
1

.

0
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

5
1
1

.

2
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

3
0
1

.

4
0
1

.

6
0
1

.

a
e
t
a
m

i
l

C

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

i

n
o
g
e
r
b
u
S

D
-
R
F
A

E
-
R
F
A

A
-
R
M
A

B
-
R
M
A

D
-
R
M
A

B
-
R
M
E

D
-
R
M
E

1602

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

o
t
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
s
o
i
r
a
n
e
c
s
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
e
v
i
t
a
n
r
e
t
l
a
 
r
o

i

 

f
 
a
i
r
a
l
a
m
m
u
r
a
p
c
l
a
f
 
f
o
 
k
s
i
r
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
e
h
t
 
f
o
 
s
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e
 
h
g
i
h
 
d
n
a
 
w
o

l

,
l
a
r
t
n
e
C

.

5
1
0
2
 
e
b
a
T

l

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
e
n

i
l

e
s
a
b

h
g
H

i

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
5
1

.

1
6
1

.

7
9
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
0
1

.

9
4
1

.

0
6
1

.

5
9
1

.

3
4
1

.

3
5
1

.

3
8
1

.

0
3
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

5
2
1

.

1
3
1

.

8
4
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

5
2
1

.

0
3
1

.

8
4
1

.

2
2
1

.

6
2
1

.

2
4
1

.

h
g
H

i

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
4
1

.

9
4
1

.

8
7
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

2
4
1

.

2
5
1

.

1
8
1

.

7
3
1

.

5
4
1

.

1
7
1

.

0
2
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
2
1

.

5
2
1

.

9
3
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
2
1

.

6
2
1

.

1
4
1

.

8
1
1

.

3
2
1

.

6
3
1

.

h
g
H

i

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

7
2
1

.

3
3
1

.

2
5
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

8
2
1

.

4
3
1

.

4
5
1

.

5
2
1

.

0
3
1

.

8
4
1

.

0
1
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

3
1
1

.

6
1
1

.

6
2
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

4
1
1

.

7
1
1

.

7
2
1

.

2
1
1

.

5
1
1

.

4
2
1

.

h
g
H

i

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
2
1

.

5
2
1

.

9
3
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
0
1

.

1
2
1

.

6
2
1

.

1
4
1

.

8
1
1

.

3
2
1

.

6
3
1

.

5
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
1
1

.

2
1
1

.

9
1
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

1
1
1

.

3
1
1

.

0
2
1

.

9
0
1

.

1
1
1

.

8
1
1

.

h
g
H

i

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

5
1
1

.

8
1
1

.

9
2
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

5
1
1

.

9
1
1

.

0
3
1

.

4
1
1

.

7
1
1

.

6
2
1

.

1
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

4
1
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

5
1
1

.

7
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

3
1
1

.

h
g
H

i

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

3
1
1

.

6
1
1

.

6
2
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

4
1
1

.

7
1
1

.

7
2
1

.

2
1
1

.

5
1
1

.

4
2
1

.

0
0
0
2

 

w
o
L

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

i

d
M

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

3
1
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

0
0
1

.

7
0
1

.

9
0
1

.

4
1
1

.

6
0
1

.

8
0
1

.

2
1
1

.

e
t
a
m

i
l

C

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

2

3

4

i

n
o
g
e
r
b
u
S

A
-
R
U
E

B
-
R
U
E

C
-
R
U
E

B
-
R
A
E
S

D
-
R
A
E
S

A
-
R
P
W

B
-
R
P
W

.
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e
 
d
e
t
a
g
i
t
i

m
n
u

=
 
4

,

0
5
7
s

=
 
3

,

0
5
5
s

=
 
2

a

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1603

Dengue
Several studies have explored the relationship between climate and the
distribution of intensity of dengue transmission (see Appendix B, Table
B.6).  Most  are  derived  from  a  series  of  biological  models  that  relate
climate  variables  to  determinants  of  the  population  biology  of  Aedes
vectors  (Focks  et  al.  1993a,  1993b)  and  dengue  transmission  (Focks 
et al. 1995). Adaptations of these models to map climate relationships
at  the  global  scale  (Jetten  and  Focks  1997;  Martens  et  al.  1997;  Patz 
et al. 1998) have used field and laboratory data to define the relation-
ships between temperature and the length of the gonotrophic cycle (and
the associated feeding frequency), larval weight (and therefore the need
to take multiple feeds within a single cycle), and the extrinsic incubation
period  of  dengue  virus  within  the  vector.  Mosquito  survival,  human
biting  habit  and  the  duration  of  human  infectiousness  are  set  as  tem-
perature-independent  constants,  with  parameter  values  defined  using
field data from a number of sites.

As for the biological models of malaria, these relationships are aggre-
gated into a simplified version of the Ro equation, excluding measures
of  vector  abundance.  This  equation  is  again  used  to  define  the  critical
density threshold (the number of mosquitoes which would be required
to maintain Ro>1), and its inverse, transmission potential or trans-
mission intensity. The model has been applied to local climate data in
a series of sites, and the rank order of monthly predicted values of trans-
mission potential showed good correspondence with the observed sea-
sonal distribution of dengue cases (e.g. Pearsons R= 0.837 in San Juan,
Puerto Rico).

These models have similar characteristics to the biological models for
malaria. By aggregating temperature effects from various stages of the
transmission cycle, they demonstrate that overall dengue risk is likely to
be extremely sensitive to even small changes in temperature. Sensitivity
analyses show that a 2C increase in global temperature would lead to
large (commonly 15 times) increases in transmission intensity in many
regions of the world. However, these models are also subject to the same
caveats. As there are no data available on mosquito abundance through-
out the globe, or the relationship between vector abundance and climate
variables,  the  transmission  potential  remains  a  relative  rather  than
absolute  measure  of  Ro.  It  is  consequently  unsuitable  for  defining  the
conditions under which transmission can persist, and therefore mapping
the distributional limits of dengue either now or in the future. In addi-
tion,  although  the  validation  exercise  demonstrates  that  transmission
potential is correlated to the incidence of infection and clinical disease,
in  that  months  with  higher  transmission  potential  have  more  cases, 
the quantitative relationships have not been explicitly defined. It is there-
fore difficult to interpret exactly what effect a doubling of transmission
potential (for example) would have on the burden of disease caused by
dengue.

1604

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

Methods  similar  to  those  used  by  Rogers  and  Randolph  (2000)  for
malaria  have  recently  been  applied  to  define  the  relationship  between
multiple climate parameters and the reported geographic distribution of
dengue.  Hales  et  al.  (2002)  used  WHO  data  (WHO  2000a)  to  map
reports of dengue transmission during the period 19751996 at the level
of  the  country,  or  smaller  administrative  area  when  this  was  specified 
in the report. These were converted into grid maps at 0.5 resolution.
Logistic  regression  analysis  was  then  used  to  correlate  presence  or
absence of reported transmission against the average values of various
climate  parameters  (monthly  average  rainfall,  vapour  pressure,  and
maximum, minimum and mean temperature) for the corresponding grid-
cells throughout 19611990. Vapour pressure (approximately equivalent
to absolute humidity, and reflecting both temperature and precipitation)
gave  the  best  discrimination  between  areas  with  and  without  reported
dengue transmission, with no other climate variables adding significant
explanatory  power.  The  accuracy  of  the  model  was  assessed  by  cross-
validation, repeatedly using 95% of the data to generate predictions for
the remaining 5%. The model gave correct predictions of observed pres-
ence or absence for an average of 8992% of grid-cells, with the precise
accuracy depending on the radius over which vapour pressure was con-
sidered. The limitations of this model are similar to the statistical model
for malaria. To be consistent with the choice and exclusion of models
for  malaria,  the  model  of  Hales  et  al.  (2002),  which  is  similar  to  the
excluded  model  of  Rogers  and  Randolph  (2000),  was  not  used  in  the
estimates of disease burden.

FUTURE RESEARCH
A  comprehensive  analysis  would  require  the  generation  of  predictive
models for other important vector-borne diseases. There is also a need
to investigate the effect of the predicted increases in climate variability
(e.g. more frequent or more extreme El Nino events), especially on the
frequency and intensity of epidemics.

Most importantly, more reliable estimation would require models that
cover  all  stages  of  the  causal  chain  from  climate  change  to  clinical
outcome. These should explicitly address the role of socioeconomics and
control  in  determining  absolute,  rather  than  relative,  measures  of  Ro.
This  would  allow  better  definition  both  of  the  geographical  limits  of
transmission, and of variations in the incidence within existing or poten-
tially newly endemic regions. They should also address the role of host-
immunity in protecting individuals and populations from clinical disease,
as exposure to infection changes. Such models would represent a con-
siderable  advance  over  the  assumption  made  here,  that  changes  in  the
proportion of the populations at risk within a subregion will be reflected
in proportional changes in the burden of disease.

For the purpose of health assessments, the nature of the model (i.e.
whether  each  of  the  biological  processes  are  modelled  separately  and

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1605

then  aggregated,  or  whether  climate  is  statistically  related  directly  to
empirical  measures  of  disease  burden)  is  probably  less  important  than
model accuracy. There is a clear need for greater model validation, by
comparison of predictions with geographical and temporal patterns of
infection  and  disease  in  the  present  and  recent  past.  The  most  urgent
requirement for all of these objectives is the availability of better quality
surveillance data on infection and disease, from a wide variety of geo-
graphical and socioeconomic settings.

Finally, the potential effects of future climate change on vector-borne
diseases (or other diseases) should not divert attention or resources from
current  control  efforts.  On  the  contrary,  they  provide  the  additional
argument  that  disease  control  now  should  also  reduce  vulnerability  to
climate change in the future.

Results

4.
Summary  measures  of  the  effects  of  climate  change  on  health  are  pre-
sented  in  this  chapter  only  for  the  estimated  current  effects,  using  the 
relative  risks  obtained  by  extrapolation  of  the  future  predictions,  as
described in section 2.6. The estimates presented here did not attribute
DALYs to cardiovascular deaths due to thermal extremes, and excluded
any increase due to dengue (see sections 3.6 and 3.10). They should be
interpreted with caution as, in contrast to most other risk factors, they
relied  on  modelled  rather  than  directly  observed  outcomes.  They  did,
however, indicate the estimated distribution of impacts both among geo-
graphical regions and among the various causes of disease (Tables 20.16
and 20.17). The models may also be useful for the secondary purpose
of  indicating  the  magnitude  of  health  impacts  that  might  already  be
caused by climate change, but which may not be detected by direct obser-
vation using current surveillance systems.

The various causes considered here differed markedly in their contri-
bution to the estimates of the overall burden of disease. In our analysis,
climate-change effects on malnutrition, diarrhoea and vector-borne dis-
eases appeared considerably more important than effects on flooding, or
on deaths attributable to thermal extremes. It should be noted that, with
the exception of malaria, these outcomes are relatively poorly studied in
comparison with the direct effects of thermal stress.

The  health  consequences  of  climate  change  are  distributed  very
unevenly among regions. Estimated DALY burdens per capita are several
hundred times greater in the poorer regions of Africa, parts of the Eastern
Mediterranean  region  and  South-East  Asia  than  in  western  Europe,
North America and the more developed regions of the Western Pacific.
This is largely a reflection of the much higher baseline incidence of the
most important climate-sensitive diseases (malaria, diarrhoea and mal-
nutrition)  in  these  poorer  regions,  but  also  of  greater  vulnerability  to
climate  change  effects.  Because  these  major  climate-sensitive  diseases

1606

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

Table 20.16 Estimated mortality (000s) attributable to climate change in

the year 2000, by cause and subregion

Subregion Malnutrition Diarrhoea Malaria

Floods

CVD All causes

population

Total deaths/million

AFR-D
AFR-E
AMR-A
AMR-B
AMR-D
EMR-B
EMR-D
EUR-A
EUR-B
EUR-C
SEAR-B
SEAR-D
WPR-A
WPR-B

World

8
9
0
0
0
0
9
0
0
0
0
52
0
0

77

5
8
0
0
1
0
8
0
0
0
1
22
0
2

47

5
18
0
0
0
0
3
0
0
0
0
0
0
1

27

0
0
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

2

1
1
0
1
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
7
0
0

19
36
0
2
1
1
21
0
0
0
2
80
0
3

12

166

66.83
109.40
0.15
3.74
10.28
5.65
61.30
0.07
1.04
0.29
7.91
65.79
0.09
2.16

27.82

CVD Cardiovascular disease. As described in section 3.6, the estimated cardiovascular deaths represent
temperature-related mortality displacement. Therefore no disease burden is estimated for deaths from this
cause in Table 20.17.

mainly  affect  younger  age  groups,  the  health  burden  associated  with
climate change appears to be borne mainly by children rather than adults.

Discussion

5.
The  collective  scientific  evidence  indicates  that  anthropogenic  climate
change has already begun and will continue, with potential consequences
for human health. Global warming over the past quarter-century was of
the  order  of  half  a  degree  centigrade.  Such  a  gradual  change  is  partly
obscured  by  natural  climate  variability  and  affects  health  through
complex causal pathways. These characteristics, coupled with consider-
ably larger effects of other factors in the most vulnerable populations,
mean that it is inherently difficult to measure directly net health losses
or gains attributable to the climate change that have occurred until now.
However, climate change differs from most other health determinants
in that considerable effort has been devoted to generating and evaluat-
ing  formal  models  to  forecast  future  climate,  in  response  to  likely 
trajectories of atmospheric gas composition. These models are in general
agreement  that  over  the  next  50100  years  global  warming  will  be
approximately  five  times  greater  than  has  been  experienced  in  the  last

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1607

Table 20.17 Estimated disease burden (000s of DALYs) attributable to
climate change in the year 2000, by cause and subregion

Subregion

Malnutrition

Diarrhoea

Malaria

Floods

All causes

Total DALYs/million

population

AFR-D
AFR-E
AMR-A
AMR-B
AMR-D
EMR-B
EMR-D
EUR-A
EUR-B
EUR-C
SEAR-B
SEAR-D
WPR-A
WPR-B

World

293
323
0
0
0
0
313
0
0
0
0
1 918
0
0

2 846

154
260
0
0
17
14
277
0
6
3
28
612
0
89

178
682
0
3
0
0
112
0
0
0
0
0
0
43

1
3
4
67
5
6
46
3
4
1
6
8
1
37

1 459

1 018

193

626
1 267
4
71
23
20
748
3
10
4
34
2 538
1
169

5 517

2 185.78
3 839.58
11.85
166.62
324.15
147.57
2 145.91
6.66
48.13
14.93
117.19
2 080.84
8.69
111.36

925.35

25 years, with associated changes in other potentially hazardous climate
characteristics, such as the frequency of extreme precipitation events.

Such  modelling  is  at  a  relatively  early  stage.  Few  modelling  studies
have  estimated  health  effects  at  the  global  scale,  and  not  all  of  these
directly  estimate  incidence  or  prevalence  of  GBD  outcomes.  However,
they  provide  the  best  current  basis  for  making  indicative  forecasts  in
order to inform policy decisions. These models nevertheless make only
crude adjustments for the effects of other variables (such as decreasing
poverty), which may both determine the vulnerability of populations to
potential health effects of climate change, and exert much larger inde-
pendent effects on health. Taking each disease in turn:

1. We estimated a small proportional decrease in cardiovascular and res-
piratory disease mortality attributable to climate extremes in tropical
regions and a slightly larger benefit in temperate regions, caused by
warmer  winter  temperatures.  Although  these  proportional  changes
are  modest,  they  apply  to  significant  causes  of  death.  Uncertainties
around  these  estimates  are  largely  due  to  lack  of  knowledge  of  the
degree to which populations physiologically and behaviourally adapt
to increasing temperatures.

2. The relative risk for diarrhoea in 2030 in developing regions was esti-
mated  to  be  between  1  and  1.1  under  unmitigated  emissions  com-
pared with baseline climate. Richer countries (GDP > US$ 6000/year),

1608

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

either now or in the future, were assumed to suffer little or no addi-
tional  risk  of  diarrhoea.  Again,  these  small  changes  in  relative  risk
relate  to  a  major  cause  of  ill-health.  Uncertainties  were  mainly  due 
to  poor  characterization  of  variations  in  the  relationship  between
climate  and  diarrhoea  in  more  or  less  developed  regions,  which 
have different balances between pathogens preferring higher or lower
temperatures.

3. Estimated effects on malnutrition varied markedly across subregions.
By  2030,  the  relative  risks  for  unmitigated  emissions  relative  to  no
climate change varied from a large increase (RR= 11.33) in SEAR-D
to  a  small  decrease  (RR= 10.99)  in  WPR-B.  Developed  countries
were  assumed  to  be  immune  to  climate  change  effects  on  malnutri-
tion. There was no consistent pattern of reduction in relative risk with
intermediate  levels  of  climate  change  stabilization.  Apparent  incon-
sistency  in  the  estimates  may  be  due  to  the  high  sensitivity  of  the
models to regional variations in precipitation, for which future pro-
jections  are  much  more  uncertain  than  for  temperature.  Although
these estimates are somewhat unstable, they are relatively large, and
again relate to a major disease burden.

4. We  estimated  much  larger  proportional  changes  in  the  numbers  of
people  killed  in  coastal  floods  (RR  of  up  to  6.3  in  EUR-B  for  un-
mitigated  emissions  compared  to  baseline  conditions  in  2030),  but
applied to a very low burden of disease. Consequences of inland floods
were  predicted  to  increase  by  a  similar  order  of  magnitude  (RR=
118.5 in AMR-A), and are generally more common. In contrast to
most other outcomes, the increase in relative risk tended to be at least
as high in developed as developing subregions. However, these apply
to baseline rates that are much higher in developing than developed
countries. Both estimates are subject to uncertainty around the likely
effectiveness  of  adaptation  measures.  Inland  floods  are  subject  to 
additional  large  uncertainties  around  the  quantitative  relationships
between  changes  in  the  intra-annual  variation  in  precipitation  (on
which our model is based), the magnitude and geographical distribu-
tion  of  extreme  precipitation  events,  and  in  turn  the  frequency  of
flooding  and  its  health  consequences.  The  suggestion  of  a  trend
towards decreasing incidence with increasing GHG emissions in some
regions is probably due to the uncertainties in predicting precipitation
trends. As projections for precipitation are less secure than for tem-
perature, mid-range estimates and uncertainties around the effects of
inland floods could be much better described using multiple climate
models, rather than the single model used in this assessment.

5. We estimated relatively large changes in the relative risk of falciparum
malaria  in  countries  at  the  edge  of  the  current  distribution,  for
example, increases in relative risk of falciparum malaria of between

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1609

1 and 1.83 in WPR-B by 2030. Relative changes were much smaller
in areas that are already highly endemic for these diseases. The prin-
cipal uncertainties specific to these estimates related to the reliability
of extrapolations made between subregions, the relationship between
changes in the population at risk of these diseases, and incidence (and
therefore  disease  burden),  and  over  the  degree  to  which  changes  in
the non-climatic influences on vector-borne diseases could affect not
only the baseline rates of disease, but also interact with climate change
to affect the relative risks.

The estimates for the year 2000 (Tables 20.16 and 20.17) suggest that,
according  to  models  summarizing  our  current  knowledge  of  the  rela-
tionships between climate and health, past climate change may already
be causing some health consequences.

These relative risk estimates are much greater for projections into the
future,  as  climate  change  continues.  Both  current  and  future  estimates
show  extreme  variations  in  the  estimated  effects  among  geographical
regions. Negative consequences are overwhelmingly concentrated in the
developing  regions  of  the  world  (particularly  in  Africa  and  the  poorer
regions of the Eastern Mediterranean and South-East Asia). This is partly
a function of variation in baseline climate (hot regions suffer more from
increases  in  temperature),  but  more  importantly  due  to  population 
vulnerability  (e.g.  developed  countries  are  assumed  to  be  completely
immune from some diseases, such as malnutrition).

Global models have not yet addressed all of the likely effects of climate
change on health. The potential omissions are many infectious diseases,
the health consequences of drought and famine (beyond those included
in current estimates of malnutrition), population displacement, destruc-
tion  of  health  infrastructure  in  natural  disasters,  increased  pollution 
and aeroallergen levels, effects of plant pests and diseases on agriculture,
and  risk  of  conflict  over  declining  natural  resources.  It  is  likely  that 
these  health  consequences  will  be  larger  than  those  estimated  in  this
chapter.

Although incomplete and encompassing a wide uncertainty range, the
results of these analyses suggested that the attributable burden of climate
change  is  likely  to  be  significant,  even  under  the  relatively  short  (in 
climatological  terms)  time-scale  considered  for  the  comparative  risk
assessment (CRA). The effect of plausible reductions in climate change
was  estimated  to  be  relatively  small  over  this  assessment  period.
However,  the  health  gains  would  clearly  be  much  greater  over  longer
time  periods.  Given  the  long  time-lag  and  apparent  irreversibility  of
climate  change,  early  mitigation  should  therefore  result  in  long-term
health benefits. Our results therefore indicate the urgent need for: (i) con-
sideration of optimal policies to reduce climate change; (ii) strengthen-
ing of current actions to control climate-sensitive diseases, both as ends
in themselves, and as adaptation to future climate change; and (iii) con-

1610

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

tinued research to revise and narrow the uncertainty range around the
estimates of disease burdens.

This assessment has highlighted the most important gaps in data and
understanding  that  should  be  addressed  for  the  next  global  burden  of
disease assessment. Marked improvements in our assessment of this risk
factor would come from: 

 the use of multiple climate models;

 climatehealth relationships derived from a greater range of climatic

and socioeconomic environments;

 more explicit and routine validation of the accuracy of disease models

in the present or recent past;

 formal analyses to aggregate uncertainty arising from multiple causes
(i.e.  GHG  emissions  scenarios,  climate  models,  climatehealth  rela-
tionships, and effect modifiers); 

 efforts  to  formally  model  climate  change  effects  through  to  disease
burden, rather than intermediate indicators such as population at risk;

 a  greater  emphasis  on  investigating  the  consequences  of  increased
climate variability, rather than gradual changes in mean conditions;
and

 the development of analytical tools to assess outcomes acting through

more complex causal mechanisms.

Acknowledgements
To Matthew Livermore, Tim Mitchell, David Viner, Pim Martens for pro-
vision of data and advice; Richard Tol for provision of unpublished data;
Debarati Guha-Sapir for advice on EM-DAT disaster data; Clive Davies,
Paul Coleman, Sandy Cairncross, Bo Draser, Alessandro Loretti, Charles
Delacollette,  Monika  Blossner,  Mercedes  de  Onis,  Rosalie  Woodruff,
Will Checkley; and nine referees, for helpful review comments.

Steering committee
Carlos  Corvalan,  Annette  Pruss-Ustun,  Roberto  Bertollini,  Bettina
Menne, Andy Haines and Alistair Woodward.

Note
1 See preface for an explanation of this term.

References
Alexander D (1993) Natural disasters. University College London Press, London.
Anderson  RM,  May  RM  (1991)  Infectious  diseases  of  humans:  dynamics  and

control. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1611

Baker RHA, Sansford CE, Jarvis CH, Cannon RJC, MacLeod A, Walters KFA
(2000) The role of climatic mapping in predicting the potential geographical
distribution  of  non-indigenous  pests  under  current  and  future  climates. 
Agriculture Ecosystems and Environment, 82:5771.

Barer D, Ebrahim S, Smith C (1984) Factors affecting day to day incidence of

stroke in Nottingham. British Medical Journal, 289:662.

Beinin C (1981) An examination of health data following two major earthquakes

in Russia. Disasters, 5:142146.

Bentham G (1997) Health. In: Economic impacts of the hot summer and unusu-
ally warm year of 1995. Palutikof JP, Subak S, Agnew MD, eds. University
of East Anglia, Norwich.

Black RE, Lanata CF (1995) Epidemiology of diarrhoeal diseases in developing
countries.  In:  Infections  of  the  gastrointestinal  tract.  Blaser  MJ,  Smith  PD,
Ravdin JI, Greenberg HP, Guerrant RI, eds. Raven Press, New York.

BOM (2001) Climate zones for urban design. Available at

http://www.bom.gov.au/climate/environ/design/climzone.shtml.

Bos ET, Vu MT, Massiah E, Bulatao RA (1994) World population projections
19941995:  estimates  and  projections  with  related  demographic  statistics.
World Bank, Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, MD.

Bouma  MJ,  Dye  C,  van  der  Kaay  HJ  (1996)  Falciparum  malaria  and  climate
change in the Northwest Frontier Province of Pakistan. American Journal of
Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 55:131137.

Bouma MJ, Kovats RS, Goubet SA, Cox JSH, Haines A (1997a) Global assess-

ment of El Ninos disaster burden. The Lancet, 350:14351438.

Bouma  MJ,  Poveda  G,  Rojas  W  et  al.  (1997b)  Predicting  high-risk  years  for
malaria  in  Colombia  using  parameters  of  El  Nino  southern  oscillation. 
Tropical Medicine and International Health, 2:11221127.

Braga A, Zanobetti A, Schwartz J (2001) A tridimensional estimate of the lag
structure  between  temperature  and  total  daily  deaths  in  14  US  cities. 
Epidemiology, 12:180.

Broecker WS (1997) Thermohaline circulation, the Achilles heel of our climate
system:  will  man-made  CO2 upset  the  current  balance?  Science,  278:
15821588.

Campbell-Lendrum  DH,  Wilkinson  P,  Kuhn  K  et  al.  (2002)  Monitoring  the
health impacts of global climate change. In: Environmental change, climate
and  health:  issues  and  research  methods,  Martens  P,  McMichael  AJ,  eds. 
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Carcavallo RU, Curto de Casas SI (1996) Some health effects of global warming
in  South  America:  vector-borne  diseases.  Journal  of  Epidemiology,
6:S153S157.

Celli A (1933) A history of malaria in the Roman Campagna from ancient times.

AMS Press Inc., New York.

Chaudhury  A,  Nath  G,  Shukla  B,  Panda  S,  Singh  TB  (1996)  Diarrhoea 
associated  with  Candida spp.:  incidence  and  seasonal  variation.  Journal  of
Diarrhoeal Diseases Research, 14:110112.

1612

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

Checkley W, Epstein LD, Gilman RH et al. (2000) Effect of El Nino and ambient
temperature  on  hospital  admissions  for  diarrhoeal  diseases  in  Peruvian 
children. The Lancet, 355:442450.

Christophers RS (1911) Malaria in the Punjab: scientific memoirs by officers of
the  Medical  and  Sanitary  Department  of  the  Government  of  India. (New
Series,  No.  46.)  Medical  and  Sanitary  Department  of  the  Government  of
India. Government Press, Calcutta.

Coleman PG, Perry BD, Woolhouse MEJ (2001) Endemic stabilitya veterinary

idea applied to human public health. The Lancet, 357:12841286.

Cook SM, Glass RI, LeBaron CW, Ho MS (1990) Global seasonality of rotavirus

infections. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 68:171177.

Craig MH, Snow RW, Le Sueur D (1999) A climate-based distribution model of
malaria transmission in sub-Saharan Africa. Parasitology Today, 15:105111.
Curriero FC, Patz JA, Rose JB, Lele S (2001) The association between extreme
precipitation  and  waterborne  disease  outbreaks  in  the  United  States,
19481994. American Journal of Public Health, 91:11941199.

Curwen M, Devis T (1988) Winter mortality, temperature and influenza: has the

relationship changed in recent years? Population Trends, 54:1720.

Detinova  TS  (1962)  Age  grouping  methods  in  diptera  of  medical  importance,
with  special  reference  to  some  vectors  of  malaria.  World  Health  Organiza-
tion, Geneva.

Drasar  BS,  Tomkins  AM,  Feacham  RG  (1978)  Seasonal  aspects  of  diarrhoeal
disease.  Seasonal  dimensions  to  rural  poverty.  (Report  to  UK  Overseas 
Development  Association.)  London  School  of  Hygiene  and  Tropical 
Medicine, London.

Drinkwater  BL,  Horvath  SM  (1979)  Heat  tolerance  and  aging.  Medicine  and

Science in Sports and Exercise 11:4955.

Dye  C  (1992)  The  analysis  of  parasite  transmission  by  bloodsucking  insects.

Annual Review of Entomology, 37:119.

Dyson  T  (1999)  Prospects  for  feeding  the  world.  British  Medical  Journal,

319:988990.

Eberhard ML, Nace EK, Freeman AR, Streit TG, Da Silva AJ, Lammie PJ (1999)
Cyclospora  cayetanensis infections  in  Haiti:  a  common  occurrence  in  the
absence  of  watery  diarrhea.  American  Journal  of  Tropical  Medicine  and
Hygiene, 60:584586.

Ebi KL, Exuzides KA, Lau E, Kelsh M, Barsnton A (2001) Association of normal
weather conditions and El Nino events with viral pneumonia hospitalizations
in  females,  California,  19831998.  American  Journal  of  Public  Health,
91:12001208.

EM-DAT (2002) The OFDA/CRED international disaster database. Universite

Catholique de Louvain, Brussels.

Energy Modeling Forum (1995) Second round study design for EMF14. (EMF

Working Paper No. 14.1.) Energy Modeling Forum, Stanford, CA.

Epstein PR (1999) Climate and health. Science, 285:347348.

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1613

FAO (1987) Fifth world food survey. Food and Agriculture Organization of the

United Nations, Rome.

Fischer G, Frohberg K, Keyzer MA, Parikh KS (1988) Linked national models.

A tool for international food policy analysis. Kluwer, Dordrecht.

Fitzpatrick  FA,  Knox  JC  (2000)  Spatial  and  temporal  sensitivity  of  hydrogeo-
morphic  response  and  recovery  to  deforestation,  agriculture,  and  floods. 
Physical Geography, 21:89108.

Fleming DM, Norbury CA, Crombie DL (1991) Annual and seasonal variation
in the incidence of common diseases. The Royal College of General Practi-
tioners, London.

Focks DA, Daniels E, Haile DG, Keesling JE (1995) A simulation model of the
epidemiology of urban dengue fever: literature analysis, model development,
preliminary validation, and samples of simulation results. American Journal
of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 53:489506.

Focks DA, Haile DG, Daniels E, Mount GA (1993a) Dynamic life table model
for  Aedes  aegypti (diptera:  culicidae)  analysis  of  the  literature  and  model
development. Journal of Medical Entomology, 30:10031017.

Focks DA, Haile DG, Daniels E, Mount GA (1993b) Dynamic life table model
for  Aedes  aegypti (diptera:  culicidae)  simulation  results  and  validation.
Journal of Medical Entomology, 30:10181028.

Garrett-Jones  C  (1964)  Prognosis  for  interruption  of  malaria  transmission
through  assessment  of  the  mosquitos  vectorial  capacity.  Nature,  204:
11731175.

Goodess  C,  Hulme  M,  Osborn  T  (2001)  The  identification  and  evaluation  of
suitable scenario development methods of the estimation of future probabil-
ities of extreme weather events. School of Environmental Sciences, University
of Norwich, Norwich.

Guerrant RL, Kosek M, Lima AAM, Lorntz B, Guyatt HL (2002) Updating the

DALYs for diarrhoeal disease. Trends in Parasitology, 18:191193.

Guest  CS,  Willson  K,  Woodward  AJ  et  al.  (1999)  Climate  and  mortality  in 
Australia.  Retrospective  study,  19791990,  and  predicted  impacts  in  five
major cities in 2030. Climate Research, 13:115.

Hadley Centre (1999) Climate change and its impacts: stabilisation of CO2 in

the atmosphere. Hadley Centre, Reading.

Haddow  AJ  (1943)  Measurements  of  temperature  and  light  in  artificial 
pools with reference to the larval habitat of Anopheles (Myzomyia) gambiae
Giles  and  A.  (M.)  funestus Giles.  Bulletin  of  Entomological  Research, 
34:89.

Hajat S, Haines A, Atkinson RW, Bremner SA, Anderson HR, Emberlin J (2001)
Association between air pollution and daily consultations with general prac-
titioners for allergic rhinitis in London, United Kingdom. American Journal
of Epidemiology, 153:704714.

Hales  S,  de  Wet  N,  Maindonald  J,  Woodward  A  (2002)  Potential  effect  of 
population  and  climate  changes  on  global  distribution  of  dengue  fever:  an
empirical model. The Lancet, 360:830834.

1614

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

Halstead  SB  (1988)  Pathogenesis  of  dengue:  challenges  to  molecular  biology.

Science, 239:476481.

Hay  SI,  Cox  J,  Rogers  DJ  et  al.  (2002)  Climate  change  and  the  resurgence  of

malaria in the East African highlands. Nature, 415:905909.

Hay SI, Myers MF, Burke DS et al. (2000) Etiology of interepidemic periods of
mosquito-borne disease. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of
the United States of America, 97:93359339.

Hoozemans FMJ, Hulsburgen CH (1995) Sea-level rise: a worldwide assessment
of  risk  and  protection  costs.  In:  Climate  change:  impact  on  coastal  habita-
tion. Eisma D, ed. Lewis Publishers, London.

Hoozemans FMJ, Marchand M, Pennekamp HA (1993) A global vulnerability
analysis:  vulnerability  assessment  for  population,  coastal  wetlands  and  rice
production on a global scale. 2nd edn. Delft Hydraulics, Delft.

Hutchinson MF, Nix HA, McMahon JP, Ord KD (1996) The development of a
topographic  and  climate  database  for  Africa.  In:  Proceedings  of  the  third
international  conference/workshop  on  integrating  GIS  and  environmental
modeling, NCGIA, Santa Barbara, CA.

IBSNAT (1989) International benchmark sites network for agrotechnology trans-
fer.  Decision  Support  System  for  Agrotechnology  Transfer  Version  2.1
(DSSAT V2.1), Department of Agronomy and Soil Science, College of Trop-
ical Agriculture and Human Resources, University of Hawaii, HI.

IPCC  (1996)  Climate  change  1995:  impacts,  adaptations  and  mitigation  of
climate change: contribution of Working Group II to the second assessment
report  of  the  Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change. Watson  RT, 
Zinyowera MC, Moss RH, eds. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

IPCC (2001a) Climate change 2001: impacts, adaptation and vulnerability: con-
tribution  of  Working  Group  II  to  the  third  assessment  report  of  the  Inter-
governmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change.  McCarthy  JJ,  Canziani  OF,  Leary
NA, Dokken DJ, White KS, eds. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

IPCC (2001b) Climate change 2001: the scientific basis: contribution of Working
Group  I  to  the  third  assessment  report  of  the  Intergovernmental  Panel  on
Climate Change. Houghton JT, Ding Y, Griggs DJ, Noguer M, van der Linden
PJ, Xiaosu D, eds. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Jepson WF, Moutia A, Courtois C (1947) The malaria problem in Mauritius: the
bionomics of Mauritian anophelines. Bulletin of the Entomological Research,
38:177208.

Jetten  TH,  Focks  DA  (1997)  Potential  changes  in  the  distribution  of  dengue
transmission under climate warming. American Journal of Tropical Medicine
and Hygiene, 57:285287.

Jetten  TH,  Martens  WJM,  Takken  W  (1996)  Model  simulations  to  estimate
malaria risk under climate change. Journal of Medical Entomology, 33:361
371.

Jetten  TH,  Takken  W  (1994)  Anophelism  without  malaria  in  Europe:  a 
review  of  the  ecology  and  distribution  of  the  genus  Anopheles  in  Europe.
Wageningen Agricultural University Press, Wageningen.

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1615

Johns  TC,  Gregory  JM,  Stott  PA,  Mitchell  JFB  (2001)  Correlations  between 
patterns of 19th and 20th century surface temperature change and HadCM2
climate model ensembles. Geophysical Research Letters, 28:10071010.

Jovel  JR  (1989)  Natural  disasters  and  their  economic  and  social  impact. 
Economic  Commissions,  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean,  Santiago  de 
Chile.

Kalkstein LS, Greene JS (1997) An evaluation of climate/mortality relationships
in large US cities and the possible impacts of a climate change. Environmen-
tal Health Perspectives, 105:8493.

Karl TR, Knight RW (1998) Secular trends of precipitation amount, frequency,
and intensity in the United States. Bulletin of the American Meteorological
Society, 79:231241.

Katz  RW  (2002)  Techniques  for  estimating  uncertainty  in  climate  change  sce-

narios and impact studies. Climate Research, 20:167185.

Katz RW, Brown BG (1992) Extreme events in a changing climate: variability is

more important than averages. Climatic Change, 21:289302.

Keatinge  WR,  Coleshaw  SRK,  Easton  JC,  Cotter  F,  Mattock  MB,  Chelliah  R
(1986a) Increased platelet and red-cell counts, blood-viscosity, and plasma-
cholesterol levels during heat-stress, and mortality from coronary and cere-
bral thrombosis. American Journal of Medicine, 81:795800.

Keatinge WR, Coleshaw SRK, Holmes J (1989) Changes in seasonal mortalities
with improvement in home heating in England and Wales from 1964 to 1984.
International Journal of Biometeorology, 33:7176.

Keatinge WR, Coleshaw SRK, Millard CE, Axelsson J (1986b) Exceptional case

of survival in cold water. British Medical Journal, 292:171172.

Khaw  KT  (1995)  Temperature  and  cardiovascular  mortality.  The  Lancet

345:337338.

Kilbourne EM (1989) Heat waves. In: The public health consequences of disas-
ters. Gregg MB, ed. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA.

Kilbourne EM (1992) Illness due to thermal extremes. In: Public health and pre-
ventative medicine. Last JM, Wallace RB, eds. Appleton Lang, Norwalk, CT.
Knutti  R,  Stocker  TF,  Joos  F,  Plattner  G-K  (2002)  Constraints  on  radiative
forcing  and  future  climate  change  from  observations  and  climate  model
ensembles. Nature, 416:719723.

Konno T, Suzuki H, Katsushima N et al. (1983) Influence of temperature and
relative humidity on human rotavirus infection in Japan. Journal of Infectious
Diseases, 147:125128.

Kovats RS, Bouma MJ, Haines A (1999) El Nino and health, World Health Orga-

nization, Geneva.

Kovats  RS,  Campbell-Lendrum  DH,  McMichael  AJ,  Woodward  A,  Cox  JS
(2001)  Early  effects  of  climate  change:  do  they  include  changes  in  vector-
borne  disease?  Philosophical  Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society,  Series  B,
356:10571068.

1616

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

Kovats  RS,  Campbell-Lendrum  DH,  Reid  C,  Martens  P  (2000a)  Climate  and
vector-borne disease: an assessment of the role of climate in changing disease
patterns. ICIS/LSHTM/UNEP, Maastricht.

Kovats RS, Menne B, McMichael AJ, Corvalan C, Bertollini R (2000b) Climate
change and human health: impact and adaptation. (WHO Technical Report
WHO/SDE/OEH/00.4.) World Health Organization, Geneva.

Kuhn  KG,  Campbell-Lendrum  DH,  Armstrong  B,  Davies  CR  (2003)  Malaria 
in Britain: past, present and future. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences, USA, 100:999710001.

Kundzewicz  ZW,  Kaczmarek  Z  (2000)  Coping  with  hydrological  extremes.

Water International, 25:6675.

Kunst  A,  Looman  C,  Mackenbach  J  (1993)  Outdoor  air  temperature  and 
mortality  in  the  Netherlandsa  time  series  analysis.  American  Journal  of 
Epidemiology, 137:331341.

Kunzli  N,  Kaiser  R,  Medina  S  et  al.  (2000)  Public-health  impact  of  outdoor 
and  traffic-related  air  pollution:  a  European  assessment.  The  Lancet,  356:
795801.

Le  Sueur  D  (1991)  The  ecology,  over-wintering  and  population  dynamics  of 
the Anopheles gambiae (diptera: culicidae) complex in northern Natal, South
Africa. [Dissertation.] University of Natal, Pietermaritzburg.

Lindgren  E,  Talleklint  L,  Polfeldt  T  (2000)  Impact  of  climatic  change  on  the
northern  latitude  limit  and  population  density  of  the  disease-transmitting
European  tick  Ixodes  ricinus.  Environmental  Health  Perspectives,  108:
119123.

Loevinsohn  ME  (1994)  Climatic  warming  and  increased  malaria  incidence  in

Rwanda. The Lancet, 343:714718.

Longstreth J (1999) Public health consequences of global climate change in the
United  Statessome  regions  may  suffer  disproportionately.  Environmental
Health Perspectives, 107:169179.

MacDonald  G  (1957)  The  epidemiology  and  control  of  malaria.  Oxford 

University Press, London.

Mackenbach JP, Borst V, Schols JM (1997) Heat-related mortality among nursing

home patients. The Lancet, 349:12971298.

Maharaj R (1995) Effects of temperature on members of the Anopheles gambiae
complex (diptera: culicidae) in South Africaimplications for malaria trans-
mission and control. [Dissertation.] University of Natal, Pietermaritzburg.

Martens P, Kovats RS, Nijhof S et al. (1999) Climate change and future popu-
lations at risk of malaria. Global Environmental ChangeHuman and Policy
Dimensions, 9:S89S107.

Martens  P,  McMichael  AJ  (2002) Environmental  change,  climate  and  health.

Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

Martens W (1998a) Climate change, thermal stress and mortality changes. Social

Science Medicine, 46:331334.

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1617

Martens WJ, Jetten TH, Rotmans J, Niessen LW (1995a) Climate change and
vector-borne diseases: a global modelling perspective. Global Environmental
Change, 5:195209.

Martens WJ, Niessen LW, Rotmans J, Jetten TH, McMichael AJ (1995b) Poten-
tial impact of global climate change on malaria risk. Environmental Health
Perspectives, 103:458464.

Martens WJM (1998b) Health impacts of climate change and ozone depletion:
an ecoepidemiologic modeling approach. Environmental Health Perspectives,
106:241251.

Martens WJM, Jetten TH, Focks DA (1997) Sensitivity of malaria, schistosomi-

asis and dengue to global warming. Climatic Change, 35:145156.

Martin  PH,  Lefebvre  MG  (1995)  Malaria  and  climatesensitivity  of  malaria

potential transmission to climate. Ambio, 24:200207.

Mason  SJ,  Waylen  PR,  Mimmack  GM,  Rajaratnam  B,  Harrison  JM  (1999)
Changes  in  extreme  rainfall  events  in  South  Africa.  Climatic  Change,
41:249257.

Massad  E,  Forattini  OP  (1998)  Modelling  the  temperature  sensitivity  of  some
physiological  parameters  of  epidemiologic  significance.  Ecosystem  Health,
4:119129.

McGregor  GR,  Walters  S,  Wordley  J  (1999)  Daily  hospital  respiratory  admis-
sions and winter air mass types, Birmingham, UK. International Journal of
Biometeorology, 43:2130.

McMichael  AJ,  Githeko  A  (2001)  Human  health.  In:  Climate  change  2001:
impacts, adaptation and vulnerability. McCathy JJ, Canziani OF, Leary NA,
Dokken DJ, White KS, eds. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

McMichael  AJ,  Haines  A,  Slooff  R,  Kovats  RS  (1996)  Climate  change  and
human  health:  an  assessment  by  a  task  group  on  behalf  of  the  World 
Health  Organization,  the  World  Meteorological  Organization  and  the 
United Nations Environment Programme. (WHO/EHG/96.7.) World Health
Organization, Geneva.

McMichael  AJ,  Kovats  RS  (2000)  Strategies  for  assessing  health  impacts  of
global environmental change. In: Implementing ecological integrity: restoring
regional and global environmental and human health. Westra L, ed. Kluwer
Academic Publishers, Dordrecht.

McMichael  AJ,  Kovats  RS,  Cawthorne  A  et  al.  (2000a) Fast-track:  climate
change  and  human  health.  Department  of  Environment,  Transport  and  the
Regions Global Atmosphere Division, London.

McMichael AJ, Campbell-Lendrum DH, Corvalan CF et al. eds. (2003) Climate
change and human health: risks and responses. World Health Organization,
Geneva.

Menne B, Pond K, Noji EK, Bertollini R (1999) Floods and public health con-
sequences,  prevention  and  control  measures.  WHO  European  Centre  for
Environment and Health, Rome.

Milly PCD, Wetherald RT, Dunne KA, Delworth TL (2002) Increasing risk of

great floods in a changing climate. Nature, 415:514517.

1618

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

Mouchet J (1998) Malaria epidemics on the Highlands of Madagascar and of
East  and  South  Africa.  Bulletin  de  la  Societe  de  Pathologie  Exotique,
91:6466.

Mouchet J, Manguin S (1999) Global warming and malaria expansion. Annales

de la Societe Entomologique de France, 35:549555.

Murray  CJL,  Lopez  AD,  eds.  (1996)  The  global  burden  of  disease:  a  compre-
hensive assessment of mortality and disability from diseases, injuries and risk
factors in 1990 and projected to 2020. Global Burden of Disease and Injury,
Vol. 1. Harvard School of Public Health on behalf of the WHO, Cambridge,
MA.

National Research Council (2001a) Abrupt climate change: inevitable surprises.

National Academy Press, Washington, DC.

National Research Council (2001b) Under the weather: climate, ecosystems, and

infectious disease. National Academy Press, Washington, DC.

New M, Hulme M, Jones P (1999) Representing twentieth-century space-time
climate variability. Part I. Development of a 196190 mean monthly terres-
trial climatology. Journal of Climate, 12:829856.

Nicholls  RJ,  Hoozemans  FMJ,  Marchand  M  (1999)  Increasing  flood  risk  and
wetland  losses  due  to  global  sealevel  rise:  regional  and  global  analyses.
Global Environmental Change-Human and Policy Dimensions, 9:S69S87.
Noji EK (1997) The public health consequences of disasters. Oxford University

Press. New York.

Otter-Nacke  S,  Godwin  DC,  Ritchie  JT  (1986)  Testing  and  validating  the
CERES-wheat  model  in  diverse  environments.  (AGGRISTARS  YM-15-
00407). Johnson Space Center, Houston, TX.

Palmer TN, Ralsanen J (2002) Quantifying the risk of extreme seasonal precip-

itation events in a changing climate. Nature, 415:512514.

Parry  M,  Rosenzweig  C,  Iglesias  A,  Fischer  G,  Livermore  M.  (1999)  Climate
change  and  world  food  security:  a  new  assessment.  Global  Environmental
Change-Human and Policy Dimensions, 9:S51S67.

Patz  JA,  Martens  WJM,  Focks  DA,  Jetten  TH  (1998)  Dengue  fever  epidemic
potential as projected by general circulation models of global climate change.
Environmental Health Perspectives, 106:147153.

Patz JA, McGeehin MA, Bernard SM et al. (2000) The potential health impacts
of climate variability and change for the United States: executive summary of
the report of the health sector of the US National Assessment. Environmen-
tal Health Perspectives, 108:367376.

Phifer JF (1990) Psychological distress and somatic symptoms after natural dis-
aster:  differential  vulnerability  among  older  adults.  Psychology  and  Aging,
5:412420.

Pielke RA (1999) Nine fallacies of floods. Climatic Change, 42:413438.
Purohit  SG,  Kelkar  SD,  Simha  V  (1998)  Time  series  analysis  of  patients  with
rotavirus diarrhoea in Pune, India. Journal of Diarrhoeal Diseases Research,
16:7483.

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1619

Randolph  S  (2001)  Tick-borne  encephalitis  in  Europe.  The  Lancet,  358:

17311732.

Randolph SE, Green RM, Peacey MF, Rogers DJ (2000) Seasonal synchrony: the
key  to  tick-borne  encephalitis  foci  identified  by  satellite  data.  Parasitology,
121:1523.

Randolph  SE,  Rogers  DJ  (2000)  Fragile  transmission  cycles  of  tick-borne
encephalitis virus may be disrupted by predicted climate change. Proceedings
of the Royal Society of London Series B, 267:17411744.

Reiter  P  (2001)  Climate  change  and  mosquito-borne  disease.  Environmental

Health Perspectives, 109:141161.

Reiter P et al. (2003) Texas lifestyle limits transmission of dengue virus. Emerg-

ing Infectious Diseases, 9:8689.

Rivers JPW (1982) Women and children last: an essay on sex discrimination in

disasters. Disasters, 6:256267.

Robins-Browne RM (1984) Seasonal and racial incidence of infantile gastroen-
teritis  in  South  Africa.  American  Journal  of  Epidemiology,  119:350
355.

Rogers DJ, Packer MJ (1993) Vector-borne diseases, models and global change.

The Lancet, 342:12821284.

Rogers DJ, Randolph SE (2000) The global spread of malaria in a future, warmer

world. Science, 289:17631766.

Rogers DJ, Randolph SE, Snow RW, Hay SI (2002) Satellite imagery in the study

and forecast of malaria. Nature, 415:710715.

Rosenzweig  C,  Iglesias  A,  Yang  XB,  Epstein  PR,  Chivian  E  (2001)  Climate
change and extreme weather events: implications for food production, plant
diseases, and pests. Global Change and Human Health, 2:90104.

Rosenzweig C, Parry ML (1994) Potential impact of climate-change on world

food-supply. Nature, 367:133138.

Rosenzweig  C,  Parry  ML,  Fischer  G,  Frohberg  K  (1993)  Climate  change  and
world  food  supply.  Environmental  Change  Unit,  University  of  Oxford,
Oxford.

Rothwell PM, Wroe SJ, Slattery J, Warlow CP (1996) Is stroke incidence related

to season or temperature? The Lancet, 347:934936.

Schlesinger  ME,  Williams  LJ  (1997)  COSMICCOuntry  Specific  Model  for
Intertemporal Climate, computer software. Electric Power Research Institute,
Palo Alto, CA.

Schneider SH (2002) Can we estimate the likelihood of climatic changes at 2100?

Climatic Change, 52:441451.

Schwartz J, Samet J, Patz J (2001) The effects of temperature and humidity on

hospital admissions for heart disease. Epidemiology, 12:61.

Schwartz J, Spix C, Touloumi G et al. (1996) Methodological issues in studies
of air pollution and daily counts of death or hospital admissions. Journal of
Epidemiology and Community Health, 50:S311.

1620

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

Shindell  DT,  Rind  D,  Lonergan  P  (1998)  Increased  polar  stratospheric  ozone
losses and delayed eventual recovery owing to increasing greenhouse-gas con-
centrations. Nature, 392:589592.

Singh RB, Hales S, de Wet N, Raj R, Hearnden M, Weinstein P (2001) The influ-
ence of climate variation and change on diarrheal disease in the Pacific Islands.
Environmental Health Perspectives, 109:155159.

Snow RW, Marsh K (1995) Will reducing Plasmodium falciparum transmission
alter  malaria  mortality  among  African  children?  Parasitology  Today,  11:
188190.

Stott  PA,  Kettleborough  JA  (2002)  Origins  and  estimates  of  uncertainty 
in  predictions  of  twenty-first  century  temperature  rise.  Nature,  416:723
726.

Sutherst RW (1998) Implications of global change and climate variability for vec-
torborne  diseases:  generic  approaches  to  impact  assessments.  International
Journal for Parasitology, 28:935945.

Sutherst RW, Yonow T, Chakraborty S, ODonnell C, White N (1996) A generic
approach to defining impacts of climate change on pests, weeds and diseases
in  Australia.  In:  Greenhouse:  coping  with  climatic  change. Bouma  WJ,
Pearman GJ, Manning MR, eds. CSIRO, Melbourne.

Tanser  FC,  Sharp  B,  Le  Sueur  D  (2003)  Potential  effect  of  climate  change  on

malaria transmission in Africa. The Lancet, 362:17921798.

Tett  SFB,  Johns  TC,  Mitchell  JFB  (1997)  Global  and  regional  variability  in  a

coupled AOGCM. Climate Dynamics, 13:303323.

Tol RSJ, Dowlatabadi H (2001) Vector-borne diseases, development and climate

change. Integrated Assessment, 2:173181.

UNDMTP  (1990)  DMTP  training  modules,  United  Nations  Disaster  Manage-

ment Training Programme. Available at http://www.undmtp.org/.

Vassallo M, Navarro K, Allen S (1995) Factors associated with high risk of mar-
ginal  hyperthermia  in  elderly  patients  living  in  an  institution.  Postgraduate
Medical Journal, 71:213216.

Walther GR, Post E, Convey P et al. (2002) Ecological responses to recent climate

change. Nature, 416:389395.

Wang XD, Smith KR (1999) Secondary benefits of greenhouse gas control: health

impacts in China. Environmental Science and Technology, 33:30563061.

Waterlow  J,  Armstrong  DG,  Fowden  L,  Riley  R  (1998)  Feeding  a  world 
population  of  more  than  eight  billion  people.  Oxford  University  Press.
Oxford.

Wayne P, Foster S, Connolly J et al. (2002) Production of allergenic pollen by
ragweed  (Ambrosia  artemisiifolia  L.)  is  increased  in  CO2-enriched  atmos-
pheres. Annals of Allergy, Asthma and Immunology, 88:279282.

Wheeler  JG,  Sethi  D,  Cowden  JM  et  al.  (1999)  Study  of  infectious  intestinal
disease  in  England:  rates  in  the  community,  presenting  to  general  practice,
and  reported  to  national  surveillance.  British  Medical  Journal, 318:
10461050.

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1621

Whitman S, Good G, Donoghue ER, Benbow N, Shou W, Mou S (1997) Mor-
tality in Chicago attributed to the July 1995 heat wave. American Journal of
Public Health, 87:15151518.

WHO (1992) Psychological consequences of disasters. World Health Organiza-

tion, Geneva.

WHO (2000a) WHO report on global surveillance of epidemic-prone infectious
diseases.  (WHO/CDS/CSR/ISR/2000.1.)  Anker  M,  Schaaf  D,  eds.  World
Health Organization, Geneva.

WHO  (2000b)  The  world  health  report  2000.  World  Health  Organization,

Geneva.

WHO (2002) Global database on child growth and malnutrition. Available at

http://www.who.int/nutgrowthdb/.

WHO/EHA (1998) Emergency health training programme for Africa. Panafrican

Emergency Training Centre, Addis Ababa.

WHO/EHA (2002) Technical hazard sheetdrought. World Health Organiza-

tion, Department of Emergency and Humanitarian Action, Geneva.

WHO/PTC  (1995)  Drought:  preparedness  and  response  in  the  health  sector.
World  Health  Organization/Panafrican  Emergency  Training  Centre,  Addis
Ababa.

Woodhouse PR, Khaw KT, Plummer M (1993) Seasonal variation of blood pres-
sure  and  its  relationship  to  ambient  temperature  in  an  elderly  population.
Journal of Hypertension, 11:12671274.

Woodhouse PR, Khaw KT, Plummer M, Foley A, Meade TW (1994) Seasonal
variations of plasma fibrinogen and factor VII activity in the elderly: winter
infections and death from cardiovascular disease. The Lancet, 343:435439.
Woodward A, Hales S, Weinstein P (1998) Climate change and human health in
the  Asia  Pacific  region:  who  will  be  most  vulnerable?  Climate  Research,
11:3138.

World  Bank  (1994)  World  population  projections  19941995.  Johns  Hopkins

University Press, Baltimore, MD.

World  Climate  (2002)  Average  temperature  at  Laucala  Bay,  Fiji.  Available  at
http://www.worldclimate.com/cgi-bin/data.pl?ref=S18E178+1102+91690W.
Yohe G, Tol RSJ (2002) Indicators for social and economic coping capacity
moving  toward  a  working  definition  of  adaptive  capacity.  Global  Environ-
mental Change, 12:2540.

Ziska  LH,  Caulfield  F  (2000)  The  potential  influence  of  rising  atmospheric
carbon  dioxide  (CO2)  on  public  health:  pollen  production  of  common
ragweed as a test case. World Resource Review, 12:449457.

1622

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

Appendix A: Uncertainty around climate predictions
Results presented here were generated using COSMIC (Country Specific
Model for Intertemporal Climate) (Schlesinger and Williams 1997). This
contains simplified versions of the 14 different climate models used by
the  IPCC,  and  gives  output  at  the  country  level.  Each  model  was  run
specifying three different plausible sensitivities (1.5, 2.5 and 4.5C) to
the effects of a doubling of atmospheric CO2, generating 42 alternative
future climate scenarios for each GHG emissions scenario. Estimates for
changes in annual average temperature and precipitation were generated
for  each  subregion  by  taking  population  weighted  averages  of  the
country  level  estimates.  Means,  ranges  and  95%  confidence  intervals
assume independence, and equal probability for each future model and
climate sensitivity. All values in figures and tables are for changes rela-
tive to 1990.

Figure A.1 Mean and 95% CI of COSMIC model outputs for temperature

change in the 2020s (relative to 1990) for each subregion under
each GHG emissions scenario

1.4

1.2

)

C


1

(
 
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
T

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

s550

s750

UE

AFR-D AFR-E

AMR-A AMR-B AMR-D EMR-B EMR-D EUR-A EUR-B

EUR-C SEAR-B SEAR-D WPR-A WPR-B

Subregion

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1623

Table A.1

Mean and range of COSMIC model outputs, for
temperature change in the 2020s, relative to 1990a

(a) S550

Subregion

AFR-D
AFR-E
AMR-A
AMR-B
AMR-D
EMR-B
EMR-D
EUR-A
EUR-B
EUR-C
SEAR-B
SEAR-D
WPR-A
WPR-B

(b) S750

Subregion

AFR-D
AFR-E
AMR-A
AMR-B
AMR-D
EMR-B
EMR-D
EUR-A
EUR-B
EUR-C
SEAR-B
SEAR-D
WPR-A
WPR-B

Mean dT (C)

95% CI 

0.53 (0.460.59)
0.50 (0.440.56)
0.68 (0.600.77)
0.50 (0.440.56)
0.45 (0.390.51)
0.67 (0.590.76)
0.63 (0.550.71)
0.64 (0.560.72)
0.66 (0.580.74)
0.73 (0.650.82)
0.40 (0.350.45)
0.51 (0.440.57)
0.58 (0.510.64)
0.64 (0.560.71)

Mean dT (C)

95% CI 

0.59 (0.520.66)
0.56 (0.490.63)
0.77 (0.680.86)
0.56 (0.490.62)
0.51 (0.450.57)
0.76 (0.670.85)
0.71 (0.630.80)
0.72 (0.640.81)
0.74 (0.650.83)
0.82 (0.730.92)
0.45 (0.390.51)
0.57 (0.500.64)
0.65 (0.580.72)
0.72 (0.630.80)

Minmax range

COSMIC version HadCM2

(2.5C sensitivity)

0.240.97
0.230.96
0.321.21
0.250.87
0.210.86
0.281.25
0.281.19
0.311.12
0.281.18
0.371.23
0.170.77
0.220.98
0.270.97
0.311.25

0.53
0.50
0.70
0.47
0.42
0.67
0.62
0.64
0.73
0.72
0.35
0.50
0.54
0.61

Minmax range

COSMIC version HadCM2

(2.5C sensitivity)

0.281.08
0.271.06
0.371.35
0.290.97
0.240.95
0.331.39
0.331.32
0.361.25
0.321.31
0.431.37
0.200.86
0.251.09
0.311.08
0.361.39

0.61
0.57
0.79
0.53
0.48
0.76
0.71
0.72
0.83
0.81
0.40
0.57
0.61
0.69

1624

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

Table A.1

Mean and range of COSMIC model outputs, for
temperature change in the 2020s, relative to 1990a
(continued)

(c) Unmitigated emissions

Subregion

AFR-D
AFR-E
AMR-A
AMR-B
AMR-D
EMR-B
EMR-D
EUR-A
EUR-B
EUR-C
SEAR-B
SEAR-D
WPR-A
WPR-B

Mean dT (C)

95% CI 

0.83 (0.730.92)
0.78 (0.700.87)
1.07 (0.961.19)
0.78 (0.690.86)
0.71 (0.630.79)
1.06 (0.941.17)
0.99 (0.881.11)
1.01 (0.901.12)
1.03 (0.921.15)
1.15 (1.031.27)
0.63 (0.550.70)
0.80 (0.700.89)
0.91 (0.811.00)
1.00 (0.891.11)

Minmax range

COSMIC version HadCM2

(2.5C sensitivity)

0.411.47
0.391.45
0.541.83
0.421.32
0.351.29
0.481.88
0.481.79
0.521.69
0.461.78
0.631.86
0.291.17
0.361.49
0.451.46
0.531.89

0.85
0.80
1.11
0.75
0.67
1.08
1.00
1.02
1.17
1.15
0.56
0.80
0.86
0.97

a Results of the simplified version of the HadCM2 model at medium (2.5 C) sensitivity are shown for

comparison.

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1625

Figure A.2 Mean and 95% CI of COSMIC model outputs for precipitation

change in the 2020s (relative to 1990), for each subregion under
each GHG emissions scenario

)

m
m

(
 
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
n
o
i
t
a
t
i
p
i
c
e
r
P

60.00

50.00

40.00

30.00

20.00

10.00

0.00

s550

s750

UE

AFR-D AFR-E AMR-A AMR-B AMR-D EMR-B EMR-D EUR-A EUR-B EUR-C SEAR-B SEAR-D WPR- A WPR- B

Subregion

1626

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

Table A.2

Mean and range of COSMIC model outputs, for change in
annual precipitation in the 2020s, relative to 1990a

(a) S550

Subregion

AFR-D
AFR-E
AMR-A
AMR-B
AMR-D
EMR-B
EMR-D
EUR-A
EUR-B
EUR-C
SEAR-B
SEAR-D
WPR-A
WPR-B

(b) S750

Subregion

AFR-D
AFR-E
AMR-A
AMR-B
AMR-D
EMR-B
EMR-D
EUR-A
EUR-B
EUR-C
SEAR-B
SEAR-D
WPR-A
WPR-B

Mean dPrecipn (mm)

95% CI

8.18 (4.3611.99)
6.71 (1.2912.14)
12.01 (8.5315.48)
9.17 (3.1215.22)
20.03 (13.8726.18)
3.45 (1.385.52)
9.05 (6.7111.38)
9.94 (7.1012.77)
3.33 (1.185.47)
11.50 (9.1413.86)
20.11 (11.0529.16)
25.87 (20.7431.01)
14.39 (8.9319.84)
14.82 (10.8218.82)

Mean dPrecipn (mm)

95% CI

9.25 (4.9713.52)
7.67 (1.6613.68)
13.52 (9.6317.40)
10.32 (3.5417.10)
22.61 (15.7329.49)
4.24 (1.626.86)
10.33 (7.7112.94)
11.19 (8.0214.35)
3.74 (1.346.15)
12.95 (10.3415.57)
23.00 (12.6933.32)
29.15 (23.4534.85)
16.22 (10.1122.33)
16.70 (12.2421.17)

Minmax range

15.843.88
31.8357.55
10.3854.00
41.4760.79
31.1771.40
7.1025.61
1.8332.97
9.5843.69
9.5515.18
0.7237.68
35.40135.16
4.4071.19
33.5668.61
7.3655.37

Minmax range

17.6648.79
31.0263.98
11.7960.07
46.1167.59
34.6479.40
7.8937.10
2.0536.66
10.8548.58
10.8216.88
0.8341.90
39.37150.27
5.0779.18
37.3076.29
8.1962.12

COSMIC version HadCM2

(2.5C sensitivity)

4.92
14.88
13.56
5.28
33.48
2.52
5.76
14.88
7.56
12.48
7.20
17.64
1.32
13.44

COSMIC version HadCM2

(2.5C sensitivity)

5.60
16.83
15.43
5.97
37.88
3.03
6.47
16.87
8.60
14.18
8.23
19.94
1.49
15.22

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1627

Table A.2

Mean and range of COSMIC model outputs, for change in
annual precipitation in the 2020s, relative to 1990a
(continued)

(c) Unmitigated emissions

Subregion

AFR-D
AFR-E
AMR-A
AMR-B
AMR-D
EMR-B
EMR-D
EUR-A
EUR-B
EUR-C
SEAR-B
SEAR-D
WPR-A
WPR-B

Mean dPrecipn (mm)

95% CI

13.39 (7.4419.35)
11.67 (3.6919.64)
18.81 (13.4924.13)
14.76 (5.6423.88)
31.84 (22.3841.31)
6.54 (2.7510.34)
15.10 (11.3718.82)
15.58 (11.2419.92)
5.22 (1.908.53)
18.04 (14.5021.58)
32.75 (17.9547.54)
40.72 (33.0048.44)
22.67 (14.2331.11)
23.33 (17.1829.47)

Minmax range

23.8566.26
37.4086.89
16.6081.56
52.8792.27
47.05107.81
10.4954.18
2.5549.78
15.3065.98
15.2722.92
1.2256.88
53.44220.93
7.38107.89
50.64104.49
11.1386.26

COSMIC version HadCM2

(2.5C sensitivity)

7.96
23.74
21.78
8.42
53.44
4.69
9.14
23.79
12.13
19.99
11.62
28.12
2.09
21.45

a Results of the simplified version of the HadCM2 model at medium (2.5 C) sensitivity are shown for

comparison.

1628

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

Appendix B: Literature review
For  all  impacts,  we  attempted  to  find  all  models  that  directly  related
climate change to the selected health effects, either at the global or large-
regional level. We describe all such models, and outline reasons for using
or not using them in the assessment. Note that the comments given relate
to their relative suitability for generating the estimates required for this
assessment,  rather  than  a  general  judgement  on  their  merits.  For  the
effects of thermal extremes, we also include a summary of the study pop-
ulations that were used to derive the heat and cold estimates used in this
assessment.

Where existing global or large scale regional models are not consid-
ered appropriate (thermal extremes), or do not exist at all (diarrhoea and
floods),  the  literature  search  describes  the  procedure  for  identifying 
relevant  studies  from  which  to  derive  new  quantitative  climatehealth
relationships and generate models.

1629

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c

l
a
n
o
s
a
e
s
 
r
o

f
 
l
o
r
t
n
o
c
 
f
o
 
k
c
a
L

 
s
t
c
e
f
f
e
 
t
a
e
h
 
g
n
i
t
a
m

i
t
s
e
-
r
e
v
o

 
s
p
a
h
r
e
p

,
s
n
o
i
t
a
i
r
a
v

l
a
b
o
l
g
 
n
a
h
t
 
r
e
h
t
a
r
 
l
a
c
o
L

)
a
8
9
9
1
(
 
s
n
e
t
r
a
M
 
r
o

f
 
s
A

i

.
g
n
e
g
a

,

h
t
w
o
r
g
 
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p
 
o
N

.
t
n
e
m

j

t
s
u
d
a
 
l
a
n
o
s
a
e
s
 
o
N

Anthony J. McMichael et al.


e
s
a
e
s
i
d

 
r
a
l
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
c


i

 
;


y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m


 
;


e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t


 
s

i

m
r
e
t
 
e
h
t
 
g
n
n
i
a
t
n
o
c
 
)
2
0
0
2

6
6
9
1
(
 
s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
r
 
l
l
a
 
r
o
f
 

h
c
r
a
e
s
 
e
n

i
l

d
e
M

)
a
1
0
0
2
(
 

C
C
P
I
 

n

i
 

d
e
t
i
c
 
s
r
e
p
a
p

 
t
n
a
v
e
l
e
r
 
l
l
a






r
e
h
t
a
e
w


 
;


y
r
o
t
a
r
i
p
s
e
r


 
;
)

D
V
C
 
r
o
(

.
s
r
e
p
a
p

 
e
s
e
h
t
 
n
i
 

d
e
t
i
c
 
s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
r



:
s
e
c
r
u
o
s
 

n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n
I

S
E
M
E
R
T
X
E

L
A
M
R
E
H
T

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a
 
s
i
h
t
 
r
o
f
 
s
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

 
g
n
i
t
a
r
e
n
e
g
 
r
o
f
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
i
u
S

a
s
e
m
e
r
t
x
e
 
l
a
m
r
e
h
t
 
o
t
 
e
u
d
 
s
h
t
a
e
d
 
n
o
 
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
f
o
 
s
t
c
e
f
f
e
 
r
o

f
 
h
c
r
a
e
s
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
t
i
l
 
f
o
 
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

.

1
B
 
e
b
a
T

l

i

s
g
n
d
n
fi
 
y
e
K

i

n
o
g
e
R

s
t
u
p
n
I

d
o
h
t
e
M

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

:

i

d
e
d
o
v
a
 
s
h
t
a
e
d
 
r
e
t
n

i

W

 
d
n
a
 
d
n
a
l
g
n
E

T
d
 
e
g
a
r
e
v
a
 
l
a
n
o
s
a
e
S

9
2
4
 
D
V
C

6
3
8
 
D
V
C

7
8
1
1
 
D
V
C

,

8
0
3
1
 
D
H

I

,

0
5
5
2
 
D
H

I

,

1
3
6
3
 
D
H

I

,

1
0
3
3
 
e
s
u
a
c
 
l
l
a

,

3
5
3
6
 
e
s
u
a
c
 
l
l
a

,

2
2
9
8
 
e
s
u
a
c
 
l
l
a

:

0
1
0
2

:

0
3
0
2

:

0
5
0
2

s
e
l
a

W

,
)
5
6
<
(
 

D
V
C
 
r
o

f
 
s
e
t
a
r
 
y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m
 
n

i
 
s
e
g
n
a
h
C

y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m

 
l
a
t
o
t
 
d
n
a

,

y
r
o
t
a
r
i
p
s
e
r

,
)
5
6
>
(
 

D
V
C

 
s
e
i
t
i
c
 
l
l
a
 
n

i
 
y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m
 
n

i
 
s
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r
 
t
e
N

 
s
e
i
t
i
c
 
w
e
f
 
a
 
n

i
 
y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m
 
y
r
o
t
a
r
i
p
s
e
r
 
t
p
e
c
x
e

s
e
i
t
i
c
 
0
2

 
s
e
i
t
i
c
 
l
l
a
 
n

i
 
y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m
 
n

i
 
s
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
e
r
 
t
e
N



l
a
b
o
G

l

 
n

i
 
s
e
s
a
e
r
c
e
d
 
o
t
 
e
u
d

,
s
n
e
h
t
A

 
t
p
e
c
x
e

s
e
i
t
i
c
 
0
2

y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m
 
r
e
t
n
w

i

 
 
e
g
a
+
e
s
u
a
C

.

i

c
fi
c
e
p
s



l
a
b
o
G

l

 

m
o
d
g
n
K

i

 
d
e
t
i
n
U
m
o
r
f

 

 
k
c
i
r
r
a

W

(
 
s
o
i
r
a
n
e
c
s

,

R
T
K
U

,

A
-
1
M
A
H
C
E

 

C
C
P
I
(
 
9
8
L
D
F
G

)
1
9
9
1
 
w
o
r
r
a
B

 
d
n
a

)
s
o
i
r
a
n
e
c
s

l

 
e
b
m
e
s
n
e

,

2
M
C
d
a
H

3
M
C
d
a
H
+
n
a
e
m

d
e

i
l

p
p
a
 
s
a
w
 
p
h
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r

i

)
d
e
d
u
c
n

l

i
 
u
fl
(

 
d
n
a
 
y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m
 
y
h
t
n
o
m

l

 
s
e
i
r
e
s
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t

:
l

e
d
o
m
 
n
o
i
s
s
e
r
g
e
R

)
5
9
9
1
(
 

m
a
h
t
n
e
B

 
d
n
a
 
d
r
o
f
g
n
a
L

 
 
e
l
g
n
i
s
 
A

.
s
i
s
y
l
a
n
a
-
a
t
e
m

y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m
-
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t

,
l

e
d
o
m

 
l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

 
-
l
a
c
i
r
i
p
m
e


.

0
1
v

A
M
S
A
M

I

)
a
8
9
9
1
(
 
s
n
e
t
r
a
M

s
e
i
t
i
c
 
l
l
a
 
o
t

 
r
o

f
 
s
a



.

0
1
.
v
A
M
S
A
M

I

)
a
8
9
9
1
(
 
s
n
e
t
r
a
M

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
l
e
a
h
c
i
M
c
M

)
b
0
0
0
2
(

1630

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

l

c
i
t
p
o
n
y
s
 
n
o
 
y
e
r
 
d
e
s
u
 
s
d
o
h
t
e
M

 
e
b
 
t
o
n
n
a
c
 
e
r
o
f
e
r
e
h
t

;
s
e
s
s
a
m

 
s
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
o
t
 
d
e
t
a
l
e
r
 
y
l
t
c
e
r
i
d

 
d
e
b
i
r
c
s
e
d
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t
 
n

i

 
r
i
a
 
l
a
c
o
l
 
f
o
 
n
o
i
t
a
c
fi
i
s
s
a
l
c

s
o
i
r
a
n
e
c
s
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
y
b

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a
 
s
i
h
t
 
r
o
f
 
s
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

 
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
s
u
o
i
r
a
v
 
r
e
d
n
u
 
y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m

s
e
i
t
i
c
 
l
l
a
 
r
o

f
 
d
e
t
c
e
o
r
p

j

,

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
t
a
m

i
l

c
c
a

 
t
u
o
h
t
i

w
 
r
o
 
h
t
i

w

,
s
o
i
r
a
n
e
c
s

 
d
e
t
a
l
e
r
-
t
a
e
h
 
n

i
 
s
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i
 
t
n
a
c
fi
n
g
i
S

i



l
a
b
o
G

l

s
e
i
t
i
c
 
7
2

 
o
n

,
s
o
i
r
a
n
e
c
s
 

M
C
G

g
n

i
l
a
c
s
n
w
o
d

 
 

m
o
r
f
 
d
e
v
i
r
e
d
 
l
e
d
o
M

i

 
p
h
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
d
e
v
r
e
s
b
o

 
r
i
a
 
c
i
t
p
o
n
y
s
 
n
e
e
w
t
e
b

y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m
 
d
n
a
 
s
e
s
s
a
m

i

 
d
n
a
 
n
e
t
s
k
l
a
K

)
3
9
9
1
(
 
r
e
y
o
m
S

i

s
g
n
d
n
fi
 
y
e
K

i

n
o
g
e
R

s
t
u
p
n
I

d
o
h
t
e
M

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

 
g
n
i
t
a
r
e
n
e
g
 
r
o
f
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
i
u
S

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(

a
s
e
m
e
r
t
x
e
 
l
a
m
r
e
h
t
 
o
t
 
e
u
d
 
s
h
t
a
e
d
 
n
o
 
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
f
o
 
s
t
c
e
f
f
e
 
r
o

f
 
h
c
r
a
e
s
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
t
i
l
 
f
o
 
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

.

1
B
 
e
b
a
T

l

l

 
c
i
t
p
o
n
y
s
 
n
o
 
y
e
r
 
d
e
s
u
 
s
d
o
h
t
e
M

 
 
e
b
 
t
o
n
n
a
c
 
e
r
o
f
e
r
e
h
t

;
s
e
s
s
a
m

 
s
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
o
t
 
d
e
t
a
l
e
r
 
y
l
t
c
e
r
i
d

 
d
e
b
i
r
c
s
e
d
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t
 
n

i

r
i
a
 
l
a
c
o
l
 
f
o
 
n
o
i
t
a
c
fi
i
s
s
a
l
c

 
e
r
a
 
y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m
 
d
e
t
a
l
e
r
-
t
a
e
h
 
n

i
 
s
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

I

 
n

i
 
s
e
s
a
e
r
c
e
d
 
n
a
h
t
 
l
l
a
r
e
v
o
 
r
e
g
r
a
l
 
h
c
u
m

y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m
 
d
e
t
a
l
e
r
-
d
o
c

l

 
 
n

i
 
s
e
i
t
i
c
 
4
4

A
S
U
 
e
h
t

 
o
n

,
s
o
i
r
a
n
e
c
s
 

M
C
G

g
n

i
l
a
c
s
n
w
o
d

s
o
i
r
a
n
e
c
s
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
y
b

i

c
fi
c
e
p
s
 
y
r
t
n
u
o
C

 
d
e
t
a
l
e
r
-
t
a
e
h
 
l
a
n
o
i
t
i
d
d
a
 
0
4
1
1

0
4
2

 
0
2
2
1

0
3
2

;

0
5
0
2
 
y
b
 
l
a
e
r
t
n
o
M
 
n

i
 
r
a
e
y
/
s
h
t
a
e
d

i

 
g
n
m
u
s
s
a

,

o
t
n
o
r
o
T
 
n

i
 
s
h
t
a
e
d
 
l
a
n
o
i
t
i
d
d
a

i

c
fi
c
e
p
s
 
y
r
t
n
u
o
C

,

y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m
 
d
e
t
a
l
e
r
-
t
a
e
h
 
n

i
 
e
s
a
e
r
c
e
d
 
t
e
N

s
e
i
t
i
c
 
e
m
o
s
 
n

i

i
 
p
h
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r

 
y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m
/
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
o
N

.

n
o
i
t
a
z
i
t
a
m

i
l

c
c
a
 
o
n

 
n

i
 
r
a
e
y
/
s
h
t
a
e
d
 
r
e
w
e
f
 
2
6

7
4
 
f
o
 
e
g
n
a
r

;
s
r
a
e
y

 
5
6

 
p
u
o
r
g
 
e
g
a
 
e
h
t
 
n

i
 
y
l
r
a
l
u
c
i
t
r
a
p

 
s
e
i
t
i
c
 
0
1

a
d
a
n
a
C
 
n

i

 
n

i
 
s
e
i
t
i
c
 
5

a
i
l
a
r
t
s
u
A

 
r
o

f
 
s
o
i
r
a
n
e
c
s
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

C

,
l

e
d
o
m
 
2
 
k
r
a
M
O
R
I
S
C

 

a
d
a
n
a
C

 
h
g
i
h

;
g
n

i
l

b
u
o
d

2

O
C

 
s
o
i
r
a
n
e
c
s
 
w
o
l
 
d
n
a

 
 

m
o
r
f
 
d
e
v
i
r
e
d
 
l
e
d
o
M

i

 
p
h
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
d
e
v
r
e
s
b
o

 
r
i
a
 
c
i
t
p
o
n
y
s
 
n
e
e
w
t
e
b

y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m
 
d
n
a
 
s
e
s
s
a
m

i

 
d
n
a
 
n
e
t
s
k
l
a
K

)
7
9
9
1
(
 
e
n
e
e
r
G

i

 
 
p
h
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
d
e
v
r
e
s
b
o

 

m
o
r
f
 
d
e
v
i
r
e
d
 
l
e
d
o
M

 
r
i
a
 
c
i
t
p
o
n
y
s
 
n
e
e
w
t
e
b

y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m
 
d
n
a
 
s
e
s
s
a
m

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
n
a
c
n
u
D

)
7
9
9
1
(

 
d
n
a
 
y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m
 
y

l
i
a
d

:
l

e
d
o
m
 
n
o
i
s
s
e
r
g
e
R

s
e
c
i
d
n

i
 
c
i
t
p
o
n
y
s

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
t
s
e
u
G

)
9
9
9
1
(

1
4
(
 
e
v
o
b
a
 
d
e
n

i
l
t
u
o
 
a
i
r
e
t
i
r
c
 
e
h
t
 
h
c
t
a
m

i

 
t
o
n
 
d
d
 
y
e
h
t
 
e
s
u
a
c
e
b
 
r
o

i

,
)
s
e
d
u
t
s
 
5
3
(
 
s
e
d
o
s
i
p
e
 
c
fi
i
c
e
p
s
 
f
o
 
s
e
s
y
l
a
n
a
 
e
r
e
w
 
y
e
h
t
 
e
s
u
a
c
e
b
 
r
e
h
t
i
e

,

d
e
s
u
 
t
o
n
 
e
r
e
w
 
s
n
o
i
t
a
c

i
l

b
u
p
 
r
e
h
t
o
 
6
7
 
f
o
 
l
a
t
o
t
 

A

a

 
r
e
m
m
u
s
 
n

i
 
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i
 
t
n
a
c
fi
n
g
i
S

i

.
s
e
i
t
i
c
 
5
 
l
l
a

 
d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

i

c
fi
c
e
p
s
 
y
r
t
n
u
o
C

.
s
0
5
0
2
 
y
b
 
%
5
5
2

7
9
 
y
b

,
s
0
2
0
2
 
y
b
 
%
3
1
1

7
5

 
y
b
 
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i
 
s
e
t
a
r
 
h
t
a
e
d
 
d
e
t
a
l
e
r
-
t
a
e
H

l
a
g
u
t
r
o
P

,

n
o
b
s
i
L

)
9
3
2

6
7
(
 
y
e
n
d
y
S
 
n

i
 
s
h
t
a
e
d

 
e
c
u
d
e
r

,
s
n
o
i
t
p
m
u
s
s
a
 
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
t
a
m

i
l

c
c
A

s
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

 
e
t
a
m

i
l
c
 
l
a
n
o
i
g
e
r
 
2

 
S
E
M
O
R
P


s
l
e
d
o
m

 
2
M
R
d
a
H
 
d
n
a

 
 
l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s
 
l
a
c
i
r
i
p
m
E

-
d
e
v
r
e
s
b
o

,
l

e
d
o
m

d
e
t
c
e
p
x
e

)
3
0
0
2
(
 
i
a
s
s
e
D

.
l

e
d
o
m
 
e
t
a
m

i
l
c
 
l
a
b
o
l
g

,

M
C
G

;

e
s
a
e
s
i
d
 
h
t
r
a
e
h
 
c
m
e
a
h
c
s
i

i

,

D
H

I

;

e
s
a
e
s
i
d
 
r
a
l
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
c

i

,

D
V
C

:

y
e
K

i

.
)
s
e
d
u
t
s

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1631

ESTIMATES OF TEMPERATUREMORTALITY RELATIONSHIP
Table B.2 below lists all studies (n= 4) that meet the following criteria
for inclusion in the meta-analysis. The study:

 uses  daily  time-series  methods  to  analyse  the  relationship  between

daily mean temperature and mortality;

 Reports a coefficient from log linear regression that estimates the per-
centage changes in mortality per degree centigrade change in temper-
ature, above a reported threshold temperature;

 has controls for the following confounders: season, air pollution and

influenza;

 is published in English language only; and

 reports confidence intervals around the coefficient and is within the

range of other reported estimates.

The studies are classified according to climate zone. The Netherlands
population is used to approximate a population in the cold zone as
there are no other appropriate time-series studies.

Note  that  some  studies  are  included  that  are  not  yet  published.

However,

 they  are  the  only  studies  available  that  provide  estimates  for  devel-

oping country populations; and

 the  results  will  be  submitted  to  peer  reviewed  journals  and  the
methods are at least as rigorous as those applied in previous published
studies.

All estimates have been rounded to one decimal place. Where more

than one estimate was available, the average estimate was calculated.

1632

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

i

)
g
n
m
o
c
h
t
r
o
f
(
 

M
R
U
H
T
O
S
I

)
3
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
t
s
n
u
K

)
3
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
t
s
n
u
K

)
3
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
t
s
n
u
K

i

)
g
n
m
o
c
h
t
r
o
f
(
 

M
R
U
H
T
O
S
I

i

)
g
n
m
o
c
h
t
r
o
f
(
 

M
R
U
H
T
O
S
I

i

)
g
n
m
o
c
h
t
r
o
f
(
 

M
R
U
H
T
O
S
I

)
7
9
9
1
(

)
7
9
9
1
(

)
7
9
9
1
(

)
7
9
9
1
(

)
7
9
9
1
(

)
8
9
9
1
(
 
i
d
r
e
b
A

l

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
r
e
t
s
e

l
l
a
B

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
r
e
t
s
e

l
l
a
B

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
r
e
t
s
e

l
l
a
B

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
r
e
t
s
e

l
l
a
B

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
r
e
t
s
e

l
l
a
B

2

1

2

1

2

1

2

0

2

0

2

0

2

0

1

0

2

1

2

1

2

1

6

3

2

1

.

5
6
1

.

5
6
1

.

5
6
1

7
1

 
6
1

 
7
1

1
2

0
2

 
4
2

 
4
2

 
4
2

 
4
2

 
4
2

e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

g
a
L

i

 
t
n
o
p
-
t
u
C

)
C
o
(

T
A
E
H

r
e
p

a
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
%

 
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i
 
C
o
1

3
2
1

.

3
1
1

.

1
1
3

.

.

1
1

.

)
5
4
2

1
4
1
(
 
3
9
1

.

.

.

)
1
3
1

4
4
0
(
 
2
9
0

.

.

.

)
2
4
3

9
0
1
(
 
5
2
2

.

.

.

)
8
3
2

2
3
0

(
 
2
0
1

.

.

.

)
0
6

2
1
(
 
6
3

.

.

.

)
0
8

1
2
(
 
0
5

.

.

7
9
0

.

.

.

)
5
4

5
1

(
 
3
2

.

.

.

)
4
7

4
0

(
 
9
2

.

.

.

)
2
8

9
2

(
 
7
5

.

g
a
L

5
1

7

5
1

7

5
1

7

3
1

0

3
1

0

3
1

0

3
1

0

4
1

7

4
1

7

4
1

7

4
1

7

6

3

 
7

i

t
n
o
p
-
t
u
C

)
C
o
(

.

5
6
1

.

5
6
1

.

5
6
1

 
r
e
p

a
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
%

 
e
s
a
e
r
c
e
d
 
C

1

D
L
O
C

1
4
0

.

6
4
0

.

3
4
1

.

5
0

.

2


1
1

7

9
1

0
2

5
1

5
1

5
1

5
1

5
1

.

)
4
5
4

8
8
0
(
 
9
6
2

.

.

.

)
9
8
6

5
5
3
(
 
1
2
5

.

.

.

)
0
7
1

6
1
0

(
 
7
7
0

.

.

.

)
5
7
3

9
8
2
(
 
2
3
3

.

.

.

)
6
4

8
1
(
 
2
3

.

.

.

)
4
5

1
2
(
 
7
3

.

.

7
1

.

.

)
4
6

1
2
(
 
3
4

.

.

.

.

)
3
3

3
0

(
 
5
1

.

.

.

)
0
6

4
0

(
 
7
1

.

h
t
a
e
d
 
f
o
 
e
s
u
a
C

 
e
g
A

e
s
u
a
c
 
l
l

A

D
V
C

y
r
o
t
a
r
i
p
s
e
R

D
V
C

l
l

A

l
l

A

l
l

A

l
l

A

 
l
l

A

e
n
o
z
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c

/
n
o
i
t
a
u
p
o
P

l

s
d
n
a
l
r
e
h
t
e
N

s
d
n
a
l
r
e
h
t
e
N

s
d
n
a
l
r
e
h
t
e
N

 

D
L
O
C

a
fi
o
S

a
i
r
a
g
l
u
B

 
l
l

A

 
l
l

A

o
g
a
i
t
n
a
S

a
i
n
e
v
o
S

l

e

l
i

h
C

l
l

A

l
l

A

 
l
l

A

l
l

A

l
l

A

D
V
C

D
V
C

y
r
o
t
a
r
i
p
s
e
R

 
l
l

A

 
l
l

A

 
l
l

A

l
l

A

0
7
>

l
l

A

l
l

A

l
l

A

a
n
a
j
l

b
u
L

j

n
w
o
T
 
e
p
a
C

a
c
i
r
f
A
 
h
t
u
o
S

n
i
a
p
S

a
i
c
n
e
l
a
V

a
i
c
n
e
l
a
V

a
i
c
n
e
l
a
V

a
i
c
n
e
l
a
V

a
i
c
n
e
l
a
V

d
i
r
d
a
M

i

p
h
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m

e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t
 
r
o

f
 
h
c
r
a
e
s
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
t
i
l
 
f
o
 
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

.

2
B
 
e
b
a
T

l

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1633

i

)
g
n
m
o
c
h
t
r
o
f
(
 

M
R
U
H
T
O
S
I

)
3
0
0
2
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
a
i
e
v
u
o
G

i

)
g
n
m
o
c
h
t
r
o
f
(
 

M
R
U
H
T
O
S
I

i

)
g
n
m
o
c
h
t
r
o
f
(
 

M
R
U
H
T
O
S
I

i

)
g
n
m
o
c
h
t
r
o
f
(
 

M
R
U
H
T
O
S
I

i

)
g
n
m
o
c
h
t
r
o
f
(
 

M
R
U
H
T
O
S
I

i

)
g
n
m
o
c
h
t
r
o
f
(
 

M
R
U
H
T
O
S
I

2

0

1

0

2

0

2

0

2

0

2

0

 
3
2

0
2

 
3
2

8
1

1
3

 
0
3

2

0

 
8
2

.

)
6
6
3

1
1
2
(
 
8
2
2

.

.

.

)
8
2

1
2
(
 
5
2

.

.

.

)
2
3
2

6
8
0
(
 
9
5
1

.

.

.

)
0
0
1

1
2
0
(
 
6
0

.

.

.

)
5
2
5
2

9
6
4
1
(
 
5
8
9
1

.

.

.

)
7
4
9

7
8
5
(
 
6
6
7

.

.

.

)
8
5
3

8
4
2
(
 
3
0
3

.

.

.

7
5

3
1

0

1
2

0

3
1

0

3
1

0

3
1

0

3
1

0

3
1

0

9
1

0
2

3
2

5
1

7
1

8
2

9
1

.

0
3

4
1

.

.

)
8
5
6

2
5
4
(
 
4
5
5

.

.

.

)
1
6
6

1
7
1
(
 
3
1
4

.

.

.

)
6
1
2

6
5
0
(
 
6
3
1

.

.

.

5
5

e
s
u
a
c
 
l
l

A

 
l
l

A

y
e
r
r
e
t
n
o
M

o
c
i
x
e
M

e
s
u
a
c
 
l
l

A

e
s
u
a
c
 
l
l

A

e
s
u
a
c
 
l
l

A

e
s
u
a
c
 
l
l

A

 
l
l

A

 
l
l

A

 
l
l

A

 
l
l

A

I

D
M
U
H
M
R
A
W

 

k
o
k
g
n
a
B

d
n
a
l
i
a
h
T

 

 

Y
R
D
T
O
H

i

l

h
e
aD
d
n

i

I

.

0
0
1

)
1
-
R
R
(
=
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
%

a

.

e
s
a
e
s
i
d
 
r
a
l
u
c
s
a
v
o
d
r
a
C

i

D
V
C

.

6
2

9
2

.

D
V
C

.

)
0
4
4

3
4
3
(
 
2
9
3

.

.

.

.

)
9
0
1

5
3
2
3

(
 
5
3
1


.

5
5

.

e
s
u
a
c
 
l
l

A

e
s
u
a
c
 
l
l

A

 
l
l

A

5
6


.

)
4
3
9

6
8
7
(
 
0
6
8

.

.

e
s
u
a
c
 
l
l

A

 
l
l

A

y
t
i

C
 
o
c
x
e
M

i

e
s
u
a
c
 
l
l

A

 
l
l

A

r
o
d
a
v
l
a
S
 
n
a
S

o
c
i
x
e
M

E
T
A
R
E
P
M
E
T

l

o
u
a
P
 
o
a
S

l

o
u
a
P
 
o
a
S

l
i
z
a
r
B

r
o
d
a
v
l
a
S
 
l
E

1634

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

)
c
i
t
a
m

i
l
c
 
r
o
(

 
e
t
a
m

i
l
c
 

d
n
a
 
)
a
e
h
r
r
a
i
d

 
r
o
(

 
a
e
o
h
r
r
a
i
D


 
s

m
r
e
t

 
e
h
t

i

 
g
n
n
i
a
t
n
o
c
 
)
2
0
0
2

6
6
9
1
(

 
s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
r
 
l
l
a
 
r
o
f

 

h
c
r
a
e
s
 
e
n

i
l

d
e
M

 


r
e
h
t
a
e
w
d
n
a
 
)
a
e
h
r
r
a
i
d

 
r
o
(
 
a
e
o
h
r
r
a
i
d


 
;


e
t
a
m

i
l
c
 

d
n
a
 
)
a
e
h
r
r
a
i
d

 
r
o
(
 
a
e
o
h
r
r
a
i
d


 
;


e
g
n
a
h
c

)
a
1
0
0
2
(
 

C
C
P
I
 

n

i
 

d
e
t
i
c
 
s
r
e
p
a
p

 
t
n
a
v
e
l
e
r
 
l
l
a

.
s
r
e
p
a
p

 
e
s
e
h
t
 

n

i
 

d
e
t
i
c
 
s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
r







:
s
e
c
r
u
o
s
 

n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n
I

A
E
O
H
R
R
A
I
D

a
a
e
o
h
r
r
a
i
d
 
n
o
 
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
f
o
 
s
t
c
e
f
f
e
 
r
o

f
 
h
c
r
a
e
s
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
t
i
l
 
f
o
 
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

.

3
B
 
e
b
a
T

l

i

 
l
a
n
o
s
a
e
s
 
g
n
w
o
h
s
 
s
e
d
u
t
s
 
l
a
c
o
L

i

 
y
l
e
v
i
t
a
t
i
t
n
a
u
q
 
s
e
d
u
t
s
 
l
a
c
o
L

i

l

 
g
n
i
t
a
e
r
 
s
l
e
d
o
m

 
l
a
b
o
G

l

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
v
o
s
a
l
V

;
)
1
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
o
l
a
s
t
U

;
)
0
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
a
n
a
w
s
T

;
)
1
8
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
g
n
i
z
t
n
i
t
S

 
g
n
a
Y

;
)
6
8
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
s

m
a
i
l
l
i

W

i
r
a
s
n
A

;
)
3
8
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
l
a
w
r
a
g
g
A

;
)
7
8
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
s
n
k
d
A

i

;
)
4
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
a
l
o
b
g
e
d
A

l

h
u
m
e
k
c
o
B

;
)
5
9
9
1
(
 

m
a
h
a
r
G
 
d
n
a
 
s
d
r
a
e
B

;
)
4
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
h
a
m
r
A

;
)
1
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e

;
)
8
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
n
a
h
C

;
)
2
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
i
t
r
a
v
a
r
k
a
h
C

;
)
9
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
s
a
j
e

l
l
a
C

;
)
6
7
9
1
(

e
 
a
s
o
R

 
a
d

;
)
8
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
e
f
f
i
l

n
u
C

;
)
0
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
k
o
o
C

;
)
6
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
y
r
u
h
d
u
a
h
C

:

n
o
i
t
a
i
c
o
s
s
a
 
g
n
w
o
h
S

i

 
a
t
i
j

u
F

;
)
9
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
d
r
a
h
r
e
b
E

;
)
7
9
9
1
(
 
n
e
i
r
u
K

 
d
n
a
 
s
a
l
g
u
o
D

;
)
1
0
0
2
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
a
v

l
i

S

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
t
i
h
o
r
u
P

;
)
3
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
a
i
l
g
a
z
z
a
P

;
)
b
8
9
9
1

,
a
8
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
r
a
h
s
a
r
a
P

;
)
6
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
s
e
y
e
R

;
)
b
0
9
9
1

,
a
0
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
m
a
R

;
)
9
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
o
a
i
Q

;
)
8
9
9
1
(

;
)
8
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
d
h
a
h
S

i

;
)
4
8
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
i
h
t
e
S

;
)
1
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
n
o

l
l
a
S

;
)
0
0
0
2
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
a
k
s
w
e
l
t
y
R

;
)
0
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
n
o
r
a
B
e
L

;
)
4
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
n
e
s
r
u
a
L

;
)
3
8
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
o
n
n
o
K

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
z
a
j
I

;
)
7
8
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
l
h
c
s
r
i
H

;
)
0
9
9
1
(
 

l

w
e
m
o
o
h
t
r
a
B

 
d
n
a
 
y
r
n
e
H

;
)
0
9
9
1
(

;
)
5
8
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
o
t
i
h
c
N

;
)
9
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
a
s
u
M

;
)
6
9
9
1
(
 
i
r
u
h
u
M

;
)
7
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
i
t
o
o
k
a
l
a
M

;
)
1
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
n
e
w
e
t
S

i

;
)
8
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
o

l
l
i

v
r
o
S

;
)
3
8
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
n
i
r
a
k
h
S

;
)
7
8
9
1
(

;
)
1
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
d
o
n
P

f

l

i

;
)
9
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e

m
a
h
s
u
o
R

;
)
4
8
9
1
(
 
e
n
w
o
r
B
-
s
n
b
o
R

i

 
i
d
i
a
S

l

;
)
5
9
9
1
(
 
r
o
y
a
t
e
i
c
s
a
M
 
d
n
a

;
)
3
9
9
1
(
 
k
u
h
c
w
a
S

;
)
7
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
a
r
t
u
S

;
)
0
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
h
k
i
a
h
S

;
)
8
7
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
o
t
o
m
a
k
u
s
T

;
)
0
9
9
1
(

;
)
3
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
k
c
e
o
r
B

 
n
e
d
 
n
a
V

d
o
o
w
n
e
e
r
G
 
d
n
a
 
r
e
t
s
w
e
r
B

;
)
2
7
9
1
(
 
s
e
n
o

J
 
d
n
a
 
n
a
e
D

;
)
1
8
9
1
(

;
)
3
9
9
1
(

 
r
e
k
c
e
B

;
)
5
7
9
1
(

l

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
u
u
y
e
n
a
j
n
A

;
)
3
9
9
1
(
 
g
n
e
h
C
 
d
n
a
 
g
n
L

i

;
)
6
9
9
1
(

 
r
a
h
s
a
r
a
P

;
)
6
8
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
n

i
l
r
e
M

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
n

i
J

;
)
6
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
e
g
o
H

;
)
0
0
0
2
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
y
e
k
c
e
h
C

l

)
1
0
0
2
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
h
g
n
S

i

e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
h
t
i

w

 
s
n
o
i
t
a
c
o
s
s
a

i

)
e
v
i
t
a
t
i
t
n
a
u
q
-
n
o
n
(
 
a
e
o
h
r
r
a
d

i

e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t
 
o
t

)
4
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
b
h
u

i

W

;
)
2
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
x
o
c

l
i

W

;
)
3
8
9
1
(

)
0
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e

i

 
c
fi
c
e
p
s
-
n
e
g
o
h
t
a
p
 
g
n
w
o
h
s
 
s
e
d
u
t
s
 
l
a
c
o
L

i

i

 
e
s
u
a
c
-
e
p
i
t
l
u
m

l

 
r
o
 
-
l
l

a
 
n

i
 
s
n
r
e
t
t
a
p

i

 
a
e
o
h
r
r
a
d
 
e
s
u
a
c
-
l
l

a
 
g
n
i
t
a
e
r

l

i

a
e
o
h
r
r
a
d
 
o
t
 
e
g
n
a
h
c

 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
/
e
t
a
m

i
l

c

e
n
o
N

)
9
8
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
i
l

o
r
a
V

;
)
8
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
s
a
e
t
n
o
C

;
)
1
0
0
2
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
p
o
h
s
i
B

i

.
)
s
e
d
u
t
s
 
y
r
o
t
a
r
o
b
a
l
 
d
n
a
 
l
a
c
i
n

i
l
c

,
s
w
e
i
v
e
r
 
y
l
n
i
a
m

(
 
t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a
 
e
v
i
t
a
t
i
t
n
a
u
q
 
o
t
 
e
c
n
a
v
e
e
r
r
i
 
r
o

l

:

n
o
i
t
a
i
c
o
s
s
a
 
d
n
fi
 
o
t
 
g
n

i
l
i
a
F

,
t
c
a
r
t
s
b
a
 
n

i
 
n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
n

f

i
 
f
o
 
k
c
a
l
 
f
o
 
s
i
s
a
b
 
e
h
t
 
n
o
 
d
e
t
c
e
e
r
 
e
r
e
w
 
s
n
o
i
t
a
c

j

i
l

b
u
p
 
7
9
5
 
f
o
 
l
a
t
o
t
 

A

a

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

r
o
(
 

n
o
i
t
i
r
t
u
n
l
a
m

 

d
n
a
 
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
)
c
i
t
a
m

i
l
c
 
r
o
(
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

C


 
s

i

m
r
e
t
 
e
h
t
 
g
n
n
i
a
t
n
o
c
 
)
2
0
0
2

6
6
9
1
(
 
s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
r
 
l
l
a
 
r
o
f
 

h
c
r
a
e
s
 
e
n

i
l

d
e
M


)
d
o
o
f

)
a
1
0
0
2
(
 

C
C
P
I
 

n

i
 

d
e
t
i
c
 
s
r
e
p
a
p

 
t
n
a
v
e
l
e
r
 
l
l
a

.
s
r
e
p
a
p

 
e
s
e
h
t
 

n

i
 

d
e
t
i
c
 
s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
r







:
s
e
c
r
u
o
s
 

n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n
I

N
O
I
T
I
R
T
U
N
L
A
M

a
n
o
i
t
i
r
t
u
n
l
a
m
 
n
o
 
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
f
o
 
s
t
c
e
f
f
e
 
r
o

f
 
h
c
r
a
e
s
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
t
i
l
 
f
o
 
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

.

4
B
 
e
b
a
T

l

 
s
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e
 
g
n
i
t
a
r
e
n
e
g
 
r
o
f
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
i
u
S

l

e
b
a
l
i
a
v
a
 
s
l
e
d
o
m

 
t
n
e
c
e
r
 
e
r
o
M

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a
 
s
i
h
t
 
r
o
f

l

e
b
a
l
i
a
v
a
 
s
l
e
d
o
m

 
t
n
e
c
e
r
 
e
r
o
M

s
n
o
i
g
e
r
 
c
fi
c
e
p
s
 
n

i

i
 
d
e
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c

,

e
g
n
a
h
c

 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
r
e
d
n
u
 
s
t
c
a
p
m

i
 
t
n
a
c
fi
n
g
i
S

i

 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
r
e
d
n
u
 
s
t
c
a
p
m

i
 
t
n
a
c
fi
n
g
i
S

i

s
n
o
i
s
u
c
n
o
C

l

 
a
e
r
A

d
e
r
e
v
o
c

l
a
b
o
G

l

l
a
b
o
G

l

i

 
t
n
e
c
fi
u
s
n

f

i
 
f
o
 
e
c
n
e
l
a
v
e
r
P

 
d
n
a
 
p
o
r
c
 
d
e
p
u
o
C

l

n
o
i
g
e
r
 
y
b
 
d
e
d
i
v
i
d

l

e
d
o
m
 
e
d
a
r
t
 
d
o
o

f

,
s
t
c
a
p
m

i
 
c
i
m
o
n
o
c
e
o
i
c
o
S

d
n
a
 
p
o
r
c
 
d
e
p
u
o
C

l

)
4
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
r
e
h
c
s
i
F

t
u
p
t
u
o
 
l
e
d
o
M

e
p
y
t
 
l
e
d
o
M

y
d
u
t
S

l

i

 
g
n
p
o
e
v
e
d
 
n

i
 
d
e
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c

,

e
g
n
a
h
c

 
y
b
 
d
e
d
i
v
i
d

,

e
k
a
t
n

i
 
y
g
r
e
n
e

s
e
i
r
t
n
u
o
c

n
o
i
g
e
r

l

e
d
o
m
 
e
d
a
r
t
 
d
o
o

f

 
d
n
a
 
g
i
e
w
z
n
e
s
o
R

)
4
9
9
1
(
 
y
r
r
a
P

1635

n
o
 
s
t
c
a
p
m

i

i

,
s
w
e
v
e
r
 
y
n
i
a
m

l

(
 
t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a
 
e
v
i
t
a
t
i
t
n
a
u
q
 
o
t
 
t
n
a
v
e
e
r
r
i
 
r
o

l

i

,
)
s
e
d
u
t
s
 
0
1
(
 
s
n
o
i
g
e
r
 
r
o
 
s
p
o
r
c
 
r
a
l
u
c
i
t
r
a
p
 
o
t
 
c
fi
c
e
p
s
 
r
e
h
t
i
e
 
e
r
a
 
y
e
h
t
 
s
a
 
d
e
t
c
e
e
r
 
e
r
e
w
 
s
n
o
i
t
a
c

j

i

i
l

b
u
p
 
r
e
h
t
o
 
1
8
2
 
f
o
 
l
a
t
o
t
 

A

a

.
)
s

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
l
a
c
i
g
o
o
c
e
 
r
e
h
t
o

l

 
e
r
u
s
a
e
m
 
y
x
o
r
p
 
a
 
s
a
 
d
e
s
u
 
s
t
l
u
s
e
r

 
e
s
e
h
t
 
f
o
 
s
n
w
o
d
k
a
e
r
b
 
l
a
n
o
i
g
e
R

n
o
i
t
i
r
t
u
n
l
a
m

 
f
o
 
e
c
n
e
l
a
v
e
r
p
 
f
o

s
o
i
r
a
n
e
c
s

e
c
n
e
l
a
v
e
r
p
 
e
c
u
d
e
r
 
y

l
l
a
r
e
n
e
g

2

l

 
d
u
o
w
 
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
l
i

b
a
t
s

O
C

,

e
g
n
a
h
c

e
k
a
t
n

i
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
 
t
n
e
i
c
fi
u
s
n

f

i

l

e
d
o
m
 
e
d
a
r
t
 
d
o
o

f

s
e
i
r
t
n
u
o
c
 
g
n
p
o
e
v
e
d
 
n

l

i

i
 
d
e
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c

e
k
a
t
n

i
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
 
t
n
e
i
c
fi
u
s
n

f

i

l

e
d
o
m
 
e
d
a
r
t
 
d
o
o

f

 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
r
e
d
n
u
 
s
t
c
a
p
m

i
 
t
n
a
c
fi
n
g
i
S

i

l
a
b
o
G

l

 
f
o
 
e
c
n
e
l
a
v
e
r
p
 
l
a
b
o
G

l

 
d
n
a
 
p
o
r
c
 
d
e
p
u
o
C

l

)
2
0
0
2
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
l
l

e
n
r
A

 
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
l
i

b
a
t
s
 
n
o
 
n
u
r
 
t
o
N

s
o
i
r
a
n
e
c
s

 
n
o
i
t
a
z
i
l
i

b
a
t
s
 
n
o
 
n
u
r
 
t
o
N

,

l

i

 
g
n
p
o
e
v
e
d
 
n

i
 
d
e
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c

,

e
g
n
a
h
c

y
b
 
d
e
d
i
v
i
d

,

e
k
a
t
n

i
 
y
g
r
e
n
e

s
e
i
r
t
n
u
o
c

n
o
i
g
e
r

l

e
d
o
m
 
e
d
a
r
t
 
d
o
o

f

e
g
a
t
r
o
h
s
 
d
o
o

f
 
n

i
 
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i
 
t
n
a
c
fi
n
g
i
S

i

l
a
b
o
G

l

 
f
o
 
e
c
n
e
l
a
v
e
r
p
 
l
a
b
o
G

l

 
d
n
a
 
p
o
r
c
 
d
e
p
u
o
C

l

)
1
0
0
2
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
y
r
r
a
P

 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
r
e
d
n
u
 
s
t
c
a
p
m

i
 
t
n
a
c
fi
n
g
i
S

i

l
a
b
o
G

l

i

 
t
n
e
c
fi
u
s
n

f

i
 
f
o
 
e
c
n
e
l
a
v
e
r
P

 
d
n
a
 
p
o
r
c
 
d
e
p
u
o
C

l

)
9
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
y
r
r
a
P

1636

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

.
g
.
e
(
 
s
e
s
u
a
c
 
r
e
h
t
o
 
h
t
i

w
 
d
e
t
a
i
c
o
s
s
a
 
0
1

 

m
r
o
t
s
 
d
n
a
 
s
e
d
i
t
 
h
g
i
h
 
h
t
i

w
 
2

 
)
g
n
i
s
p
a
l
l

o
c
 
s
f
f
i
l

c

,
s
e
n
m

i

 
t
a
 
s
e
d

i
l
s
d
n
a
l

s
e
g
r
u
s

n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
n

f

i

i
 
c
fi
c
e
p
s
 
t
u
o
h
t
i

w
 
5
1
1

e
s
u
a
c
 
n
o

,
s
e
n
o
c
y
c

l

.
g
.
e
(
 
s
e
s
u
a
c
 
r
e
h
t
o
 
9
1

)
g
n
i
t
s
r
u
b
 
s

m
a
d

,
t
l
e
m
 
e
c

i

 
n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
n

f

i

i
 
c
fi
c
e
p
s
 
t
u
o
h
t
i

w
 
9
5
5

i

n
o
i
t
a
t
i
p
c
e
r
p
 
h
t
i

w
 
d
e
t
a
i
c
o
s
s
a
 
3
6

i

n
o
i
t
a
t
i
p
c
e
r
p
 
h
t
i

w
 
d
e
t
a
i
c
o
s
s
A

 
d
e
c
n
a
h
n
e
 
T
A
D
M
E
 
e
h
t

-

)
9
9
9
1

0
8
9
1
(
 
e
s
a
b
a
t
a
d

)
9
9
9
1

0
8
9
1
(
 
e
s
a
b
a
t
a
d
 
d
e
c
n
a
h
n
e

-

 
T
A
D
M
E
 
e
h
t
 
n

i
 
d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r

n

i
 
d
e
t
r
o
p
e
r
 
s
e
i
r
u
n

j

i
 
r
o
/
d
n
a
 
s
h
t
a
e
d

 
s
e
i
r
u
n

j

i
 
r
o
/
d
n
a
 
s
h
t
a
e
d
 
d
e
s
u
a
c

d
e
s
u
a
c
 
h
c
h
w

i

 
s
e
d

i
l
s
d
n
a

l
 
f
o
 
s
e
s
u
a
C

 
h
c
h
w

i

 
s
t
n
e
v
e
 
d
o
o
fl
 
f
o
 
s
e
s
u
a
C

i

 
g
n
i
t
c
d
e
r
p
 
s
l
e
d
o
m

 
l
a
b
o
G

l

 
s
l
e
d
o
m

i

 
l
a
n
o
g
e
r
 
e
g
r
a

l
 
r
o
 
l
a
b
o
G

l

r
o
(
 

h
t
l
a
e
h

 

d
n
a
 
)
g
n
d
o
o
fl

i

 
r
o
(
 
s
d
o
o
F


l

 
;


e
g
n
a
h
c
 
)
c
i
t
a
m

i
l
c
 
r
o
(
 
e
t
a
m

i
l
c
 

d
n
a
 
)
g
n
d
o
o
fl

i

)
a
1
0
0
2
(
 

C
C
P
I
 

n

i
 

d
e
t
i
c
 
s
r
e
p
a
p

 
t
n
a
v
e
l
e
r
 
l
l
a

 
r
o
(
 
s
d
o
o
F


l

 
r
o
f
 

h
c
r
a
e
s
 
e
c
n
e
i
c
S
 
f
o

 

b
e
W

-
I
S
I


)
y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m

 
r
o

 
y
r
u
n

j

i
 
r
o

 

h
t
a
e
d

 
r
o
(
 

h
t
l
a
e
h

 

d
n
a
 

n
o
i
t
a
t
i
p
i
c
e
r
p

 
e
m
e
r
t
x
E


 
;


)
y
t
i
l
a
t
r
o
m

 
r
o

 
y
r
u
n

j

i
 
r
o

 

h
t
a
e
d


e
g
n
a
h
c
 
)
c
i
t
a
m

i
l
c
 
r
o
(
 
e
t
a
m

i
l
c
 

d
n
a
 
)
g
n
d
o
o
fl

i

 
r
o
(
 
s
d
o
o
F


l

 
r
o
f
 

h
c
r
a
e
s
 
e
n

i
l

d
e
M

s
r
e
p
a
p

 
e
s
e
h
t
 

n

i
 

d
e
t
i
c
 
s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
R

.
)
2
0
0
2
 

-

T
A
D
M
E
(
 

9
9
9
1

0
8
9
1

 
e
s
a
b
a
t
a
d

 

d
e
c
n
a
h
n
e
 

T
A
D
M
E

-

 

n

i
 

d
e
t
s
i
l
 
s
t
n
e
v
e
 

d
o
o
fl

 
l
l
a
 
f
o

 
s
n
o
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
d

 
f
o

 

n
o
i
t
c
e
p
s
n
I











I

G
N
D
O
O
L
F

D
N
A
L
N

I

D
N
A

L
A
T
S
A
O
C

:
s
e
c
r
u
o
s
 

n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n
I

a

s
e
d

i
l
s
d
n
a
l
 
d
n
a
 
s
d
o
o
fl
 
o
t
 
e
u
d
 
s
e
i
r
u
n

j

i
 
d
n
a
 
s
h
t
a
e
d
 
n
o
 
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
f
o
 
s
t
c
e
f
f
e
 
r
o

f
 
h
c
r
a
e
s
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
t
i
l
 
f
o
 
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

.

5
B
 
e
b
a
T

l

 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f
 
n
o
 
s
t
c
e
f
f
e

i

g
n
d
o
o
fl
 
l
a
t
s
a
o
c
 
f
o

 
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c

n
o
 
s
t
c
e
f
f
e
 
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
g
n
i
t
c
d
e
r
p

i

i

 
n
o
i
t
a
t
i
p
c
e
r
p
 
e
m
e
r
t
x
e
 
f
o
 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
f

i

g
n
d
o
o
fl
 
d
n
a
n

l

i
 
r
o
 
s
t
n
e
v
e

l

e
v
e
l
-
a
e
s
 
r
o
 
n
o
i
t
a
t
i
p
c
e
r
p

i

j

s
e
i
r
u
n
i
/
s
h
t
a
e
d
 
o
t
 
e
s
i
r

l

 
g
n
i
t
a
e
r
 
y
l
e
v
i
t
a
t
i
t
n
a
u
q

i

 
s
e
d
u
t
s
 
a
e
r
a
 
e
g
r
a
L

i

 
a
r
u
m
M
 
d
n
a
 
s
l
l

o
h
c
N

i

)
9
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
s
l
l

o
h
c
N

i

)
8
9
9
1
(

)
5
9
9
1
(
 
n
e
g
r
u
b
s
l
u
H

 
d
n
a
 
s
n
a
m
e
z
o
o
H

,
)
5
9
9
1
(
 
y
s
s
e
n
n
e
H
 
d
n
a
 
r
e
w
o
F

l

i

e
d
w
d
l
r
o
w
 
s
n
o
i
t
a
c
o
l
 
c
fi
i
c
e
p
s

 
d
e
t
i
n
U

 
)
1
0
0
2
(
 
d
e
R

i

 
d
n
a
 
s
e
n
o

J

m
o
d
g
n
K

i

 
c
fi
i
c
e
p
s
 
)
2
0
0
2
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
y
l
l
i

M

)
5
9
9
1
(
 
e
s
r
a
a
B

e
p
o
r
u
E
 
n
r
e
t
s
e
w

,
)
2
0
0
2
(
 
j
i

o
o
B

e
n
o
N

i

.
)
s
t
n
e
v
e
 
c
fi
c
e
p
s
 
f
o
 
s
n
o
i
t
p
i
r
c
s
e
d

,
s
w
e
i
v
e
r
 
y
l
n
i
a
m

(
 
t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a
 
e
v
i
t
a
t
i
t
n
a
u
q
 
o
t
 
t
n
a
v
e
e
r
r
i
 
r
o

l

i

,
s
n
o
i
g
e
r
 
r
a
l
u
c
i
t
r
a
p
 
o
t
 
c
fi
c
e
p
s
 
r
e
h
t
i
e
 
e
r
a
 
y
e
h
t
 
s
a
 
d
e
t
c
e
e
r
 
e
r
e
w
 
s
n
o
i
t
a
c

j

i
l

b
u
p
 
r
e
h
t
o
 
2
4
3
 
f
o
 
l
a
t
o
t
 

A

a

e
s
u
a
c
 
n
o

a
i
s
A

 
t
s
a
E
-
h
t
u
o
S

,

e
p
o
r
u
E
 
n
r
e
h
t
r
o
n

 
)
2
0
0
2
(
 
n
e
n
a
s
l
a
R

 
d
n
a
 
r
e
m
l
a
P

i

e
d
w
d
l
r
o
w
 
s
n
o
i
t
a
c
o

l

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1637

 
s
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e
 
g
n
i
t
a
r
e
n
e
g
 
r
o
f
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
i
u
S

r
e
v
o
 
y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

.

n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t
 
l
a
u
t
c
a
 
n
a
h
t
 
r
e
h
t
a
r

i

i

 
c
m
e
d
n
e
-
n
o
n
/
c
m
e
d
n
e
 
e
n
fi
e
d
 
o
t
 
s
e
u
l
a
v
 
f
f

o
-
t
u
c

d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c
 
t
o
n
 
s
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d
 
r
o
t
c
e
V

.
s
a
e
r
a

,

n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t
 
r
o

f
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
i
u
s
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
f
o
 
n
o
i
t
c
d
e
r
P

i

d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c

d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c
 
t
o
n
 
s
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d
 
r
o
t
c
e
V

.
s
a
e
r
a

i

i

 
c
m
e
d
n
e
-
n
o
n
/
c
m
e
d
n
e
 
e
n
fi
e
d
 
o
t
 
s
e
u
l
a
v
 
f
f

o
-
t
u
c

r
e
v
o
 
y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

.

n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t
 
l
a
u
t
c
a
 
n
a
h
t
 
r
e
h
t
a
r

,

n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t
 
r
o

f
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
i
u
s
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
f
o
 
n
o
i
t
c
d
e
r
P

i

,

n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d
 
f
o
 
n
o
i
s
n
a
p
x
E

C
C
 
r
e
d
n
u
 
P
T
 
g
n
i
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

,

n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d
 
f
o
 
n
o
i
s
n
a
p
x
E

C
C
 
r
e
d
n
u
 
P
T
 
g
n
i
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

,

e
t
i
s
a
r
a
p
 
n
o
 
s
t
c
e
f
f
e
 
f
o
 
y
n
o
 
n
o
i
t
a
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
C

l

r
o
t
c
e
v
 
n
a
h
t
 
r
e
h
t
a
r

,

n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d
 
f
o
 
n
o
i
s
n
a
p
x
E

C
C
 
r
e
d
n
u
 
P
T
 
g
n
i
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

l
a
b
o
G

l

l
a
b
o
G

l

l
a
b
o
G

l

t
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
d
n

i
 
d
n
a

,
s
d
o
h
t
e
m
 
n

i
 
l
i
a
t
e
d
 
f
o
 
k
c
a
L

n
o
i
t
a
c
fi
i
r
e
v

 
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d
 
n

i
 
e
g
n
a
h
C

C
C
 
r
e
d
n
u
 
s
n
r
e
t
t
a
p

,
l
a
b
o
G

l

i

a
n
h
C

 
n

i
 
s
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
f
o
 
s
p
a
M

 
e
h
t
 
d
n
a
 
y
t
i
c
i
m
e
d
n
e

 
f
o
 
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d

s
a
e
r
a
 
s
u
o
i
r
a
l
a
m

 
d
n
a
 
s
c
i
m
e
d
p
e
 
f
o
 
k
s
i
r

i

 
t
a
 
s
a
e
r
A
P.
T

 
f
o
 
s
p
a
M

a
i
r
a
l
a
m
 
c
i
m
e
d
n
e

 
 
a
i
r
a
l
a
m
 
n

i
 
s
e
g
n
a
h
C

 
P
T

 
f
o
 
s
p
a
M

.

0
9
9
1

P
T
 
n

i
 
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
d
n
a

 
o
t
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
k
s
i
r

 
 
a
i
r
a
l
a
m
 
n

i
 
s
e
g
n
a
h
C

 
 
P
T

 
f
o
 
s
p
a
M

.

0
9
9
1

P
T
 
n

i
 
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
d
n
a

 
 
o
t
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
k
s
i
r

 
c
i
t
a
m

i
l
c
o
c
e
 
n
o
 
d
e
s
a
b

 
d
e
b
i
r
c
s
e
d
 
)
I
E
(
 
x
e
d
n

i

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
t
s
r
e
h
t
u
S
 
n

i

 
)
6
9
9
1
(

 
l
e
d
o
m

 
l
a
c
i
g
o
o
B

l

i

 
l
e
d
o
m

 
l
a
c
i
g
o
o
B

l

i

I

P
E
 
n
o
 
d
e
s
a
b



l

e
d
o
m

 
l
a
c
i
g
o
o
B

i

l



l

e
d
o
m

 
l
a
c
i
g
o
o
B

i

l

.

0
1
v

A
M
S
A
M

I

.

0
1
v

A
M
S
A
M

I

d
n
a
 
a
k
o
u
s
t
a
M

)
4
9
9
1
(
 
i
a
K

 
d
n
a
 
n
i
t
r
a
M

 
e
r
v
b
e
f
e
L

)
5
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
s
n
e
t
r
a
M

)
b
5
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
s
n
e
t
r
a
M

)
a
5
9
9
1
(

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a
 
s
i
h
t
 
r
o
f

s
n
o
i
s
u
c
n
o
C

l

d
e
r
e
v
o
c
 
a
e
r
A

t
u
p
t
u
o
 
l
e
d
o
M

e
p
y
t
 
l
e
d
o
M

y
d
u
t
S


e
g
n
a
h
c
 
)
c
i
t
a
m

i
l
c
 
r
o
(
 
e
t
a
m

i
l
c
 

d
n
a
 
a
i
r
a
l
a

M


 
s

i

m
r
e
t
 
e
h
t
 
g
n
n
i
a
t
n
o
c
 
)
2
0
0
2

6
6
9
1
(
 
s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
r
 
l
l
a
 
r
o
f
 

h
c
r
a
e
s
 
e
n

i
l

d
e
M

)
a
1
0
0
2
(
 

C
C
P
I
 

n

i
 

d
e
t
i
c
 
s
r
e
p
a
p

 
t
n
a
v
e
l
e
r
 
l
l
a

.
s
r
e
p
a
p

 
e
s
e
h
t
 
n
i
 

d
e
t
i
c
 
s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
r







:
s
e
c
r
u
o
s
 

n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n
I

A
I
R
A
L
A
M

a
i
r
a
l
a
m
 
n
o
 
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
f
o
 
s
t
c
e
f
f
e
 
r
o

f
 
h
c
r
a
e
s
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
t
i
l
 
f
o
 
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

.

6
B
 
e
b
a
T

l

1638

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

i

 
s
n
o
i
t
c
d
e
r
p
 
l
a
b
o
l
g
 
n
a
h
t
 
r
e
h
t
a
r
 
l
a
c
o

l

,
r
o
t
c
e
v
 
e
l
g
n
S

i

n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d
 
n

i
 
e
g
n
a
h
C

 
r
e
v
o
 
y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

.

n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t
 
l
a
u
t
c
a
 
n
a
h
t
 
r
e
h
t
a
r

i

i

 
c
m
e
d
n
e
-
n
o
n
/
c
m
e
d
n
e
 
e
n
fi
e
d
 
o
t
 
s
e
u
l
a
v
 
f
f

o
-
t
u
c

d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c
 
t
o
n
 
s
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d
 
r
o
t
c
e
V

.
s
a
e
r
a

,

n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t
 
r
o

f
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
i
u
s
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
f
o
 
n
o
i
t
c
d
e
r
P

i

,

n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d
 
f
o
 
n
o
i
s
n
a
p
x
E

C
C
 
r
e
d
n
u
 
P
T
 
g
n
i
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

C
C
 
r
e
d
n
u

 
n
r
e
h
t
r
o
N

a
i
l
a
r
t
s
u
A

l
a
b
o
G

l

 
d
n
a
 
P
T

 
f
o
 
s
p
a
M

P
T
 
n

i
 
e
g
n
a
h
c

y
l
n
o

 
s
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d
 
r
o
t
c
e
V

 

 
l
e
d
o
m
X
E
M
I
L
C

 
r
e
v
o
 
y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

.

n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t
 
l
a
u
t
c
a
 
n
a
h
t
 
r
e
h
t
a
r

i

i

 
c
m
e
d
n
e
-
n
o
n
/
c
m
e
d
n
e
 
e
n
fi
e
d
 
o
t
 
s
e
u
l
a
v
 
f
f

o
-
t
u
c

d
e
r
e
d
i
s
n
o
c
 
t
o
n
 
s
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d
 
r
o
t
c
e
V

.
s
a
e
r
a

l

j

y
n
o
 
s
n
o
i
t
c
e
o
r
p
 
l
a
n
o
i
g
e
R

,

n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t
 
r
o

f
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
i
u
s
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
f
o
 
n
o
i
t
c
d
e
r
P

i

,

n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d
 
f
o
 
n
o
i
s
n
a
p
x
E

C
C
 
r
e
d
n
u
 
P
T
 
g
n
i
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

 
l
a
b
o
G

l

 
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
d
n
a
 
P
T

 
f
o
 
s
p
a
M

 
d
n
a

x
a
v
i
v
P.

P,
T
 
n

i

m
u
r
a
p
c
a
f

l

i

P.

 
e
d
u
t
i
t
a
l
 
n

i
 
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

I

C
C
 
r
e
d
n
u

s
d
n
a
l
h
g
i
H

 
n
a
c
i
r
f
A

 
c
i
m
e
d
p
e

i



s
p
a
M

l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p

,

n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t
 
r
o

f
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
i
u
s
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
f
o
 
n
o
i
t
c
d
e
r
P

i

n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t
 
l
a
u
t
c
a
 
n
a
h
t
 
r
e
h
t
a
r

,

n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d
 
f
o
 
n
o
i
s
n
a
p
x
E

C
C
 
r
e
d
n
u
 
P
T
 
g
n
i
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

C
C
 
r
e
d
n
u

a
c
i
r
f
A

l
a
b
o
G

l

i

e
a
b
m
a
g
 
s
e
e
h
p
o
n
A
 
f
o

l

 
f
o
 
s
p
a
m
P,
T

 
f
o
 
s
p
a
M

 
l
a
n
o
s
a
e
s
 
n

i
 
s
e
g
n
a
h
c

l
a
n
o
i
t
i
d
d
a

,

n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t

k
s
i
r
 
t
a
 
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p

,
l

e
d
o
m

 
l
a
c
i
g
o
o
B

i

l

.

d
i
r
g
 
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p

i

a
 
g
n
y
a
l
r
e
v
o

.

0
2
v
 
A
M
S
A
M

I

i

g
n
p
p
a
m

l

j

y
n
o
 
s
n
o
i
t
c
e
o
r
p
 
l
a
n
o
i
g
e
R

 
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d
 
n

i
 
e
g
n
a
h
C

 
n
r
e
h
t
u
o
S

 
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d
 
f
o
 
s
p
a
M

 
l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s
 
l
a
c
i
r
i
p
m
E

 
n
o
 
d
e
s
a
b
 
l
e
d
o
m

y
t
i
c
a
p
a
c
 
l
a
i
r
o
t
c
e
v



l

e
d
o
m

 
l
a
c
i
g
o
o
B

l

i

.

0
1
v
 
A
M
S
A
M

I

.

0
1
v
 
A
M
S
A
M

I



.

0
1
v
 
A
M
S
A
M

I

l
a
c
i
g
o
o
b

l

i

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
n
a
y
r
B

)
6
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
n
e
t
t
e
J

)
6
9
9
1
(

 
s
n
e
t
r
a
M

)
7
9
9
1
(

 
d
n
a
 
y
a
s
d
n
L

i

 
s
n
e
t
r
a
M

)
8
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
s
n
e
t
r
a
M

)
9
9
9
1
(

 
s
r
e
g
o
R

)
6
9
9
1
(

 
s
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e
 
g
n
i
t
a
r
e
n
e
g
 
r
o
f
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
i
u
S

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a
 
s
i
h
t
 
r
o
f

s
n
o
i
s
u
c
n
o
C

l

d
e
r
e
v
o
c
 
a
e
r
A

t
u
p
t
u
o
 
l
e
d
o
M

e
p
y
t
 
l
e
d
o
M

y
d
u
t
S

)
d
e
u
n
i
t
n
o
c
(
 
a
i
r
a
l
a
m
 
n
o
 
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
f
o
 
s
t
c
e
f
f
e
 
r
o

f
 
h
c
r
a
e
s
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
t
i
l
 
f
o
 
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

.

6
B
 
e
b
a
T

l

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1639

,

n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t
 
r
o

f
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
i
u
s
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
f
o
 
n
o
i
t
c
d
e
r
P

i

,

n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d
 
f
o
 
n
o
i
s
n
a
p
x
E

l
a
b
o
G

l

P.
 
n

i
 
s
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
f
o
 
s
p
a
M

,
l

e
d
o
m

 
l
a
c
i
g
o
o
B

l

i

n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t
 
l
a
u
t
c
a
 
n
a
h
t
 
r
e
h
t
a
r

 

C
C
 
r
e
d
n
u
 
P
T
 
g
n
i
s
a
e
r
c
n

i

n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p

P,
T
m
u
r
a
p
c
a
f

l

i

l

 
e
b
a
t
i
u
s
 
s
n
o
s
a
e
s

,

k
s
i
r
 
t
a

 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t
 
r
o

f

.

d
i
r
g
 
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p

i

 
a
 
g
n
y
a
l
r
e
v
o

.

0
2
v
 
A
M
S
A
M

I

n
o
i
t
a
d

i
l
a
V

.

n
o

i
l
l
i

t
s
n
i
a
g
a
 
a
t
a
d
 
e
h
t
 
f
o
 
t
e
s
b
u
s
 
a
 
m
o
r
f
 
d
e
v
i
r
e
d
 
l
e
d
o
m

 
f
o

m
 
5
2

 
k
s
i
r
 
t
a
 
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p
 
l
a
n
o
i
t
i
d
d
A

 
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d
 
n

i
 
e
g
n
a
h
c

l

 
o
n
 
y
e
t
a
m
x
o
r
p
p
A

i

0
9
9
1

1
6
9
1
 
o
t

 
l
a
b
o
G

l

 
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p
 
n

i
 
s
e
g
n
a
h
C

 
l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s
-
l
a
c
i
r
i
p
m
E

m
u
r
a
p
c
a
f

l

i

P.

:

k
s
i
r
 
t
a

l

e
d
o
m

 

m
r
o
n

f

i
 
o
t
 
d
e
s
U

(

.
s
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
o
 
g
n
n
i
a
m
e
r
 
e
h
t

i

e
g
n
a
h
c
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
r
e
d
n
u

t
n
e
d
n
e
p
e
d
n

i
 
d
e

l
i
a
t
e
d
 
t
s
n
i
a
g
a
 
d
e
t
a
d

i
l
a
V

.

e
c
n
e
d
c
n

i

i
 
f
o

s
e
t
a
m

i

i
t
s
e
 
e
g
n
a
r
-
d
m
 
e
n
m
r
e
t
e
d
 
o
t
 
d
e
s
U

i

(

.
t
e
s
 
a
t
a
d

 
f
o
 
e
r
u
s
a
e
m
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
a
 
s
a

,

k
s
i
r
 
t
a
 
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p
 
f
o

i

s
n
o
i
t
c
d
e
r
p
 
o
t
n

i

l

i
 
g
n
p
o
e
v
e
d
 
r
o

f
 
l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
P

.

e
r
e
h
w
e
s
l
e

 
f
o
 
s
r
e
b
m
u
n
 
d
n
a
 
k
s
i
r
 
t
a
 
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p
 
t
c
d
e
r
p
 
o
t
 
d
e
s
u

i

 
t
o
n
 
t
u
b

,
a
c
i
r
f
A

 
t
u
o
h
g
u
o
r
h
t
 
k
s
i
r
 
t
a
 
s
h
t
n
o
m

i

l

,
s
e
d
u
t
s
 
d
e
fi
 
d
e
z
i
l
a
c
o
l
 
n
o
 
d
e
s
a
b
 
l
e
d
o
m

 
l
a
c
i
g
o
o
B

i

l

j

)
s
n
o
i
t
c
e
o
r
p
 
e
h
t
 
d
n
u
o
r
a
 
e
g
n
a
r
 
y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
u

n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p
 
n

i
 
n
o
i
s
n
a
p
x
E

C
C
 
r
e
d
n
u
 
k
s
i
r
 
t
a

a
c
i
r
f
A

 
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p
 
n

i
 
s
e
g
n
a
h
C

l

e
b
a
t
i
u
s
 
s
h
t
n
o
m


k
s
i
r
 
t
a

n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t
 
r
o

f

l

 
/
l
a
c
i
g
o
o
b
 
A
R
A
M

i

)
9
9
9
1

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
g
i
a
r
C

(

 
l
e
d
o
m

 
l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
l
l

e
n
r
A

)
2
0
0
2
(

 
d
n
a
 
s
r
e
g
o
R

l

 
h
p
o
d
n
a
R

)
0
0
0
2
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
r
e
s
n
a
T

)
3
0
0
2
(

)
e
c
n
e
d
c
n

i

i
 
n

i
 
e
g
n
a
h
c

.
)
l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p
 
c
i
m
e
d
p
e

i

P,
E
 
d
e

l
l
a
c
 
o
s
l
a
(
 
l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p
 
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t

P,
T

;

d
o
i
r
e
p
 
n
o
i
t
a
b
u
c
n

i
 
c
i
s
n
i
r
t
x
e

P,
E

I

;

e
g
n
a
h
c
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c

,

C
C

:

y
e
K

i

.
)
s
e
d
u
t
s
 
l
a
c
o

l

,
s
w
e
i
v
e
r
 
y
l
n
i
a
m

j

(
 
s
n
o
i
t
c
e
o
r
p
 
l
a
b
o
l
g
 
g
n
k
a
m
 
r
o

i

l

f
 
e
c
n
a
v
e
e
r
 
f
o
 
k
c
a
l
 
o
t
 
e
u
d
 
d
e
t
c
e
e
r
 
e
r
e
w
 
s
n
o
i
t
a
c

j

i
l

b
u
p
 
1
4
 
r
e
h
t
r
u

f
 

A

a

1640

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

.

d
e
z
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
 
t
o
n
 
e
c
n
e
d
c
n

i

i
 
e
s
a
e
s
i
d

 
r
o

f
 
s
n
o
i
t
i
n
fi
e
d
 
r
e
v
o
 
y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

 
d
n
a
 
P
T
 
n
e
e
w
t
e
b
 
p
h
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
R

i

 
f
o
 
s
t
i

m

i
l
 
e
n
fi
e
d
 
o
t
 
P
T
 
d
o
h
s
e
r
h
t

l

t
n
e
m

s
s
e
s
s
a
 
s
i
h
t
 
r
o
f
 
s
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e

 
g
n
i
t
a
r
e
n
e
g
 
r
o
f
 
y
t
i
l
i

b
a
t
i
u
S

e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t
 
l
l
a
m

s

 
e
t
a
m

i
l
c
 
r
e
d
n
u

 
s
c
i
m
a
n
y
d
 
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p
 
e
t
i
s
a
r
a
p

e
g
n
a
h
c

 
h
t
i

w
 
d
e
p
u
o
c

l

,

.

0
1
v
 
A
M
S
A
M

I

 
h
t
i

w

 
l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p
 
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t

 
n

i
 
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i
 
e
g
r
a
L

l
a
b
o
G

l

 
n

i
 
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
f
o
 
s
p
a
M

 
l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p
 
c
i
m
e
d
p
e

i

 
g
n
i
z
i
r
a
m
m
u
s
 
l
e
d
o
m

 
l
a
c
i
g
o
o
B

l

i

 
d
n
a
 
r
o
t
c
e
v
 
n
o
 
s
t
c
e
f
f
e
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
s
n
e
t
r
a
M

)
7
9
9
1
(

a
e
u
g
n
e
d
 
n
o
 
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
f
o
 
s
t
c
e
f
f
e
 
d
e
t
c
e
o
r
p
 
r
o

j

f
 
h
c
r
a
e
s
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
t
i
l
 
f
o
 
s
t
l
u
s
e
R

.

7
B
 
e
b
a
T

l

s
n
o
i
s
u
c
n
o
C

l

d
e
r
e
v
o
c
 
a
e
r
A

t
u
p
t
u
o
 
l
e
d
o
M

e
p
y
t
 
l
e
d
o
M

y
d
u
t
S

n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d

 
s
k
c
o
F
 
f
o
 
l
e
d
o
m
M
I
S
N
E
D

 

)
5
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e


e
g
n
a
h
c
 
)
c
i
t
a
m

i
l
c
 
r
o
(
 
e
t
a
m

i
l
c
 

d
n
a
 
e
u
g
n
e
D


 
s

i

m
r
e
t
 
e
h
t
 
g
n
n
i
a
t
n
o
c
 
)
2
0
0
2

6
6
9
1
(
 
s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
r
 
l
l
a
 
r
o
f
 

h
c
r
a
e
s
 
e
n

i
l

d
e
M

)
a
1
0
0
2
(
 

C
C
P
I
 

n

i
 

d
e
t
i
c
 
s
r
e
p
a
p

 
t
n
a
v
e
l
e
r
 
l
l
a

.
s
r
e
p
a
p

 
e
s
e
h
t
 

n

i
 

d
e
t
i
c
 
s
e
c
n
e
r
e
f
e
r
 
y
r
a
d
n
o
c
e
S







:
s
e
c
r
u
o
s
 

n
o
i
t
a
m
r
o
f
n
I

E
U
G
N
E
D

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1641

s
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e
r
e
d
n
u
 
y
a
m
 
d
n
a
 
s
a
e
r
a

i

 
c
m
e
d
n
e
 
g
n
i
r
e
d
r
o
b
 
s
a
e
r
a
 
c
m
e
d
n
e

i

-
n
o
n
 
r
o

f
 
e
t
a
r
u
c
c
a
 
t
s
o
m

 
s
i
 
l
e
d
o
M

 
e
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t
 
n

i
 
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t
 
n

i

d
n
a
 
P
T
 
n
e
e
w
t
e
b
 
p
h
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
R

i

.
s
e
n
o
z

d
e
z
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
 
t
o
n
 
e
c
n
e
d
c
n

i

i
 
e
s
a
e
s
i
d

e
s
a
e
s
i
d
 
d
n
a
 
P
T
 
n
e
e
w
t
e
b
 
p
h
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
e
R

i

 
s
a
e
r
a
 
n

i
 
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i
 
e
g
r
a
L

e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t
 
l
l
a
m

s

 
h
t
i

w

 
l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p
 
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t

,

k
o
k
g
n
a
B

,
s
n
e
h
t
A

(

 
n

i
 
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i
 
e
g
r
a
L

i

 
c
fi
c
e
p
s
 
y
t
i

C

 
n

i
 
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
f
o
 
s
p
a
M

 
l
a
i
t
n
e
t
o
p
 
c
i
m
e
d
p
e

i

 
g
n
i
z
i
r
a
m
m
u
s
 
l
e
d
o
m

 
l
a
c
i
g
o
o
B

i

l

 
d
n
a
 
-
r
o
t
c
e
v
 
n
o
 
s
t
c
e
f
f
e
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c

,

y
t
i

C
 
o
c
x
e
M

i

,
a
i
h
p
e
d
a
l
i

l

h
P

,

o
c
R

i

 
o
t
r
e
u
P

e
g
n
a
h
c

 
e
t
a
m

i
l
c
 
r
e
d
n
u

s
c
i
m
a
n
y
d
 
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p
 
e
t
i
s
a
r
a
p

)
n
a
u

J
 
n
a
S

l
a
b
o
G

l

 
n

i
 
s
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
f
o
 
s
p
a
M

 
g
n
i
z
i
r
a
m
m
u
s
 
l
e
d
o
m

 
l
a
c
i
g
o
o
B

i

l

.

d
e
z
i
r
e
t
c
a
r
a
h
c
 
t
o
n
 
e
c
n
e
d
c
n

i

i

d
n
a
 
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t
 
r
o

l

f
 
e
b
a
t
i
u
s

 
y
t
i
s
n
e
D

 
l
a
c
i
t
i
r
C

 
d
n
a
 
-
r
o
t
c
e
v
 
n
o
 
s
t
c
e
f
f
e
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c

s
f
f

o
-
t
u
c
 
f
o
 
g
n
i
t
t
e
s
 
r
e
v
o
 
y
t
n
i
a
t
r
e
c
n
U

n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t
 
r
o

f

n
o
s
a
e
s
 
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t
 
f
o
 
h
t
g
n
e

l

e
g
n
a
h
c
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
r
e
d
n
u

a
 
m
o
r
f
 
d
e
v
i
r
e
d
 
l
e
d
o
m

 
f
o
 
n
o
i
t
a
d

i
l
a
V

l

 
y
e
t
a
r
u
c
c
a
 
y
t
i
d
m
u
h
 
e
t
u
o
s
b
A

i

l

 
e
h
t
 
t
s
n
i
a
g
a
 
a
t
a
d
 
e
h
t
 
f
o
 
t
e
s
b
u
s

 
n
o
i
t
u
b
i
r
t
s
i
d
 
t
n
e
r
r
u
c
 
s
n
i
a
l
p
x
e

 
a
 
s
a

,

k
s
i
r
 
t
a
 
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p
 
e
n
m
r
e
t
e
d

i

o
t
 
d
e
s
U

(

.
s
n
o
i
t
a
v
r
e
s
b
o
 
g
n
n
i
a
m
e
r

i

 
n

i
 
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
f
o
 
e
r
u
s
a
e
m
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r

 
)
e
c
n
e
d
c
n

i

i

 
n

i
 
s
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i
 
e
g
r
a
L

.

e
u
g
n
e
d
 
f
o

i

 
d
e
t
c
d
e
r
p
 
k
s
i
r
 
t
a
 
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p

 
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
e
t
a
m

i
l

c
 
r
e
d
n
u

l

d
o
h
s
e
r
h
T

s
c
i
m
a
n
y
d
 
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p
 
e
t
i
s
a
r
a
p

l
a
b
o
G

l

 
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p
 
f
o
 
s
p
a
M

 
e
u
g
n
e
d
 
r
o

f
 
k
s
i
r
 
t
a

n
o
i
s
s
i

m
s
n
a
r
t

l

e
d
o
m

 
l
a
c
i
t
s
i
t
a
t
s
 
l
a
c
i
r
i
p
m
E

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
s
e
l
a
H

)
2
0
0
2
(

i

.
)
s
e
d
u
t
s
 
l
a
c
o

l

,
s
w
e
i
v
e
r
 
y
l
n
i
a
m

j

(
 
s
n
o
i
t
c
e
o
r
p
 
l
a
b
o
l
g
 
g
n
k
a
m
 
r
o

i

l

f
 
e
c
n
a
v
e
e
r
 
f
o
 
k
c
a
l
 
o
t
 
e
u
d
 
d
e
t
c
e
e
r
 
e
r
e
w
 
s
n
o
i
t
a
c

j

i
l

b
u
p
 
2
1
 
r
e
h
t
r
u

f
 

A

a

s
k
c
o
F
 
d
n
a
 
n
e
t
t
e
J

)
7
9
9
1
(

.
l
a
 
t
e
 
z
t
a
P

)
8
9
9
1
(

1642

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

Appendix references
Adegbola  RA, Demba  E, de Veer  G, Todd  J  (1994)  Cryptosporidium  infection  in
Gambian children less than 5 years of age. Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene,
97:103107.

Adkins HJ, Escamilla J, Santiago LT, Ranoa C, Echeverria P, Cross JH (1987) Two-year
survey of etiologic agents of diarrheal disease at San Lazaro Hospital, Manila, Repub-
lic of the Philippines. Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 25:11431147.

Aggarwal P, Sarkar R, Gupta JP, Ahuja S, Ray K, Rai Chowdhuri AN (1983) Current
Journal  of  Communicable  Diseases,

epidemiological  aspects  of  cholera  in  Delhi.
15:2632.

Alberdi JC (1998) Daily mortality in Madrid community, 19861992: relationship with

meteorological variables. European Journal of Epidemiology, 14:571578.

Anjaneyulu G, Banerji SC, Indrayan A (1975) A study of fly density and meteorologi-
cal factors in occurrence of diarrhoea in a rural area. Indian Journal of Public Health,
19:115121.

Ansari SA, Springthorpe VS, Sattar SA (1991) Survival and vehicular spread of human
rotavirusespossible relation to seasonality of outbreaks. Reviews of Infectious Dis-
eases, 13:448461.

Armah GE, Mingle JAA, Dodoo AK et al. (1994) Seasonality of rotavirus infection in

Ghana. Annals of Tropical Paediatrics, 14:223229.

Arnell N, Cannell MG, Hulme M et al. (2002) The consequences of CO2 stabilization

for the impacts of climate change. Climatic Change, 53:413446

Baarse G (1995) The development of an operational tool for global vulnerability assessment
(GVA) update of the number of people at risk due to sea level rise and increased flood-
ing  probabilities. Ministry  of Transport, Public Works  and Water  Management, The
Hague.

Ballester DF, Corella D, Perez-Hoyos S, Saez M, Hervas A (1997) Mortality as a func-
tion of temperature. A study in Valencia, Spain, 19911993. International Journal of
Epidemiology, 26:551561.

Beards  G, Graham  C  (1995) Temporal  distribution  of  rotavirus  G-serotypes  in  the
West Midlands region of the United Kingdom, 19831994. Journal of Diarrhoeal Dis-
eases Research, 13:235237.

Becker S (1981) Seasonality of deaths in Matlab, Bangladesh. International Journal of Epi-

demiology, 10:271280.

Bishop RF, Masendycz PJ, Bugg HC, Carlin JB, Barnes GL (2001) Epidemiological pat-
terns of rotaviruses causing severe gastroenteritis in young children throughout Aus-
tralia from 1993 to 1996. Journal of Clinical Microbiology, 39:10851091.

Bockemuhl J (1976) Salmonellosis and shigellosis in Togo (West Africa), 19711973. I.
Carrier rates in the rural population. Tropenmedizin und Parasitologie, 27:112120.
Booij MJ, (2002) Extreme daily precipitation in Western Europe with climate change

at appropriate spatial scales. International Journal of Climatology, 22:6985.

Brewster DR, Greenwood BM (1993) Seasonal-variation of pediatric diseases in the

Gambia, West-Africa. Annals of Tropical Paediatrics, 13:133146.

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1643

Bryan JH, Foley DH, Sutherst RW (1996) Malaria transmission and climate change in

Australia. Medical Journal of Australia, 164:345347.

Callejas D, Estevez J, Porto-Espinoza L et al. (1999) Effect of climatic factors on the
epidemiology of rotavirus infection in children under 5 years of age in the city of
Maracaibo, Venezuela [in Spanish]. Investigacion Clinica, 40:8194.

Chakravarti A, Broor S, Natarajan R, Setty VS, Mittal SK (1992) Epidemiological and
clinical characteristics of acute diarrhoea in children due to human rotavirus. Journal
of Tropical Pediatrics, 38:192193.

Chan PKS, Tam JS, Nelson EAS et al. (1998) Rotavirus infection in Hong Kong: epi-
demiology and estimates of disease burden. Epidemiology and Infection, 120:321325.
Chaudhury A, Nath G, Shukla B, Panda S, Singh TB (1996) Diarrhoea associated with
Candida spp.: incidence and seasonal variation. Journal of Diarrhoeal Diseases Research,
14:110112.

Checkley W, Epstein LD, Gilman RH et al. (2000) Effect of El Nino and ambient tem-
perature  on  hospital  admissions  for  diarrhoeal  diseases  in  Peruvian  children. The
Lancet, 355:442450.

Conteas CN, Berlin OG, Lariviere MJ et al. (1998) Examination of the prevalence and
seasonal variation of intestinal microsporidiosis in the stools of persons with chronic
diarrhea  and  human  immunodeficiency  virus  infection. American  Journal  of Tropical
Medicine and Hygiene, 58:559561.

Cook SM, Glass RI, LeBaron CW, Ho MS (1990) Global seasonality of rotavirus infec-

tions. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 68:171177.

Cunliffe NA, Kilgore PE, Bresee JS et al. (1998) Epidemiology of rotavirus diarrhoea
in Africa: a review to assess the need for rotavirus immunization. Bulletin of the World
Health Organization, 76:525537.

da Rosa e Silva ML, Naveca FG, Pires de Carvalho I (2001) Epidemiological aspects of
rotavirus  infections  in  Minas  Gerais, Brazil. Brazilian  Journal  of  Infectious  Diseases,
5:215222.

Dean AG, Jones TC (1972) Seasonal gastroenteritis and malabsorption at an Ameri-
can  military  base  in  the  Philippines. I. Clinical  and  epidemiologic  investigations  of
the acute illness. American Journal of Epidemiology, 95:111127.

Dessai SR (2003) Heat stress and mortality in Lisbon. Part II. An assessment of the
potential impacts of climate change. International Journal of Biometeorology, 48:3744.
Douglas  AS, Kurien  A  (1997)  Seasonality  and  other  epidemiological  features  of
haemolytic uraemic syndrome and E-coli O157 isolates in Scotland. Scottish Medical
Journal, 42:166171.

Duncan K, Guidotti TL, Cheng K et al. (1997) The Canadian Country study: impacts
and  adaptation, Health  Sector. In: The  Canadian  Country  study: climate  impacts  and
adaptation, National Sectoral Volume VII. Environment Canada. Toronto.

Eberhard  ML, Nace  EK, Freeman  AR, Streit  TG, Da  Silva  AJ, Lammie  PJ  (1999)
Cyclospora cayetanensis infections in Haiti: a common occurrence in the absence of
watery diarrhea. American Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 60:584586.

Fischer  G, Frohberg  K, Parry  ML, Rosenzweig  C  (1994)  Climate-change  and  world
food-supply, demand  and  tradewho  benefits, who  loses. Global  Environmental
Change-Human and Policy Dimensions, 4:723.

1644

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

Fowler AM, Hennessy KJ (1995) Potential impacts of global warming on the frequency

and magnitude of heavy precipitation. Natural Hazards, 11:283303.

Fujita Y  (1990)  Rotavirus  infectionclinical  symptoms  and  influence  of  climate  [in

Japanese]. Kansenshogaku Zasshi, 64:12551263.

Gouveia N, Hajat S, Armstrong B (2003) Socio-economic differentials in the temper-
ature-mortality relationship in Sao Paulo, Brazil. International Journal of Epidemiology,
32:390397.

Guest CS, Willson K, Woodward AJ et al. (1999) Climate and mortality in Australia.
Retrospective study, 19791990, and predicted impacts in five major cities in 2030.
Climate Research, 13:115.

Hales S, de Wet N, Maindonald J, Woodward A (2002) Potential effect of population
and climate changes on global distribution of dengue fever: an empirical model. The
Lancet, 360:830834.

Henry FJ, Bartholomew RK (1990) Epidemiology and transmission of rotavirus infec-
tions and diarrhoea in St. Lucia,West Indies. West Indian Medical Journal, 39:205212.
Hirschl AM, Lior H, Wolf D et al. (1987) Occurrence, serotypes and biotypes of ther-
mophilic Campylobacters isolated in Vienna. Zentralblatt fur Bakteriologie, Mikrobiolo-
gie, und Hygiene, Serie A, 266:94103.

Hoge CW, Shlim DR, Echeverria P, Rajah R, Herrmann JE, Cross JH (1996) Epidemi-
ology of diarrhea among expatriate residents living in a highly endemic environment.
Journal of the American Medical Association, 275:533538.

Hoozemans FMJ, Marchand M, Pennekamp HA (1993) A global vulnerability analysis: vul-
nerability assessment for population, coastal wetlands and rice production on a global scale.
2nd edn. Delft Hydraulics, Delft.

Ijaz MK, Sattar SA, Johnson-Lussenburg CM, Springthorpe VS, Nair RC (1985) Effect
of relative humidity, atmospheric temperature, and suspending medium on the air-
borne survival of human rotavirus. Canadian Journal of Microbiology, 31:681685.

ISOTHURM (forthcoming) ISOTHURM Study Group: international study of temper-
ature and heat-waves on urban mortality in low and middle income countries. The
Lancet,

Jetten TH, Focks DA (1997) Potential changes in the distribution of dengue transmis-
sion  under  climate  warming. American  Journal  of  Tropical  Medicine  and  Hygiene,
57:285287.

Jetten TH, Martens WJM, Takken W (1996) Model simulations to estimate malaria risk

under climate change. Journal of Medical Entomology, 33:361371.

Jin SX, Kilgore PE, Holman RC, Clarke MJ, Gangarosa EJ, Glass RI (1996) Trends in
hospitalizations for diarrhea in United States children from 1974 through 1992: esti-
mates of the morbidity associated with rotavirus. Pediatric Infectious Disease Journal,
15:397404.

Jones  PD, Reid  PA  (2001) Assessing  future  changes  in  extreme  precipitation  over
Britain using regional climate model integrations. International Journal of Climatology,
21:13371356.

Kalkstein LS, Greene JS (1997) An evaluation of climate/mortality relationships in large
US  cities  and  the  possible  impacts  of  a  climate  change. Environmental  Health  Per-
spectives, 105:8493.

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1645

Kalkstein LS, Smoyer KE (1993) The impact of climate change on human health: some

international implications. Experientia, 49:969979.

Konno T, Suzuki H, Katsushima N et al. (1983) Influence of temperature and relative
Journal  of  Infectious  Diseases,

humidity  on  human  rotavirus  infection  in  Japan.
147:125128.

Kunst A, Looman C, Mackenbach J (1993) Outdoor air temperature and mortality in
the  Netherlandsa  time  series  analysis. American  Journal  of  Epidemiology,
137:331341.

Langford IH, Bentham G (1995) The potential effects of climate-change on winter mor-

tality in England and Wales. International Journal of Biometeorology, 38:141147.

Laursen  E, Mygind  O, Rasmussen  B, Ronne T  (1994)  Gastroenteritis: a  waterborne
outbreak affecting 1600 people in a small Danish town. Journal of Epidemiology and
Community Health, 48:453458.

LeBaron CW, Lew J, Glass RI, Weber JM, Ruiz-Palacios GM (1990) Annual rotavirus
epidemic patterns in North America. Results of a 5-year retrospective survey of 88
centers in Canada, Mexico, and the United States. Rotavirus Study Group. Journal
of the American Medical Association, 264:983988.

Lindsay SW, Martens WJM (1998) Malaria in the African highlands: past, present and

future. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 76:3345.

Ling JM, Cheng AF (1993) Infectious diarrhea in Hong-Kong. Journal of Tropical Medi-

cine and Hygiene, 96:107112.

Malakooti MA, Alaii J, Shanks GD, Phillips-Howard PA (1997) Epidemic dysentery in
western  Kenya. Transactions  of  the  Royal  Society  of Tropical  Medicine  and  Hygiene,
91:541543.

Martens P (1997) Health impacts of climate change and ozone depletion: an eco-epidemi-

ological modelling approach. Maastricht University, Maastricht.

Martens W  (1998a)  Climate  change, thermal  stress  and  mortality  changes. Social

Science Medicine, 46:331334.

Martens WJ, Jetten TH, Rotmans J, Niessen LW (1995a) Climate change and vector-
borne  diseases: a  global  modelling  perspective. Global  Environmental  Change,
5:195209.

Martens WJ, Niessen LW, Rotmans J, Jetten TH, McMichael AJ (1995b) Potential impact
of  global  climate  change  on  malaria  risk. Environmental  Health  Perspectives,
103:458464.

Martens WJM, Jetten TH, Focks DA (1997) Sensitivity of malaria, schistosomiasis and

dengue to global warming. Climatic Change, 35:145156.

Martens P, Kovats RS, Nijhof S et al. (1999) Climate change and future populations at
risk  of  malaria. Global  Environmental  ChangeHuman  and  Policy  Dimensions,
9:S89S107.

Martin PH, Lefebvre MG (1995) Malaria and climatesensitivity of malaria potential

transmission to climate. Ambio, 24:200207.

Matsuoka Y, Kai K (1994) An estimation of climatic change effects on malaria. Journal

of Global Environment Engineering, 1:115.

1646

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

McMichael AJ, Kovats S, Martens P et al. (2000b) Climate change and human health: final
report to the Department of Environment,Transport and the Regions. London School of
Hygiene and Tropical Medicine/ICIS, London/Maastricht.

Merlin M, Roure C, Kollo B et al. (1986) Evaluation of morbidity, mortality and ther-
apeutic procedures in diarrheal diseases of young children in Cameroon. Medecine
Tropicale (Marseilles), 46:355357.

Milly  PCD, Wetherald  RT, Dunne  KA, Delworth TL  (2002)  Increasing  risk  of  great

floods in a changing climate. Nature, 415:514517.

Muhuri  PK  (1996)  Estimating  seasonality  effects  on  child  mortality  in  Matlab,

Bangladesh. Demography, 33:98110.

Musa HA, Shears P, Kafi S, Elsabag SK (1999) Water quality and public health in north-
ern Sudan: a study of rural and peri-urban communities. Journal of Applied Microbi-
ology, 87:676682.

Nchito M, Kelly P, Sianongo S et al. (1998) Cryptosporidiosis in urban Zambian chil-
dren: an  analysis  of  risk  factors. American  Journal  of Tropical  Medicine  and  Hygiene,
59:435437.

Nicholls RJ, Mimura N (1998) Regional issues raised by sea level rise and their policy

implications. Climate Research, 11:518.

Nicholls RJ, Hoozemans FMJ, Marchand M (1999) Increasing flood risk and wetland
losses due to global sealevel rise: regional and global analyses. Global Environmental
Change-Human and Policy Dimensions, 9:S69S87.

Palmer TN, Ralsanen J (2002) Quantifying the risk of extreme seasonal precipitation

events in a changing climate. Nature, 415:512514.

Parashar UD, Chung MA, Holman RC, Ryder RW, Hadler JL, Glass RI (1999) Use of
state hospital discharge data to assess the morbidity from rotavirus diarrhea and
to monitor the impact of a rotavirus immunization program: a pilot study in Con-
necticut. Pediatrics, 104:489494.

Parashar UD, Holman RC, Bresee JS et al. (1998a) Epidemiology of diarrheal disease
among children enrolled in four west coast health maintenance organizations. Pedi-
atric Infectious Disease Journal, 17:605611.

Parashar  UD, Holman  RC, Clarke  MJ, Bresee  JS, Glass  RI  (1998b)  Hospitalizations
associated  with  rotavirus  diarrhea  in  the  United  States, 1993  through  1995: sur-
veillance based on the new ICD-9-CM rotavirus-specific diagnostic code. Journal of
Infectious Diseases, 177:1317.

Parry M, Rosenzweig C, Iglesias A, Fischer G, Livermore M. (1999) Climate change
and world food security: a new assessment. Global Environmental Change-Human and
Policy Dimensions, 9:S51S67.

Parry ML, Arnell NW, McMichael A et al. (2001) Millions at risk: defining critical climate

change threats and targets. Global Environmental Change, 11:181183.

Patz JA, Martens WJM, Focks DA, Jetten TH (1998) Dengue fever epidemic potential
as projected by general circulation models of global climate change. Environmental
Health Perspectives, 106:147153.

Pazzaglia G, Bourgeois AL, Araby I et al. (1993) Campylobacter-associated diarrhea in
Egyptian infantsepidemiology and clinical manifestations of disease and high-fre-
quency of concomitant infections. Journal of Diarrhoeal Diseases Research, 11:613.

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1647

Pinfold JV, Horan NJ, Mara DD (1991) Seasonal effects on the reported incidence of
acute diarrhoeal disease in northeast Thailand. International Journal of Epidemiology,
20:777786.

Purohit SG, Kelkar SD, Simha V (1998) Time series analysis of patients with rotavirus

diarrhoea in Pune, India. Journal of Diarrhoeal Diseases Research, 16:7483.

Qiao HP, Nilsson M, Abreu ER et al. (1999) Viral diarrhea in children in Beijing, China.

Journal of Medical Virology, 57:390396.

Ram S, Khurana S, Khurana SB, Sharma S, Vadehra DV (1990a) Seasonal fluctuations
Indian  Journal  of

in  the  occurrence  of  enteroinvasive  Escherichia  coli  diarrhoea.
Medical Research, 91:258262.

Ram S, Khurana S, Khurana SB, Sharma S, Vadehra DV, Broor S (1990b) Bioecologi-
Indian  Journal  of  Medical  Research, 91:167

cal  factors  and  rotavirus  diarrhoea.
170.

Reyes M, Hedlund KO, Lorenzana I, Ehrnst A (1996) Respiratory infection and iatro-
genic diarrhea in Honduras and El Salvador during the 19911992 season. American
Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 54:260264.

Robins-Browne RM (1984) Seasonal and racial incidence of infantile gastroenteritis in

South Africa. American Journal of Epidemiology, 119:350355.

Rogers DJ (1996) Regional impacts of climate change; changes in disease vector dis-
tributions. In: Climate  change  and  Southern Africa: an  exploration  of  some  potential
impacts and implications in the SADC region. Hulme M, ed. University of East Anglia,
Norwich.

Rogers DJ, Randolph SE (2000) The global spread of malaria in a future, warmer world.

Science, 289:17631766.

Rosenzweig C, Parry ML (1994) Potential impact of climate-change on world food-

supply. Nature, 367:133138.

Rousham  EK, Mascietaylor  CGN  (1995)  Seasonality  and  child  morbidity  in  rural

Bangladesh. American Journal of Human Biology, 7:369379.

Rytlewska M, Bako W, Ratajczak B et al. (2000) Epidemiological and clinical charac-
teristics of rotaviral diarrhoea in children from Gdansk, Gdynia and Sopot. Medical
Science Monitor 6:117122.

Saidi SM, Iijima Y, Sang WK et al. (1997) Epidemiological study on infectious diarrheal
diseases in children in a coastal rural area of Kenya. Microbiology and Immunology,
41:773778.

Sallon  S, el  Showwa  R, el  Masri  M, Khalil, M, Blundell  N, Hart  CA  (1991)  Cryp-

tosporidiosis in children in Gaza. Annals of Tropical Paediatrics, 11:277281.

Sawchuk LA (1993) Societal and ecological determinants of urban health: a case study
of pre-reproductive mortality in 19th century Gibraltar. Social Science and Medicine,
36:875892.

Sethi SK, Al-Nakib W, Khuffash FA, Majeed HA (1984) Acute diarrhoea and rotavirus

infections in young children in Kuwait. Annals of Tropical Paediatrics, 4:117121.

Shahid  NS, Rahman AS, Sanyal  SC  (1987)  Cryptosporidium  as  a  pathogen  for  diar-

rhoea in Bangladesh. Tropical and Geographical Medicine, 39:265270.

1648

Comparative Quantification of Health Risks

Shaikh K, Wojtyniak B, Mostafa G, Khan MU (1990) Pattern of diarrheal deaths during
19661987 in a demographic surveillance area in rural Bangladesh. Journal of Diar-
rhoeal Diseases Research, 8:147154.

Shkarin VV, Ouchfoun A, Minaev VI, Naceur D (1983) Epidemiology of bacillary dysen-
tery in Algeria. II. The seasonality of dysentery. Zhurnal Mikrobiologii, Epidemiologii i
Immunobiologii, 5358.

Singh RB, Hales S, de Wet N, Raj R, Hearnden M, Weinstein P (2001) The influence
of climate variation and change on diarrheal disease in the Pacific Islands. Environ-
mental Health Perspectives, 109:155159.

Sorvillo F, Beall G, Turner PA et al. (1998) Seasonality and factors associated with cryp-
tosporidiosis  among  individuals  with  HIV  infection. Epidemiology  and  Infection,
121:197204.

Stewien KE, Dacunha LCF, Alvim AD et al. (1991) Rotavirus associated diarrhea during
infancy in the city of S Luis (Ma), Brazila 2-year longitudinal-study. Revista do Insti-
tuto de Medicina Tropical de Sao Paulo, 33:459464.

Stintzing G, Back E, Tufvesson B, Johnsson T, Wadstrom T, Habte D (1981) Seasonal
fluctuations in the occurrence of entero-toxigenic bacteria and rotavirus in pedi-
atric diarrhea in Addis-Ababa. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 59:6773.

Sutra S, Srisontrisuk S, Panpurk W et al. (1990) The pattern of diarrhea in children in
Khon Kaen, northeastern Thailand: I. The incidence and seasonal variation of diar-
rhea. Southeast Asian Journal of Tropical Medicine and Public Health, 21:586593.

Tanser FC, Sharp B, Le Sueur D (2003) Potential effect of climate change on malaria

transmission in Africa. The Lancet, 362:17921798.

Tsukamoto T, Kinoshita Y, Shimada T, Sakazaki R (1978) Two epidemics of diarrhoeal
disease possibly caused by Plesiomonas shigelloides. Journal of Hygiene, 80:275280.
Tswana SA, Jorgensen PH, Halliwell RW, Kapaata R, Moyo SR (1990) The incidence
of rotavirus infection in children from 2 selected study areas in Zimbabwe. Central
African Journal of Medicine, 36:241246.

Utsalo SJ, Eko FO, Antia-Obong OE (1991) Cholera and Vibrio parahaemolyticus diar-
rhoea endemicity in Calabar, Nigeria. West African Journal of Medicine, 10:175180.
Van den Broeck J, Eeckels R, Devlieger H (1993) Child morbidity patterns in two trop-
International  Journal  of  Epidemiology,

ical  seasons  and  associated  mortality  rates.
22:11041110.

Varoli O, Gatti M, Piscolla F (1989) A one-year study on thermophilic campylobacters

isolated from fecal specimens. Microbiologica, 12:263265.

Vlasov VI, Zamotin BA, Burykh VM (1983) Method for the short-term prognosis of
annual morbidity indices in Sonne-type dysentery. Zhurnal Mikrobiologii, Epidemiologii
i Immunobiologii, 5356.

Warrick RA, Barrow EM (1991) Climate change scenarios for the UK. Transactions of

the Institute of British Geographers, 16:387399.

Wilcox MH, Cook AM, Eley A, Spencer RC (1992) Aeromonas spp. as a potential cause

of diarrhoea in children. Journal of Clinical Pathology, 45:959963.

Williams EH, Hayes RJ, Smith PG (1986) Admissions to a rural hospital in the West
Nile District of Uganda over a 27 year period. Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene,
89:193211.

Anthony J. McMichael et al.

1649

Wuhib T, Silva TM, Newman RD et al. (1994) Cryptosporidial and micro-sporidial infec-
tions  in  human  immunodeficiency  virus-infected  patients  in  northeastern  Brazil.
Journal of Infectious Diseases, 170:494497.

Yang CR, Meng ZD, Wang X, Li YL, Zhang YX, Zhao QP (1990) Diarrhea surveillance
in children aged under 5 years in a rural area of Hebei Province, China. Journal of
Diarrhoeal Diseases Research, 8:155159.

