DEFORESTATION IN INDIA
OVERVIEW AND PROPOSED CASE STUDIES
Pankaj SEKHSARIA
Kalpavriksh - Environment Action Group, India
I. INTRODUCTION
India is a vast country - encompassing a large canvas of habitats, and ecological
niches; rich in bio-diversity and simultaneously supporting a rich, and vibrant
diversity of human cultures.
The environments are as diverse as can be imagined ; from the Himalayas in
the north, the long coastline touched by the Arabian Sea on the west and the Bay
of Bengal in the east to the islands of Andaman and Nicobar and the Lakshadweep.
From the deserts of Rajasthan and Gujarat in the west to the teak forests of Central
India to the thick and towering rainforests in the Northeast. Large parts of India
like most other parts of South Asia and for that matter the rest of the world were
till recently covered in thick forests.
This region is probably best known for the civilizations that flourished in the
valleys of its great rivers like the Ganges, the Yamuna and of course the Indus.
These were civilizations that reached a high degree of sophistication, and
urbanization. What are much less known are the innumerable, small, vibrant,
diverse and extremely sustainable forest cultures that survived and flourished
and continue to do so even today in the areas where the forests still exist?

II. LOCAL TRADITIONS AND CONSERVATION
There are several continuing examples of many such small communities;
taking self propelled initiatives outside the formal structures of law and
governance to protect their forests. In their endeavor to safeguard their
environment and protect their forests they are often in direct conflict with powerful
political and economic structures which are themselves driven by major vested
interests.
The best known case of this is the Chipko movement in the Himalayas (Hegde,
1998; Weber, 1987). The villagers rallied together to save their forests by hugging
the trees from the axe of the contractors who were issued licenses without the
consent of the local people. Much earlier to this movement, though similar in its
action is the story of the Bishnois in the desert state of Rajasthan (CSE 1984-85).
The religious tenets of the community prevent them from causing any harm to
any living thing. A few centuries ago a situation arose when the ruler ordered the
cutting down of the trees of the area. The people of this community protested.
They hugged the trees to protect them and in the process paid a very heavy price.
The king's men ruthlessly chopped down the protesters before chopping down
the trees. Even today the villages of the Bishnois are a pleasant sight where trees

76

IGES International Workshop

grow all around inspite of the desert like environment and various animals like
the endangered Blackbuck find freedom and safety in a people's sanctuary.
In addition, across the country there are innumerable sacred groves (Gadget,
1975; Gadget and Vartak, 1976; Induchoodan, 1991; WWF, 1996); patches of forests
that have had a sacredness and sanctity attached to them for centuries. Often it is
a forest dedicated to the local deity and in many places like in the western ghats
these remain the only surviving examples of the rich and virgin forests that once
clothed the mountains.
More recently we come across the well-documented cases where communities
are taking the initiative in protecting their forests. For instance Jardhar (Kothari,
1995) is a village in the Garhwal Himalayas about 12 hours drive away from New
Delhi. Here the village has come together on its own initiative to protect the forests
on the hills around their village. With the help of the Delhi based environmental
group Kalpavriksh they have even prepared a community register of their
biological, ecological and environmental knowledge. Additionally they have a
'Beej Bachao Andolan' (Save the seeds campaign) wherein the villagers have taken
it upon themselves to save the great agricultural diversity of their area and have
started a seed bank on their own.
Similar is the case in the Alwar district of Rajasthan where the coordinated
action of a series of villages; protecting the forests, preventing grazing, tree cutting,
and building a series of small bunds across the water streams has actually brought
the river Arvari back to life (Patel, 1997). The river which had over the years
turned into a seasonal stream now once again flows perennially. Enthused by the
initiative of the villagers the government too responded positively and schemes
like those under Joint Forestry Management are being implemented in the area.
Many such initiatives, experiences and experiments are going on in the country
today. These are however not necessarily the trends, but just the exceptions to a
rule. There is a basic conflict of interest here. For the various small communities
like the ones mentioned earlier forests mean home and are an important (and
often the only) source of livelihood and survival. The same forests have a different
interest for others; the government may look at it merely as a source of revenue
while for industry it is only the timber or the raw materials. This results in huge,
though remote controlled processes of deforestation and destruction that the locals
neither understand and have absolutely no control over. However life in the great
plains where most of the political and monetary muscle lies goes quite unaffected
(at least immediately and directly) by what happens in these forests far away.

III. ROLE OF THE BRITISH
In recent history large-scale destruction of the forests began with the British
who wished to utilize the timber and the natural resources for the expansion and
continuation of the empire. An idea of the commercial onslaught on India's forests
by the British has been pieced together by Gadgil and Guha (1992). Quoting from
a number of sources, they show how the British navy's need for durable timber
Forest Conservation Strategies for the Asia and Pacific Region

77

was increasingly being met from India from teak Tectona grandis forests.
Vast tracks of forest were chopped to create the vast railway network that
criss crosses India today. The main aim was the fast, cheap and efficient transport
of inexpensive raw materials to the ports from the hinterlands of the country for
export to Britain's industries and to ensure the fast movement of security forces
to maintain the hold over the empire.
For instance, between 1869 and 1885, over 6,500,000 deodar Cedrus deodara
sleepers were extracted from the Yamuna Valley forests in the Himalayas, which
in turn was necessitated because the supply of teak and sal Shorea obusta from
peninsular India was getting exhausted. Wood for railway sleepers and as fuel
for powering the locomotives facilitated the expansion of both the railways and
the British Empire.
The other major cause of deforestation immediately after independence was
agricultural expansion, often state-sponsored. Much of the rich moist deciduous
forests of the humid Terai region in northern Uttar Pradesh for example were
cleared to provide land to immigrants from the newly created Pakistan. Most of
the woodland once covering the Indo-Gangetic plains was also gradually
converted to fields or grazing lands (Subramanium and Sasidharan, 1993). Indeed
between 1951 and 1980, according to the Forest Survey of India (1987), over 26.20
lakh hectares (26,200 sq.kms ) of forest was converted for agriculture purposes all
over India.( Kothari, 1993)

IV. PRESENT SCENARIO
Many environmental historians hold the opinion that the large-scale
destruction of the forests in India is rooted in the commercially oriented forest
use and ownership policies of the British government and these have continued
in their essence for several years even in post independence India. In more recent
times it is the new policies and programs of development; rapid industrialization,
urbanization and growing consumerism that has resulted in the wide-scale
destruction of the forests.
In certain parts of the country; particularly the rainforest regions of the north
eastern states bordering China and Burma and the remote islands of the Andaman
and Nicobar, a lot of the forests have been fed into the plywood mills. Other parts
of India have witnessed a spurt of large projects from big dams and thermal power
projects to huge mines and massive industrial complexes. Many of these have
been located in what were once thick forest areas. So these forests got drowned in
the backwaters of the dam projects or got cleared for the mines or the industrial
complexes.
What has been equally bad if not worse is that these projects very insensitively
alienated the communities living in the forests, depriving them of their basic
sources of survival, forcing them to move away; making them refugees if their
own land.

78

IGES International Workshop

With this destruction of the stake in and responsibility for the well being of
the forests the people who have lived in and tended the forests for generations
were forced to participate in and share the blame for destruction of the forests.
This process continues even today in various forms in many parts of the country,
resulting in the rapid decline in forest cover.
As mentioned earlier efforts are on to tackle these at various levels. Efforts
are being made to simultaneously sensitize the govt. machinery (with its deeply
entrenched colonial legacy) and to increase the confidence and involvement of
the local communities in the conservation of the forests.
Another paradoxical situation has arisen recently. Though not related directly
to the destruction of the forests, it still has great ramifications for the protection of
India's wilderness areas. Various areas (amounting to roughly 4.5 percent of India's
total geographical area) have been declared as sanctuaries and national parks to
safeguard the rich wild wealth. Many local communities who lived in these forests
were often moved out by force, or their accesses to the resources were curtailed in
the belief that it was the best for the forest and the protection of the wild creatures.
It is only now being realized that far from being useful this actually is detrimental,
both, to the human communities that live here and to the forests that are to be
protected and conserved. This process too has alienated a number of communities
who could have otherwise been critical partners in the protection of the forests.
In very recent times there have been a number of cases where these very
protected areas have been officially denotified to be handed over to larger
commercial and industrial interests to mine the minerals that are found there or
to set up complexes like oil refineries or cement plants, defeating in the process
the very purpose of declaring the areas protected in the first place. This is a
development that is strongly resented by the communities that once lived here
and is also being opposed at all levels by environmental groups.

V. THE ROLE OF KALPAVRIKSH
Kalpavriksh has over the last couple of decades been involved in the above
mentioned issues in various capacities and at various stages. Today one of the
areas we are intensely working in are the processes of community involvement in
the protection of forests; documenting already existing examples, preparing case
studies and initiating processes that encourage joint management of forests and
protected areas by the forest department and the local communities. A significant
move has been the 'Building Bridges' dialogue where attempts are being made to
bring together the diverse groups of people who are the major stakeholders in the
issues related to forests. These include the local communities, government agencies
like the forest department, conservationists, wildlife researches and enthusiasts
and social activists. In various meetings over the last year or so many of these
have come together for the first time and important common ground is being
found, especially against destructive pressures by industrial and commercial
forces.

Forest Conservation Strategies for the Asia and Pacific Region

79

As part of the Underlying Causes (UC) of deforestation case studies
Kalpavriksh along with two other NGO's, Vrikshmitra (Friends of Trees) and the
Parisara Samrakshana Kendra (Centre for Environment Conservation) hopes to
be able to present at least 3 case studies from 3 different parts of the country
comprising different forests, different social and political circumstances and
different community responses.
The study sites are:
a) Gadchiroli district in Central India
b)Uttara Kannada district of the Western ghats
c) Little Andaman island from the Andaman and Nicobar islands in the Bay of
Bengal
1. Gadchiroli District
Gadchiroli in Central India is one of the most forested districts in India with
a predominantly tribal population. This case study is to be conducted by Mohan
Hirabai Hiralal of the NGO Vrikshamitra in association with the residents of the
village Mendha in the district.
1). Present Scenario
In recent years there has been an accelerated process of deforestation in the
district of Gadchiroli. As in most cases it is the locals and the tribals who get
blamed for the deforestation that is happening here whereas a closer look at the
situation reveals that one of the major cause is without doubt policies of the
government. Simultaneously the district has many tribal villages that are striving
for more legal control over their forests. There is much village level self initiated
forest protection committees that are attempting to regulate the unsustainable
use of their forests. The case study will focus on the underlying causes of
deforestation in this district and the effectivity of the local initiatives to control
them. One such village is Mendha.
Legally the forests here belong to the state. Entry into and use of the forests
by the locals here has been severely restricted by the various government agencies
like the forest dept. At the same time however the state itself continues to carry
out commercial forestry extraction and a part of the forest has been leased out to
the paper industry for bamboo extraction.
2). Role of the Local Community
Mendha is a significant case because of the initiatives of the villagers, and
their decisions which have contributed immensely in the conservation of the forests
of the area. The village has established a very strong community organization of
its own. It has various institutional structures like the Van Suraksha Samiti (VSS)
or the Forest Protection Committee which takes the forest related decisions. The
village has also been successful in establishing good relations with some sensitive
government officials and Non Governmental Organizations and succeeded in
facilitating inter-departmental co-operation among the various government
80

IGES International Workshop

agencies working in the area.
The entire process has lead to the confidence of villagers in their own capacity
to take responsibility over matters directly affecting their lives. One of the most
important results of this has been the revitalization of importance of forests in the
lives of the tribals and the need to protect, conserve and decide about it themselves.
In the last seven years the villagers have taken up a number of soil and water
conservation programs, built a water hole for wild animals, controlled forest fires
to an extent and framed regulations for the controlled extraction of biomass from
the forest. They have also succeeded in stopping the indiscriminate and destructive
extraction by the paper mill. They carry out daily patrolling and with the help of
the Forest Department have punished those who have been caught violating the
rules Forest Protection Committee (Pathak, 1998). Over the years the forest
department has also recognized the work done by the villagers, and shown its
appreciation by supporting the villagers against socially and economically
powerful offenders.
The village has also brought its forests under the Joint Forest Management
(JFM) scheme of the state government. This has not only formalized their position
as the custodians of the forests but has also opened up the possibilities for
negotiating benefits from the official forest related activities. In another significant
move the village council has made it mandatory for all government and nongovernmental agencies to seek its permission before carrying out any forest related
activity in the village and the surrounding forests and this includes the powerful
external commercial forces like the paper industry.
2. Uttar Kannada
Uttar Kannada is a heavily forested district in the state of Karnataka in the
western part of the country. Roughly 80percents of the land here is still under
forest cover. The district is unique in that it traverses five important terrestrial
ecozones. From the west to the east there is the narrow coastal plain, the evergreen
and moist deciduous forests of the Western Ghats, the dry deciduous forests and
further east the scrublands, making it one of the important centres of biodiversity
in the Western Ghats.
People have traditionally been involved in agroforestry and have maintained
unique multi-tiered spice orchards dominated by betel nut (Areca catechu).
1). Destruction of the Forests
Forest cover in the area has been steadily coming down over the last several
decades. The major causes have been many developmental projects like the paper
industry, hydro projects and even a nuclear power plant. The West Coast paper
mill has been responsible for the disappearance of a large chunk of forests. The
mill has unfairly high subsidies and have been allowed to go on inspite of not
having adequate effluent treatment facilities. They have even managed to get
portions of the Dandeli Wildlife Sanctuary denotified for the purpose of bamboo
extraction and continue to press for more denotifications of the protected areas.

Forest Conservation Strategies for the Asia and Pacific Region

81

The Supa dam was built over the river Kali in 1976. Large tracts of forests were
submerged in the reservoir. The townships that were created for the government
employees and for the dam also resulted in further destruction There is a proposal
for a similar project over the river Sharawati but it has met with stiff opposition
from the local communities. The forest department too has played a major role in
forest decimation, particularly with large-scale commercial forestry operations,
which are among the largest in the state.
2). Action of the Local Communities
In the late 1970's local communities got together and begun protesting against
the indiscriminate destruction of the forests which had been relatively intact over
centuries. They launched a movement called Appiko, akin to the popular Chipko
movement of the Himalayas (Hedge, 1998). Since then various local groups have
become involved in forest-related research and activism. In recent years they have
also protested against coastal destruction; lobbying against major aquaculture
projects, a barge mounted power plant and a huge a five star tourist resort. They
have also exposed some of the harsh realities of the capital intensive Overseas
Development Agency (ODA) funded JFM project in the area.
Pandurang Hegde who spearheaded the Appiko movement and is now with
the Parisara Samarakshana Samiti will be conducting the case study on the
underlying causes of deforestation in the district along with other volunteers
individuals and groups.
3. The Andaman Islands
The Andaman islands are a special field of interest to me in particular and
recently. I spent nearly four months looking at the logging industry in the islands.
1). The Local Tribes
The Andaman Islands are great interest and importance. Situated roughly
1,200 Kms from mainland India in the Bay of Bengal they are home to 4 tribal
communities and an additional 2 that live in the Nicobar group of Islands. The
Andaman tribes are the Great Andamanese, the Onge, the Jarawa and the
Sentinelese, whereas the tribes from the Nicobar group are the Nicobarese and
the Shompen .
The 4 groups that live in the Andaman Islands are of the Negrito origin and
probably share a certain affinity to the other tribal groups in the region like the
Semangs of Malaysia. Many theories exist of their origin but it is not yet fully
clear how, why or when they came here. What is well known however is that the
tribes here have been and continue to be extremely hostile even today and avoid
all contact with the modern world outside. Of the 4 groups the Great Andamanese
and the Onge have accepted the intrusions and contacts with the modern world
(and have suffered excessively for that). The processes and forces of modern
development have so destroyed them and their cultures that it is unlikely that
they will be able to survive for too long as a viable group of people. In any case
only 28 individuals survive of the Great Andamanese and about 100 of the Onge

82

IGES International Workshop

(Census of India, 1995). The other 2 groups - the Jarawas and the Sentinelese have
however fiercely safeguarded their identity and kept their distance.
The explanation for the behavior of the tribals lies in the history of these
people. From what little is known the outside world has always treated these
tribals very badly and only exploited them. The Arab traders, for example who
plied their trade along these routes many centuries ago were known to have often
taken these people for slaves. However the major intervention from outside came
in the 1850's with the establishment of the British penal settlement for convicts
from mainland India. Large tracts of forests that these tribals inhabited began to
be cleared.
2). Destruction of the Forests
The establishment of the penal settlement and then independent India's
resettlement and rehabilitation policy for the islands saw a huge influx of people.
Thousands were brought here from mainland with the promises of land and
resources. Vast tracts of forests continue to be cleared to accommodate all these
people. It was then also realized that a source of employment; a source of income
generation needs to be created to help these people survive here. The obvious
industry thought of and promoted from the 60's has been the timber and plywood
industry. Thus a situation was created wherein there was no option but to open
up the forests for exploitation. Huge incentives and subsidies were offered to
entrepreneurs who were willing to take the risk of establishing industry here.
This process has gone on uninterrupted for close to 4 decades now. Population
too, based largely on large scale immigration has grown phenomenally adding
considerable pressure on the forests and other natural resources of the islands.
The results of the deforestation are clearly visible in a number of places. There is
increased runoff; soil erosion is high which has choked the reefs surrounding the
islands and many endemic and rare species of plants and animals are becoming
rarer. Only recently has the realization dawned that the islands are a treasure
house that needs to be valued and safeguarded with care.
Following this growth of awareness there has been in recent years a reduction
in the official quotas of timber that can be harvested from these forests; a
development being strongly resented by the industrial lobby. Consequently the
private plywood industry has production facilities and capacities lying idle. In
an ironic and interesting “robbing Peter to pay Pan” situation, private industry
now begun importing timber from Malaysia and for the last financial year this
import amounted to a substantial 25percents of the intake in the industries.
3). Fate of the Tribals
However what is extremely important in the context is the fate of the tribal
communities. There has been no consideration for the fact that the first and
foremost right over these forests and the islands is that of the tribals who have
lived here for centuries and who would be completely destroyed if their forest
home is so destroyed. Here we also have the classical case of a rich storehouse of
biodiversity which could be lost even before it is comprehensively documented.
Forest Conservation Strategies for the Asia and Pacific Region

83

The Onge tribe for example uses a plant that recent modern research says may be
highly active against the dreaded malarial parasite, Plasmodium falciparum, which
causes the debilitating and often fatal malignant and cerebral forms of malaria
(Kothari, 1997). Discoveries like these could change the face of medicine and benefit
humankind in unimagined ways but only if the tribals are respected and their
forests are protected from destruction.
4). The Onge
The Onge tribals live on the 700 odd sq. Km. Island of Little Andaman which
is covered in thick evergreen forests. Like the Jarawas and the Sentinelese today,
the Onge too were a hostile tribe at the turn of the century. Eventually they were
befriended by the British. However they were the only group of people who lived
on the particular island and this was the situation till as recently as the 1960's.
Then the earlier mentioned policies of rehabilitation and resettlement of the Indian
Government came into effect. Suddenly thousands of outsiders were settled here
and the timber extraction operation was started in a big way. The combined effect
of opening up of the island, the introduction of an alien people and culture and
the destruction of the forests have devastated the extremely small community of
the Onge. The community has always been a small one. Today there are only
about 100 members of the Onge tribe that survive. Already vices of modern
civilization like alcohol and tobacco have made deep inroads here and the
exploitation of the tribals at the hands of the settlers goes on in many ways.
Policies of a government has not only initiated a powerful process of the
destruction of some virgin forests it has also probably put a small viable forest
community down the road to their doom.
In 1966 the Census of India report predicted that the possibility of preventing
their (the Onge's) ultimate extinction seems remote of importance and significance
in the case of the Onge is also the statement made in 1975 by Robert Allen who
was sent to these islands by the International Union for the Conservation of Natural
resources (IUCN) (Whitaker, 1985). He commented:
"personally, I do not accept the census (1966) statement that the possibility
of preventing their ultimate extinction seems remote. As a general rule, hunter
- gatherer peoples have every chance of surviving as hunter - gatherers and
of living well, provided:
1) they want to;
2) their economic and spiritual territory is conserved;
3) they receive appropriate medical help;
4) their numbers are in equilibrium with their environment;
5) they do not become demoralized, losing faith in their own way of life.
He added:
"...by economic territory I mean the full area of forest and coastal waters

84

IGES International Workshop

used for hunting, fishing and gathering by a healthy stable population....
here is where the interests of hunter-gatherers like the Onge and the Jarawa,
of peoples and governments like that of India and of conservationists
coincide. If Little Andaman were declared a protected area, for use by the
Onge alone, a unique area of tropical forest would be conserved, while at the
same time assuring the Onge way of life. If an ethnobotanical program were
also begun, studying and recording Onge plant knowledge, the Onge could
be shown how much we value their environmental understanding, while
the rest of the world would be shown both the potential of tropical forest
plants and also how harmoniously some peoples can live in environments
which at present we only know how to exploit by destroying."
More than ever it is today that these statements are of immense importance
in the context of the Onge. Sadly enough if one looks at the history of the Onge
and of the island of Little Andaman one realises what has happened in the last 3
decades is exactly opposite to what had been hoped and suggested by Allen.
The case study I propose envisages an in-depth look and analysis of the status
of the forestry operations in the island of Little Andaman and the effect it is having
on the Onge tribals and most importantly make suggestions to save the island's
forest and the Onge who will otherwise be destroyed with the destruction of their
forest home.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
I would like to thank Ashish Kothari, Neema Pathak, Sunita Rao, Yashodara
Kundaji and Sushruti Santhanam for their help and cooperation in the preparation
of this paper.

REFERENCES
Centre for Science and Environment. 1985. The State of India's Environment,
2nd Citizens Report, New Delhi.
Gadgil, N. 1975. Sacred Groves of India. Journal of the Bombay Natural
History Society Vol. 7.
Gadgil, M. and Vartak, V.D. 1976. Sacred Groves of Western Ghats of India.
Economic Botany, Vol. 30 No. 152.
Gadgil, M. and Guha, R. 1992. This Fissured Land. Oxford University Press,
Delhi.
Hegde, P. 1998. Chipko and Appiko: how the people save the trees.
Nonviolence in Action Series; Quaker Peace and Service.
Induchoodan, N.C. 1991. Sacred Groves of Kerala. WWF New Delhi.
Kothari, A. 1993. Conservation of Biological Diversity in India. Indian Institute

Forest Conservation Strategies for the Asia and Pacific Region

85

of Public Administration, New Delhi (draft report).
Kothari, A. 1995. Hope for the future: Regenerating Biodiversity in a
Himalayan Village. Conserving Life, Kalpavriksh, New Delhi.
Kothari, A. et al. 1997. Building Bridges for conservation. Indian Institute of
Public Administration, New Delhi.
Kothari, A. 1997. Protect Onge Tribal Knowledge and Rights. Kalpavriksh.
Patel, J. 1997. Story of a small rivulet Arvari. Tarun Bharat Sangh, Alwar.
Pathak, N. 1998. Case Study of Community involvement in Forest
Conservation in Mendha (Lekha) village in Maharashtra, India. South Asian
Regional Survey of Community involvement in wildlife conservation.
Poffenberger, M. and McGean, B. 1996. Village Voices, Forest Choices. Oxford
University Press, Delhi.
Subramaniam, K.N. and Sasidharan, K.R. 1993. Conservation of Biodiversity:
Forest Trees. Paper contributed to Conservation of Biological Diversity in India
Vol. II, Indian Institute of Public Administration, New Delhi.
Weber, T. 1987. Hugging the trees. Viking.
Whitekar, R. 1985. Endangered Andamans. WWF India, and Dept.
Environment, Govt. of India.
WWF. 1996. Sacred and Protected Groves of Andhra Pradesh.

86

IGES International Workshop

