USGS Science Helps Build Safer Communities 
Wildfire HazardsA National Threat 
Wildfires in the United States and Puerto Rico

This map shows locations that experienced wildlfires greater than 250 acres, from 1980 to 2003. 
Map not to scale. Sources: Bureau of Land Management, U.S. Forest Service, U.S. Fish and 
Wildlife Service, Bureau of Indian Affairs, National Park Service, and the USGS National Atlas

Wildfire Impacts

USGS Science Priorities 

 The Federal Government annually  
  spends billions of dollars to suppress  
  wildfires.
 Wildfires increase the potential for    
  flooding, debris flows, and landslides.
 Smoke and other emissions contain  
  pollutants that can cause significant  
  health problems.
 Short-term effects: destruction of  
  timber, forage, wildlife habitats, scenic  
  vistas, and watersheds
 Long-term effects: reduced access to  
  recreational areas; destruction of com- 
  munity infrastructure and cultural and  
  economic resources

 Conduct research on previous wildfires,  
  including ignition sources, burn severity  
  patterns, season of burning, and fire size
 Study the effects of postfire runoff  
  and erosion on aquatic ecosystems and  
  species
 Expand the ability to monitor and  
  provide early warnings using new  
  technology, sensor webs, and satellite  
  technology
 Develop tools and methods to mini- 
  mize impacts on human life and prop- 
  erty, especially in the wildland-urban  
  interface

U.S. Department of the Interior
U.S. Geological Survey

A Mounting Threat

     Wildfires are a growing natural hazard 
in most regions of the United States, 
posing a threat to life and property, 
particularly where native ecosystems 
meet developed areas.

     However, because fire is a natural (and 
often beneficial) process, fire suppression 
can lead to more severe fires due to the 
buildup of vegetation, which creates more 
fuel.

     In addition, the secondary effects of 
wildfires, including erosion, landslides, 
introduction of invasive species, and 
changes in water quality, are often more 
disastrous than the fire itself. 

 Science Can Meet the Challenge

     The U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) 
provides tools and information by 
identifying wildfire risks, ways to reduce 
wildfire hazards, providing real-time 
firefighting support, and assessing the 
aftermath of wildfires. The goal is to 
build more resilient communities and 
ecosystems. 

     The USGS conducts vegetation and 
fuels mapping to support firefighting 
readiness, reduce wildfire hazards in 
the wildland-urban interface, and assess 
wildfire effects on ecosystems. 

Firefighters work to control a wildfire near 
Springer, Okla., on Monday, January 16, 
2006. (FEMA photo/Bob McMillan)

Fact Sheet 2006 3015 
February 2006

     To determine how current 
conditions differ from natural wildlfire 
circumstances, the USGS studies 
historical fire patternstheir size, how 
they started, how hot they burned, and 
what time of year they occurred.

     The USGS is also developing methods 
to monitor the effectiveness of treatments 
to reduce fuel buildup, the effects of 
wildfire on wildlife, and the ecological 
effects of fuel-reduction measures and 
postfire rehabilitation treatments.

     Land managers use this information to 
determine fire risk, plan fuel treatments, 
and develop emergency response plans.

Tools and Teamwork

     To aid land managers in developing 
plans to minimize wildfire threats before 
they occur or spread, the USGS and the 
U.S. Forest Service developed the Fire 
Potential Index (FPI), which depicts the 
wildfire potential for forests, shrublands, 
and grasslands.

     FPI maps use satellite-derived 
information to assess the impact of 
vegetation on fire danger. The FPI is 
updated daily to reflect changing weather 
conditions and is used in daily wildfire 
decisionmaking.

     To monitor the risk of actively burning 
wildfires, the USGS, in cooperation 
with the National Interagency Fire 
Center, developed GeoMAC. This is an 
Internet-based mapping tool that provides 
a national view of current wildfire 
situations to fire managers and the public.

  Wildfire  Facts

     GeoMAC aids fire personnel by 
displaying the most current wildfire 
information available.

     The USGS is also a member of 
LANDFIRE, a multipartner wildfires, 
ecosystem, and fuel-mapping 
project. LANDFIRE data support 
fuels treatments, incident response, 
postfire recovery actions, and effective 
monitoring.

After the Flames, the Risk 
Remains

     The less obvious but equally 
devastating effects of wildfires occur 
after the fire is extinguished. These 
aftereffects include erosion, landslides, 
debris flows, and altered water quality.

     The risk of floods and debris flows  
increases due to the exposure of bare 
ground and the loss of vegetation. 
Sediment, burned debris, and chemicals 
affect water quality as well.

     USGS Rapid-Deployment Data-
Collection Networks provide critical 
information for postfire flood and debris-
flow warnings and on the response of 
eroded, burned areas. This information 
helps emergency management officials 
with emergency response, postfire 
mitigation, and rehabilitation planning.

     USGS wildfire science is an integral 
part of the Federal Government mission 
to protect life, property, and natural 
resources before, during, and after 
wildfires.

 
 

 More land has been affected by wildfires in recent years than at any time since  
  the 1960s. In 2004, wildfires burned more than 8 million acres in 40 States.
 The greater Yellowstone National Park fire of 1988 burned more than 1.2 million  
  acres. 
 Wildfire severity has increased and fire frequency has decreased during the past  
  200 years.
 Many species depend on wildfires to improve habitat, recycle nutrients, and  
  maintain diverse communities.
 Land management agencies light prescribed fires under controlled conditions  
  for specific management objectives.

A wildfire in Yellowstone National Park, 
Wyo., approaches a gift shop and lodge on 
Wednesday, September 7, 1988. (National 
Park Service photo)

A wildfire left very little of this home near 
San Bernadino, Calif., in October 2003. 
(FEMA photo/Kevin Galvin)

The evening sun barely penetrates smoke 
and ash as evacuees flee Glenwood 
Springs, Colo., because of spreading 
wildfires on Saturday, June 8, 2002. (FEMA 
photo/Bryan Dahlberg)

   For More Information

http://www.usgs.gov/themes/Wildfire/  

     fire.html/ 

http://firescience.cr.usgs.gov/html/ 

     sitemap.html  
 
     http://www.geomac.gov/ 
 
     http://landfire.gov/ 
 
     http://www.usgs.gov/ 
      

