The World’s Worst
Polluted Places

The Top Ten
of

The Dirty Thirty

A Project of the Blacksmith Institute
September 2007

THE WORLD’S WORST POLLUTED PLACES

The Top Ten
(of The Dirty Thirty)

Blacksmith Institute
New York
September 2007

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

1

This document was prepared by the staff of Blacksmith Institute with input and
review from a number of experts and volunteers, to whom we are most grateful.
Special thanks to:
The full cast of the Technical Advisory Board (see Annex for details)
Meredith Block
David Hanrahan
Aadika Singh
Jennifer Spiegler, and
Richard Fuller
For questions, comments and feedback, please contact Blacksmith Institute in New
York City at the following address:
Blacksmith Institute
2014 Fifth Avenue
New York, NY 10035
(646) 742 0200
info@blacksmithinstitute.org
Media enquires should be directed to Meredith Block block@blacksmithinstitute.org
in New York or David Hanrahan dhanrahan@blacksmithinstitute.org in London.
This report is available online at www.blacksmithinstitute.org

Appendices
About Blacksmith Institute
Technical Advisory Board Members,
Site Selection Criteria – Revised for 2007 Review

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

2

The Pollution Challenge Remains Unfinished
In 2006, Blacksmith Institute launched the first assessment of the extent of toxic
pollution in the developing world. This was published as The World’s Worst Polluted
Places: The Top Ten. Blacksmith Institute now presents its second annual review of
the most polluted places in the world – sites where human health is severely
affected.
The initial report pointed out that decades of effort and attention have reduced
industrial pollution to no more than an occasional worry for most of the developed
world. However, this is certainly not the case in the poorest countries where
pollution continues to be a major cause of death, illness, and long-term
environmental damage. In these parts of the world, pollution shortens lives,
damages children’s development and growth, causes chronic illnesses, and kills
thousands of people indiscriminately. All this makes strong, sustainable economic
development very difficult.
Pollution in developing countries is often hidden away from the casual visitor. In
most countries the major polluting industries are concentrated in special estates or
industrial cities, usually well away from the capitals. Mining and metals processing
are frequently located where the ore deposits are found, often in remote and
mountainous areas. In these places people are faced with ongoing soil, air and
water contamination from antiquated enterprises and the legacy of decades of
uncontrolled emissions. These are locations where soils and groundwater have
been poisoned, where rivers are saturated with toxins, and radioactive lakes cannot
be approached safely, let alone be used for irrigation or drinking. In some towns, life
expectancy approaches medieval rates and birth defects are the norm, not the
exception. In others, children’s asthma rates are measured above 90 percent and
mental retardation is endemic. In such places, life expectancy may be half that of
the richest nations and these shortened, debilitated lives are miserable.
The developed world may find it scarcely credible that such medieval conditions
continue to exist, although it is perhaps only fifty years since parts of Europe and
North America were black and infernal. The levels of regulatory and management
controls that protect people in modern industrial societies are not yet reflected in
developing countries. Even if sub-standard or antiquated factories were brought to
modern expectations, the legacy of old contamination from the past would continue
to poison the local population. Inadequacies in formal controls are often
compounded by weaknesses in civil institutions and the inability to hold governments
accountable when they fail to take action.
The 2006 Top Ten Report summarised the present situation bluntly: “Living in a town
with serious pollution is like living under a death sentence. If the damage does not
come from immediate poisoning, then cancers, lung infections and mental
retardation are likely outcomes. Often insidious and unseen, and usually in places
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

3

with deficient and exhausted health systems, pollution is an unacknowledged burden
on the poor and marginalized in the developing world. It is a major factor impairing
economic growth, and a significant strain on the lives of already impoverished
people.” Efforts are being made and some successes have been seen but far too
many people still live under these debilitating circumstances.
The problems are major, but this does not mean that they are hopeless. There are
decades of experience in industrial nations in cleaning up the most toxic sites and as
well as a handful of successful projects that are being implemented in the
developing world. Blacksmith’s website lists a number of such “Success Stories”.
Solving these problems can also be extremely cost effective in terms of health
impact. A recent review of the cost effectiveness of a sampling of Blacksmith
interventions made estimates of the resulting health impacts and the cost-benefits,
using established epidemiological data and methodologies. The estimated benefits
compare favourably to World Bank estimates of costs of lives saved on interventions
related to water supply, improved cooking stoves, and malaria controls. This
confirms that dealing with highly polluted sites is one of the most cost effective
methods to improving life expectancy in the developing world. (See full report at
http://www.blacksmithinstitute.org/docs/costEff1.pdf).

What Has Changed in a Year?
The worldwide publicity that followed the publication of the 2006 Top Ten succeeded
in reaching politicians, industrialists and concerned citizens around the world. As a
result of the exposure and newly invigorated public pressure, governments and
polluters in several of the sites listed in the 2006 report have responded. Positive
actions have been taken to clean-up many of these pollution problems and protect
impacted communities. However, given the scale of the problems at the worst sites,
it is going to take time for measurable improvements in the health conditions of the
local populations to emerge.
A significant number of new sites were nominated from across the globe as potential
candidates for the 2007 Top Ten list. Every nomination received was added to
Blacksmith’s database and considered for the 2007 review. The methodology for
assessing the severity of polluted sites has also been refined to place more weight
on the scale and toxicity of the pollution and on the numbers of people at risk.
There have been some changes in the Top Ten as a consequence of these
adjustments but no major reshuffle. The details and implications of the changes are
discussed below, after the presentation of the selected sites.
Despite ongoing efforts to make the survey of the world’s most toxic places more
comprehensive, the list of nominated sites is still incomplete.
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

4

Blacksmith will continue to review sites as they are nominated, continually improving
and updating our yearly list until health in developing countries is no longer
threatened by toxic industrial pollution.

Updating the Top Ten and Introducing the Dirty Thirty
The Top Ten list was compiled again this year with heavy reliance on Blacksmith’s
Technical Advisory Board (TAB) of experts, with over 250 years of combined
experience in this field. The TAB includes specialists from Johns Hopkins
University, Hunter College, Harvard University, IIT Delhi, University of Idaho, Mt.
Sinai Hospital, and leading international environmental engineering companies.
Blacksmith began the Top Ten review process by surveying the existing database of
polluted sites. Over the past seven years, Blacksmith has amassed a list of over
400 severely polluted locations from all regions of the world. The initial survey
narrowed these down to about seventy sites - all with severe human health risks, all
deserving the attention of the global community. In discussing feedback from last
year’s Top Ten, it became clear that the list needed to be more representative of the
different types and locations of polluted sites.
To achieve this while maintaining an objective process of selecting the Top Ten, the
initial seventy sites were presented as a matrix showing location and type. These
seventy were then reduced to thirty while maintaining, as far as possible, a full range
of diversity in the sites. These then became the “Dirty Thirty” which formed the basis
of the Top Ten selection. The full Dirty Thirty are presented on page 7, in the matrix
format.
The TAB used the revised methodical approach that places increased emphasis on
the toxicity and scale of the pollution sources and also on the numbers of people at
risk. This approach is presented in more detail in the Annexes. TAB members
individually prepared their evaluations of the thirty sites and then discussed them in
a conference. Based on the individual rankings and the consensus from the
conference, the worst of the larger group made the final Top Ten list.
It is not realistic or feasible to put these sites into a final rank order from one to ten,
given the wide range of location sizes, populations and pollution dynamics. This
report refrains from pointing a finger at any one place as being the worst on earth
and therefore this report lists polluted sites alphabetically, by country name.
One important caveat to be made is the relative weakness of the information on
which the selection process is based. More and better data would greatly improve
the assessment process but the reality is that good data is (at best) missing and (at
worst) hidden or distorted. Efforts continue to improve the knowledge and
understanding of the main sites. However, we must rely significantly on the
qualitative judgements and experience of the TAB in ranking the worst sites.
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

5

The Top Ten – Summary Table
(NOT RANKED - listed alphabetically by country)
Site Name
and
Location
Sumgayit,
Azerbaijan

Linfen, China

Major Pollutants and Sources
Organic chemicals and mercury, from
petrochemical and industrial complexes

Particulates and gases from industry and
traffic

Tianying,
China

Heavy metals and particulates; industry

Sukinda,
India

Hexavalent chromium; chromite mines

Vapi, India

La Oroya,
Peru

Dzerzhinsk,
Russia

Norilsk,
Russia

Chernobyl,
Ukraine

Kabwe,
Zambia

Removed from list

Lead and other heavy metals; mining and
metal processing

Chemicals and toxic byproducts, lead;
chemical weapons and industrial
manufacturing

Heavy metals, particulates; mining and
smelting

Radioactive materials; nuclear reactor
explosion

Lead; mining and smelting

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

Scope of the Problem and
Human Health Impact
Dated technologies, a lack of pollution
controls and improper disposal of
industrial waste have left the city
contaminated.
Expanding and unregulated industry
based on local coal and other resources
has resulted in the worst air quality in
China. There are high incidences of
respiratory and skin diseases and lung
cancer.

Cleanup Status
Various multilateral development
agencies, international banks and
governments have invested
moneys to do the clean-up.
The local government plans to
shut down more than 200
factories by the end of 2007 and
replace them with clean and
better regulated facilities.

Average lead content in the air and soil
are up to10 times higher than national
standards. Children suffer from birth
defects and developmental challenges.

The State Environmental
Protection Administration has
ordered all lead processing firms
to be shut down until they
address environmental impacts.

Waste rock and untreated water from the
mines impacts local water supplies. The
air and soils are also heavily affected.
Residents suffer from gastrointestinal
bleeding, tuberculosis, and asthma.
Infertility and birth defects are common.

Some piecemeal actions have
been taken by mining companies
but the scale of the problems is
“beyond the means of the State
to solve”.

Removed from list

Significant improvements have
been made at the site. For this
reason, it is no longer included in
this report.

Metal mining and smelting over 80 years
has caused significant lead
contamination. Blood lead levels for
children average 33.6 µg/dl, triple WHO
limits.
A major site for Cold War era
manufacturing where industrial
chemicals have been discharged into the
local water supplies. Life expectancy is
short and the death rate is significantly
higher than Russia’s average.
Mining and smelting operations have
devastated the area with particulates and
heavy metal pollution. Norilsk Nickel is
the biggest air polluting industrial
enterprise in Russia.
The legacy of this most infamous of
nuclear disasters lingers and has
resulted in thousands of cancer deaths.
Respiratory, ear, nose, and throat
diseases are common ailments.
Unregulated lead mining and smelting
operations resulted in lead dust covering
large areas. Children’s’ blood lead levels
average between 50 and 100 µg/dl – up
to ten times the recommended
maximum.

The current owner, Doe Run, has
made some investments in the
operating plant but the legacy
issues have not been addressed.
A number of isolated efforts have
been undertaken in individual
villages but no major clean-up
activity has been undertaken.
Norilsk Nickel has begun to
implement plans for some
emissions controls. There is as
yet little visible improvement.
Most residents have moved and
some remediation projects have
been implemented. Future health
impacts are possible.
The World Bank has begun a $40
million remediation program with
the Government of Gambia,
initiated with Blacksmith
involvement.

6

The Dirty Thirty (including the Top Ten)
(listed by region and type)

2007 World’s Worst Polluted Places – The Dirty Thirty Summary Matrix
World
Region

Type of Pollutant/Source
Mining

Metals

Africa

Kabwe,
Zambia

China

Wanshan Tianying,
China
China

PetroChems

Nuclear

Weapons

Industrial
Complex

SME
Cluster

Huaxi,
China

Urban
Waste
Dandora
Dumpsite,
Kenya

Air Pollution

Other

Lanzhou,
China
Linfen,
China

Eastern
Europe and
Central Asia

Chita,
Russia

Norilsk,
Russia

Bratsk,
Russia

Rudnaya
Pristan/
Dalneg’sk,
Russia
Oriente,
Ecuador

South Asia

Hazarib’g
Bangl’sh

Sukinda,
India

Chernobyl, Dzerzhinsk Sumgayit,
Ukraine
Russia
Azerbaijan
MailuuSuu,
Kyrgyzstan

Latin
Huancav’ Haina,
America and lca
Domincan
the
Peru
Republic
Caribbean
La Oroya,
Peru

Ranipet,
India
South-east
Asia

Urumqi,
China
Magnitogor
sk, Russia

UstKamenogorsk,
Kazakhstan
Mexico
City,
Mexico

MatanzaRiachuelo,
River
Basin,
Argentina

Mahad
Industrial
Estate,
India

Meycauayan City
and
Marilao,
Philippines

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

7

What Has Changed From the 2006 Listing?
Six of the ten sites that were on last year’s list remain in this year’s Top Ten:
Linfen (China),
La Oroya (Peru),
Dzerzhinsk (Russia),
Norilsk (Russia),
Chernobyl (Ukraine), and
Kabwe (Zambia).
One site that was on the longer list in 2006 has now moved into the Top Ten, as a
result mainly of the revisions to the scoring methodology. This site is:
Sumgayit (Azerbaijan)
The two following sites that were not on the nomination list in 2006 have now been
included in the Top Ten. Their identification during the past year and their inclusion
as top sites highlights the need for ongoing expansion and refinement of the overall
database of polluted sites, in order to find other neglected candidates.
Tianying (China) and
Sukinda (Orissa).
As a consequence of the inclusion of four new sites at the top of the overall list, the
following have dropped down lower into the Dirty Thirty listing.
Haina (Dominican Republic),
Ranipet (India),
Mailuu-Suu (Kyrgyzstan), and
Rudnaya Pristan (Russia).
The reasons for these lower rankings are fundamentally due to increased
competition from new sites and changes in the methodology that reduced the
ranking for smaller sites or for those where the risks are less clear. Remediation
works have commenced at some of these sites but the clean-ups have not
progressed to the point where they have reduced the impacts to a significant extent.

What Next?
As noted at the beginning of this report, there are cost effective interventions that
can be undertaken to deal with highest priority “hot spots” within the Dirty Thirty.
However, the level of investments required to deal with the top sites is beyond that
which can be assembled locally and therefore national government or even
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

8

international support is needed. Blacksmith and other groups work with key local
champions to identify realistic and practical solutions and then continue to be
intermediaries in trying to identify major support. The kind of issues that are most
amenable to this approach are large scale point-source problems such as mines and
metal smelters.
More difficult to address are the declining industrial cities or complexes, where a
focus on unfettered production in the past has left a legacy of human and
environmental problems. Unfortunately, there are too many of these “industry
towns” still carrying on where there is no economic alternative for the local
population. The interventions in these places begin with supporting a core group of
concerned people and officials to create a consensus and build momentum, starting
with some simple but visible improvements to show that progress is possible.
Blacksmith continues to support all of these approaches.

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

9

Details of the 2007 Top Ten World’s Worst Polluted
Places
(Sites Listed Alphabetically by Country)

Sumgayit, Azerbaijan
Potentially Affected
People:
275,000

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Organic chemicals, oil,
heavy metals including
mercury.

Petrochemical and
Industrial Complexes

The Problem:
Sumgayit was a major Soviet industrial center housing more than 40 factories
manufacturing industrial and agricultural chemicals. These included synthetic
rubber, chlorine, aluminium, detergents, and pesticides. While the factories
remained fully operational, 70-120,000 tons of harmful emissions were released into
the air annually. With the emphasis placed on maximum, low-cost production at the
expense of environmental and occupational health and safety, industry has left the
city heavily contaminated. Factory workers and residents of the city have been
exposed to a combination of high-level occupational and environmental pollution
problems for several decades.
Untreated sewage and mercury-contaminated sludge (from chlor-alkali industries)
continue to be dumped haphazardly. A continuing lack of pollution controls, dated
technologies and the improper disposal and treatment of accumulated industrial
waste are just some of the issues that plague the city.
Health Impacts:
Sumgayit had one of the highest morbidity rates during the Soviet Era and the
legacy of illness and death persist. A study jointly conducted by the UNDP, WHO,
Azerbaijan Republic Ministry of Health and the University of Alberta demonstrated
that residents of Sumgayit experience intensely high levels of both cancer morbidity
and mortality. Cancer rates in Sumgayit are 22-51% higher than average incidence
rates in the rest of Azerbaijan. Mortality rates from cancer are 8% higher. Evidence
suggests that lower reported cancer rates are flawed as a result of underreporting.
A high percentage of babies are born premature, stillborn, and with genetic defects
like downs syndrome, anencephaly, spina bifida, hydrocephalus, bone disease, and
mutations such as club feet, cleft palate, and additional digits.
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

10

Status of Clean-Up Activity:
The government of Azerbaijan has obtained international support for the economic
and environmental rehabilitation of the city from several United Nations
organizations, including the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and
the World Health Organization (WHO). The UNDP helped to create the Sumgayit
Centre for Environmental Rehabilitation (SCER) to research and prioritize the
environmental problems and propose programs to address them. A number of
environmental epidemiology courses were held in Baku to strengthen the capacity of
local experts.
In 2003, the World Bank launched a US $2.7 million project for the cleanup of a
chlorine producing plant where 1,566 tons of mercury were spilled, including the
construction of a secure landfill. Other international projects funded by UK and
Japan have also been implemented.
Reports indicate that only 20% of Soviet Era polluting factories are still operating and
there are ongoing debates about closure of the remaining number. However, even if
all the polluting industries are dealt with, there remains a significant legacy clean-up
challenge.
Resources:
J.E. Andruchow, C.L. Soskolne, F. Racioppi, et al. “Cancer Incidence and Mortality in the Industrial
City of Sumgayit, Azerbaijan”. Int J. Occupational Environmental Health. (2006). 12 (3). 234-241.
http://www.ijoeh.com/pfds/IJOEH_1203_Andruchow.pdf.
J. W. Bickham, C. W. Matson, A. Islamzadeh, et al. “Editorial: The unknown environmental tragedy in
Sumgayit, Azerbaijan” Ecotoxicology, (2003).
12, 505-508.
“The State of Environment. Azerbaijan.” Ministry of Ecology and Natural Resources of the Republic
of Azerbaijan. http://www.eco.gov.az/v2.1/az/Azerbaijan/Eco_En.htm
Azerbaijan Country Environmental Analysis. ADB. (2006) Jan.
http://www.asiandevbank.org/Documents/Studies/Ctry-EnvironmentalAnalysis/2005/AZE/chap3.pdf#search=%22SUMGAYIT%20AZERBAIJAN%20remediation%202006%
22
Andruchow, James Edward. Epidemiology Program, Department of Public Health Sciences,
University of Alberta, January, 2003.
http://www.phs.ualberta.ca/staff/soskolne/PDF%20Files/Thesis-FINAL-UofA-Lodged-Jan6- 2003.pdf
Islamzade, Arif. Sumgayit: Soviet’s Pride, Azerbaijan’s Hell. Autumn 1994.

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

11

Linfen, China
Potentially Affected
People:
3,000,000

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Fly-ash, carbon
monoxide, nitrogen
oxides, PM-2.5, PM-10,
sulfur dioxide, volatile
organic compounds,
arsenic, lead.

Automobile and industrial
emissions

The Problem:
Shanxi Province is at the heart of China’s enormous and expanding coal industry,
providing about two thirds of the nation’s energy. Within this highly polluted region,
Linfen has been identified as one of its most polluted cities with residents claiming
that they literally choke on coal dust in the evenings. In terms of air quality, the
World Bank has stated that 16 out of 20 of the world’s worst polluted cities are in
China while the State Environmental Protection Administration (SEPA) has branded
Linfen as having the worst air quality in the country. Levels of SO2 and other
particulates are many times higher than limits set by the World Health Organization.
Rapid development and unequivocal faith in industry has led to the development of
hundreds of unregulated coal mines, steel factories and refineries which have not
only polluted indiscriminately but have also diverted agricultural water sources.
Water is so tightly rationed that even the provincial capital receives water for only a
few hours each day.
Health Impacts:
The high levels of pollution are taking a serious toll on the health of Linfen’s
inhabitants. Local clinics are seeing growing cases of bronchitis, pneumonia, and
lung cancer. The children of Shanxi Province also have high rates of lead poisoning.
A growing number of local deaths in recent years have been linked to these
overwhelming pollution levels.
Arsenicosis, a disease caused by drinking elevated concentrations of arsenic found
in water is at epidemic levels in the area. Chronic exposure to this toxic chemical
results in skin lesions, peripheral vascular disease, hypertension, blackfoot disease,
and high cancer incidence rates. A study of Shanxi’s well water published in
Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology found the rate of unsafe well water in the
province to be at an alarming 52%.

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

12

Status of Clean-Up Activity:
By the end of this year, the city of Linfen plans to shut down 160 of 196 of its iron
foundries and 57 of 153 of its coal producing plants. Small, highly polluting plants
will be replaced with larger, cleaner, more regulated facilities. Emissions will be cut
further by shifting from coal to gas for central heating. Last year, Linfen’s residents
gained 15 more days of clean, breathable air as a result of newly implemented
initiatives. In addition to air quality improvement, the local government also hopes to
prevent serious coal mine accidents, which at this point are the cause of more than
10 deaths annually.
Resources:
China Internet Information Center. “Rivers Run Black in Shanxi Province.” China Daily (2006) July
17, 2006. http://service.china.org.cn/link/wcm/Show_Text?info_id=174874&p_qry=Linfen
Qin Jize. “Most polluted cities in China blacklisted.” China Daily. (2004) July 15.
http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/english/doc/2004-07/15/content_348397.htm

“The Most Polluted City in the World: Sixteen of the 20 most polluted cities in the world are in China.”
The Epoch times. (2006) June 10, 2006. (refers to air pollution and particulates)
http://www.theepochtimes.com/news/6-6-10/42510.html

“Environmental quality stable in general: report.” People's Daily Online (2004) July 14, 2004.
http://english.people.com.cn/200407/14/eng20040714_149521.html
Y. F. Li, Y. J. Zhang, G. L. Cao. “Distribution of seasonal SO2 emissions from fuel combustion and
industrial activities in the Shanxi province.” Atmospheric Environment (Oxford, England) (Jan. '99)
33 no2 p. 257
G. Sun. “Arsenic contamination and arsenicosis in China.” Toxicology and Applied Pharmacology.
(2004) 198 268-271.
S-g Wang, J-l Zhang. “Blood lead levels of children in China”. Environmental Sciences and Pollution
Mgmt. (2004) 21(6) 355-360.
Mary Kay Magistad “Land of Pollution.” The World. (2006) July 17, 2006.
http://www.theworld.org/?q=node/4059
Kristin Aunan, Jinghua Fang, Haakon Vennemo, Kenneth Oye, Hans M. Seip. “Co-benefits of climate
policy-lessons learned from a study in Shanxi, China.” Energy Policy. (2004) 32(4) 567-581
http://environment.guardian.co.uk/waste/story/0,,2042999,00.html#article_continue
http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/china/2007-05/24/content_879724.htm
http://www.gadling.com/2007/04/01/lifen-china-boosts-tourism-with-mask-give-a-way/
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

13

Tianying, China
Potentially Affected
People:
140,000

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Lead and other heavy
metals

Mining and processing

The Problem:
Tianying in Anhui province is one of the largest lead production bases in China, with
an output accounting for half of the country’s total production. Low-level
technologies, illegal operation and the lack of any serious pollution control measures
in the firms have caused several severe lead poisoning cases in the region. It is also
believed that there are numerous small scale recycling plants in the area, which are
notorious for polluting. As a result of these indiscriminate practices, lead processing
firms in Tianying have been pressured by local residents and officials to shut down
their operations.
The average lead concentrations in air and soils were (respectively) 8.5 times and
10 times national health standards. Eighty-five per cent of air samples collected had
lead concentrations higher than the national standards. Local crops and wheat at
farmers' homes were also contaminated by lead dust, with some levels 24 times
higher than national standards.
Health Impacts:
Residents, particularly children, are reported to suffer from lead poisoning and its
related effects: lead encephalopathy, lower IQs, short attention spans, learning
disabilities, hyperactivity, impaired physical growth, hearing and visual problems,
stomach aches, irritation of the colon, kidney malfunction, anaemia and brain
damage. Pregnant women have reported numerous cases of premature births and
smaller/underdeveloped infants.
Status of Clean-Up Activity:
In June of 2000 SEPA (State Administration of Environmental Protection) designated
this area as one of the eight worst polluted sites in China. The local administration
ordered that all lead processing firms be shut down until they addressed their
environmental impacts. The government has demanded that all lead processing
firms move their operations to a specified industrial zone and improve their treatment
facilities. New lead smelters in China will have to be large scale, modern and with
adequate pollution controls. It is not known how effectively these orders are being
implemented.

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

14

However, regardless of improvements made to ongoing plants, the legacy pollution
from the tons of lead lost from badly run plants in the past will continue to negatively
impact the local population for decades unless specific measures are implemented
to remove or encapsulate the worst polluted dust and soils.
Resources:
http://bobwhitson.typepad.com/howlings/2004/10/river_without_f.html
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=12411081&dopt
=Abstract
http://news.xinhuanet.com/english/2003-09/10/content_1074451.htm_1-sep03
http://english.people.com.cn/200309/10/eng20030910_124085.shtml

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

15

Sukinda, India
Potentially Affected
People:
2,600,000

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Hexavalent chromium
and other metals

Chromite mines and
processing

The Problem:
Sukinda Valley, in the State of Orissa, contains 97% of India’s chromite ore deposits
and one of the largest open cast chromite ore mines in the world. Twelve mines
continue to operate without any environmental management plans and over 30
million tons of waste rock are spread over the surrounding areas and the Brahmani
riverbanks. Untreated water is discharged by the mines into the river. This area is
also flood-prone, resulting in further contamination of the waterways. Approximately
70% of the surface water and 60% of the drinking water contains hexavalent
chromium at more than double national and international standards and levels of
over 20 times the standard have been recorded. The Brahmani River is the only
water source for the residents and treatment facilities are extremely limited. The
State Pollution Control Board has conceded that the water quality at various
locations suffers from very high levels of contamination. The air and soils are also
heavily impacted.
Health Impacts:
Chromite mine workers are constantly exposed to contaminated dust and water.
Gastrointestinal bleeding, tuberculosis and asthma are common ailments. Infertility,
birth defects, and stillbirths and have also resulted. The Orissa Voluntary Health
Association (OVHA), funded by the Norwegian government, reports acute health
problems in the area. OVHA reported that 84.75% of deaths in the mining areas and
86.42% of deaths in the nearby industrial villages occurred due to chromite-mine
related diseases. The survey report determined that villages less than one kilometre
from the sites were the worst affected, with 24.47% of the inhabitants found to be
suffering from pollution-induced diseases.
Status of Clean-Up Activity:
Sukinda is a classic example of pollution where the wastes are spread over a large
area and residents are affected by the chromium through multiple pathways. The
pollution problem from the chromite mines is well known and the mining industry has
taken some steps to reduce the levels of contamination by installing treatment
plants. However, according to state audits from Orissa, these fail to meet agency
regulations. The Orissa government has said, “It is unique, it is gigantic and it is
beyond the means and purview of the [Orissa Pollution Control] Board to solve the
problem.”
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

16

Various organizations have carried out studies proving the debilitating health
impacts of the toxic pollution. However, remediation actions remain piecemeal with
no decisive plans to provide for effective health monitoring and abatement programs.
Resources:
http://www.geocities.com/envis_ism/news36_28.html http://mines.nic.in/anrep04-05/chapter7.pdf
http://cag.nic.in/reports/orissa/rep_2001/civil_overview.pdf
http://www.mmpindia.org/madhavan/pages/14.htm
http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/tfacts7.html
http://www.rrlbhu.res.in/envis/Marine_pollution.html
http://www.mmpindia.org/madhavan/pages/14.htm
http://www.downtoearth.org.in/fullprint.asp
http://www.cesorissa.org/PDF/newsletter_vol_5.pd
http://rajyasabha.nic.in/book2/reports/petition/127threport.htm

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

17

Vapi, India
Background
Vapi is a highly successful industrial estate in Gujarat, India. Developed by Gujarat
Industrial Development Corporation (GIDC) during 1967, it is located in Valsad
District of Gujarat. The estate, spread on 1140 hectares of land in close proximity to
National Highway No 8 and Delhi Mumbai Railway line, and accommodates about
1382 industrial units out of which 800 units are operational (Source: CPCB).
The area accommodates a number of chemical industries including manufacturers of
pesticide, pharmaceuticals, dyes and dye intermediates, paints, and a sizeable
number of paper and pulp industries.
The major affected rivers for discharge of effluents are the Damanganga and Kolak.
These rivers flow almost parallel to the west, into the Arabian Sea, passing through
Daman on the coast.
History
VIA and the surrounding town of Vapi suffered from pollution substantially in its early
days, especially with regard to discharge of effluents, hazardous waste and air
pollution. The Central Effluent Treatment Plant initially was found to be poorly
performing, and came under much criticism from government reports, and from other
non-government agencies.
VIA has seen dramatic changes in pollution management from 2000 onward, with a
great deal of capital investment and local activities to reduce pollution of all types.
These efforts have been generally successful, and are now seen as an example for
others to follow. While more work needs to be undertaken; the improvements in
pollution management are to be commended.
This report summarizes many of the changes undertaken, and details the results of
those management strategies.
Effluent Management:
50 million liters per day (MLD) of effluent is generated throughout the Vapi Industrial
area, and out of that 45MLD is collected through GIDC drainage system and treated
at Common Effluent Treatment Plant (CETP). This plant has a current design
capacity of 55 MLD. The CETP is situated in the south-west direction on the bank of
river Damanganga, to which the treated effluent is discharged.

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

18

The Vapi CETP was constructed with the cost of $9.2 million and further $2 million is
being spent to expand its capacity from 55 MLD to 70MLD and improve its
performance. In the past decade the CETP has taken various steps both for
expansion and to improve performance, so as to bring the discharge standards
within the limit.
Recently, the CETP introduced a new technology (FACCO) in collaboration with
CLRI, Chennai, to reduce Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD). This technology is in
trials, and will be in full operation by the end of 2009. This technology is already
installed in James Robinson (a member of VIA) and initial test results are positive.
In addition, other recent upgrade work done at Vapi CETP is that of tertiary
treatment which is now operational. Testing and evaluation is in process.
Vapi CETP takes both sewage and industrial effluent from the drainage canal and
thus gets a lot of inorganic and plastics which reduce the effectiveness of treatment
at CETP. A new screen device costing $110,000 has been installed at CETP inlet to
screen the unwanted waste like plastics rubber and other floating non biodegradable
waste. Earlier the operation was carried out manually which was not effective and
laborious.
Efforts have been made over the past decade to ensure that all plants are connected
to the CETP, and there is no direct release to the Damanganga.
The issue of an effluent disposal pipeline (from CETP, Vapi) to environmentally safe
location at the Arabian Sea is under discussion scrutiny by CPCB, GPCB and PCC,
Daman.
Hazardous Solid Waste Management:
Hazardous solid waste generated from the industries is disposed at secured landfill
facility (TSDF) provided at GIDC Vapi. Incinerable hazardous waste is mostly
disposed to other CHWTSDF at Surat and BEIL at Ankleshwar.
About 385,000 metric tons of waste is currently stored at the Vapi TSDF. According
to Vapi Effluent and Waste Management Company officials, the site has the capacity
to store waste for at least 10 more years, and more land is being acquired.
Vapi CETP is also piloting efforts in treatment of non hazardous waste using
vermitechnology; a technology which is proven useful for the bioconversion of paper
pulp sludge and other bio-sludge. This material is currently disposed off in the open
area and is one of the major concerns of Vapi Industrial Association.
Air Quality

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

19

Much effort has been made to reduce air emissions from all plants. Testing stations
monitor air quality in the estate and the town itself, and results show that for the
most part air quality is within standards set by the Central Pollution Control Board.
Internal Monitoring Activities
VIA has become vigilant and have acted spontaneously in some illegal dumping of
hazardous waste. An illegal solid waste dump is analyzed and checked for the type
of contamination to identify the responsible industry.
Few examples showing prompt VIA actions are:
1) Large volume about couple of thousands of tons of Gypsum mixed with
Pthylocynin Blue were dumped on the banks of Damanganga river, under the bridge.
On analysis of the sample and identifying the source, It was found that it belong to
Jai Synth Dyes & Chemicals. Information was given to industry to collect it back and
material was suitably disposed off in both a cement industry kiln and some in TSDF
2) Claint Chemicals, which had been closed down, were manufacturing Aluminum
Chloride. The waste (approximately 100 tons) was collected and sent to the landfill
site. It was analyzed and found that it contained Aluminum Oxide and some chloride
which cannot be dumped in open land.
M/s. Anjaria Enviro Tech Pvt Ltd has helped many units to safely dispose of the
waste in secured landfill site as well as guiding it to send at cement factory for coincineration.
Notwithstanding, some illegal toxic dumps still exist, outside of the estate. VIA has
initiated a program to clean up these dump sites in conjunction with Blacksmith
Institute and other authorities.
Greening Initiatives:
CETP Vapi currently has more than 50,000 trees and every year there is addition in
the green belt development. At Naholi farms more that 30,000 teak, mango trees
are being grown for planting to further green the area.
Many shrubs and other beneficial plantation have been conducted on road side of
Vapi. About $600,000 is budgeted for additional plantings to be undertaken by M/s
VW&EM Company Ltd.
Infrastructure Development:
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

20

Good roads are the major indicator for a well-run industrial estate. Vapi has
excellent roads suitable for heavy vehicles. Major investment in road has been
undertaken in the last decade, with an investment of almost $6 million, and plans for
an additional $10 million in the works. Road works include investment in drains and
underground pipeline for effluent to be directed to the CETP, now considered almost
complete. Some internal areas are still to be developed and are planned for
infrastructure in the next several years.
Water Management:
Vapi GIDC has a reserved a quantity of 100MGD requirement of water when the
Madhuban Damam was constructed and commissioned in 1981. GIDC draws
currently about 20MGD from the weir constructed in 1968 near the southern tip of
the industrial estate. The entire water is taken through a set of pumps from the weir
and sent to the filtration plant situated about 600 meters from the weir.
The water supply department has installed a filtering system with a capacity of
25MGD for filtering this water. The filtered water is then stored in transition sumps
with a capacity of about 3.5 MGD and then pumped to a total of seven Elevated
Storage Reserves (ESR) in various parts of the Estate. These ESRs then supply
filtered water to various parts of estate which includes industry and residential area
of the estate. One of the ESR also supplies filtered water to transit sump in the Vapi
town area and then supply the same filtered water to several such ESRs of there
own for further distribution to houses in Vapi Township. In this manner, clean water
is provided throughout the town.
VW&EM Company Ltd has invested $500,000 for pipeline to supply filtered water to
surrounding villages outside of Vapi, which is addition to the $5 million already spent
for up- gradation and augmentation of existing water supply system at Vapi GIDC.
Earlier reports of mercury in well water have proven to be inaccurate – extensive
testing has not shown the presence of heavy metals.
Last but not the least Vapi Waste and Effluent Management Company Limited has
spent $3 million for the Center for Excellence supported by Ministry of Commerce
for state-of-the-art lab testing facility.
Health Status:
A systematic study was carried out in Vapi Industrial area by PARIRAKSHANA (A
society for promotion and protection of health systems management training and
research) in 2004 with the following objective:
1) To assess the health status of Vapi industrial area inhabitants.
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

21

2) To compare the health status of Vapi industrial area population with that of
non-industrial area inhabitants of Dharampur
3) To compare reproductive cycle and hormonal life (Spontaneous abortions,
bleeding during pregnancy, abnormal fetus and infertility) of women in Vapi
and that of women in Dharampur.
4) To compare incidence of skin diseases and mental retardation among
children of Vapi and Dharampur.
The study is done in form of personal interview of families with the questionnaire
prepared by experts. No direct health check up is done like body check up or blood
sample analysis, urine sample analysis etc. Government hospital data is not used for
study or to access health of Vapi residents and random selection of families is done.
Conclusion of study:
1) Study indicates no major casualty or health problem is prevalent in the males,
females as well as children. The control group statistics are at par with the
industrial group which is indicative of normal health
2) Abortion, still births, infants deaths are minimal. There is no valid difference in
abortions, still births and infant mortality rates between study and control
groups
3) Almost all the children are born without any mental and physical disabilities.
There are no abnormalities observed in the physical and mental growth
among children of age group 1 year to 5 years.
Recommendations:
While much has been done, several areas of additional improvement can be found.
These include:
1) There should not be any industrial effluent discharge/overflow into Bill Khadi
from the industrial area. GIDC can finalize the upgrade its drainage system
and make appropriate arrangement to prevent any discharge in the Bill Khadi.
Clean up and Remediation of Bill Khadi will be very helpful in beautifying
Vapi.
2) Paper industry non-toxic waste should be taken care at the CETP site or
appropriate low cost eco-friendly technology can be opted for its treatment
and its open land disposal should be stopped.
3) The option for effluent disposal pipeline from CETP, Vapi to environmentally
safe location in the Arabian Sea should be expedited to avoid further water
pollution problem in River Damanganga.
4) Illegal dumps should continue to be remediated not only in VIA, but in
surrounding areas.
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

22

5) Efforts should me made to check the ground water contamination and surface
water contamination by regular monitoring and maximum use of Center for
Excellence laboratory facility should be done.
6) Efforts should continue to ensure the pollution level is within the prescribed
standards of CPCB for all the sites
Conclusion
It is clear that investments in pollution management have resulted in significant
improvements in the past decade. While additional efforts are required, Vapi no
longer should be considered as highly polluted. It has been removed from the list of
the Worst Polluted Places.

Report Prepared by Dr Suneet V Dabke.
References:
“A Report on Health Status of Vapi Industrial Area in Valsad Dist of Gujarat”
Dr. A.V. Ratnam M.B.B.S, D.L.O, M.Phil., Ph.D; Parirakshana (A Society for
Promotion and Protection of Health Systems Management Training & Research)
Air Quality test results
Well water test results
GPCB test results – Vapi CETP

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

23

La Oroya, Peru
Potentially Affected
People:

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

35,000

Lead, copper, zinc, and sulfur
dioxide.

Heavy metal mining and
processing

The Problem:
Since 1922, adults and children in La Oroya, Peru - a mining town in the Peruvian
Andes and the site of a poly-metallic smelter - have been exposed to the toxic
emissions and wastes from the plant. Peru's Clean Air Act cites La Oroya in a list of
Peruvian towns suffering from critical levels of air pollution, but action to clean up
and curtail this pollution has been delayed for area’s 35,000 inhabitants. Currently
owned by the Missouri-based Doe Run Corporation, the plant has been largely
responsible for the dangerously high lead levels found in children’s blood.
Health Impacts:
Ninety-nine percent of children living in and around La Oroya have blood lead levels
that exceed acceptable limits, according to studies carried out by the Director
General of Environmental Health in Peru in 1999. Lead poisoning is known to be
particularly harmful to the mental development of children. A survey conducted by
the Peruvian Ministry of Health in 1999 revealed blood lead levels among local
children to be dangerously high, averaging 33.6 µg/dL for children between the ages
of 6 months to ten years, triple the WHO limit of 10 µg/dL. Neurologists at local
hospitals state that even newborn children have high blood lead levels, inherited
while still in the womb. Absurdly large rates of premature deaths are linked to
noxious gasses from the smelter. Lung-related ailments are commonplace.
Sulfur dioxide concentrations also exceed the World Health Organization guidelines
by a factor of ten. The vegetation in the surrounding area has been destroyed by
acid rain due to high sulfur dioxide emissions. To date, the extent of soil
contamination has not been studied and no plan for clean up has been prepared.
Numerous studies have been carried out to assess the levels and sources of lead
and other metals still being deposited in La Oroya. Limited testing has revealed
lead, arsenic and cadmium soil contamination throughout the town.

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

24

Status of Clean-Up Activity:
Doe Run Corporation asserts that an environmental management plan has been
developed for the processing plant. However, the Corporation asked the government
for a four-year extension to the plant’s environmental management plan in 2004. A
concerted NGO movement is now underway to pressure the company and the
government to develop effective strategies for implementation of site remediation
agreements and to provide health care for affected residents. Some sampling and
testing has been done in the local communities and the areas outside the plant to
determine the levels of pollutants.
In response to the listing of La Oroya in the 2006 Top Ten, Doe Run sent a letter to
Blacksmith Institute on May 2, 2007 stating that it has curbed its toxic emissions and
has invested approximately $1 million yearly in joint program with the Peruvian
Ministry of Health designed to lower blood lead levels in the region. Doe Run states
that it has made significant capital investments in emission control systems, water
treatment plants and changing rooms. The company asserts that it has also
introduced occupational and population health programs and has made its
environmental improvement efforts more public. They report emission levels to have
fallen since these health programs and investments were made in new technologies.
Sanctions against Doe Run are still expected, mainly for sulphur dioxide emissions
that it was required to reduce by this year. Doe Run is also investing in community
development and poverty alleviation efforts by implementing various job-training
programs. Doe Run is the main driver of the local economy and hence able to
exercise control over the livelihood of the population.
The government’s national environmental council approved a Contingency Plan for
States of Alert (CONAM) on August 10th of this year. Its purpose will be to limit the
exposure of the affected population by issuing red alerts to stay inside in response to
highly toxic air quality and weather conditions that exacerbate pollution levels. The
mayor of the city of La Oroya states that the alert programme will remain in effect
until Doe Run fully complies with pollution reduction measures. If the contingency
plan was already implemented, a state of emergency would have been declared 183
days so far this year.
Resources:
“Development of an integrated intervention plan to reduce exposure to lead and other contaminants in
the mining center of La Oroya, Peru”. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention National Center
for Environmental Health/ Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry Division of Emergency
and Environmental Health Services. (2005)
http://www.cdc.gov/nceh/ehs/Docs/la_oroya_report.pdf
“Crisis Deepens in La Oroya” Oxfam America. (2004) December 20.
http://www.oxfamamerica.org/newsandpublications/news_updates/archive2004/news_update.200412-20.4019587716
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

25

Dzerzhinsk, Russia
Potentially Affected
People:
300,000

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Chemicals and toxic
byproducts, including
Sarin, VX gas, etc. Also
lead, phenols.

Cold War-era chemical
weapons manufacturing

The Problem:
Until the end of the Cold War, Dzerzhinsk was among Russia's principal production
sites of chemical weapons. Today, Dzerzhinsk is still a significant center of Russian
chemical manufacturing. The city was also home to a leaded gasoline factory that
produced TEL, a potent toxin. However, little attention was paid to the impacts of all
this production. According to figures from Dzerzhinsk's environmental agency
almost 300,000 tons of chemical waste were improperly disposed between 1930 and
1998. In this waste, around 190 identified chemicals have been released into the
groundwater. In places, the chemicals have turned the water into a white sludge
containing dioxins and high levels of phenol – an industrial chemical that can lead to
acute poisoning and death. These levels are reportedly 17 million times the safe
limit. The Guinness Book of World Records has named Dzerzhinsk the most
chemically polluted city in the world.
Because a number of industries are no longer in operation, the local groundwater
has risen, along with the water level in the canal. This rise in the water level
threatens to release massive amounts of arsenic, mercury, lead and dioxins into the
Oka river basin, a source of drinking water for the nearby city of Nizhny Novgorod.
Drinking water supplies in Nizhny Novgorod City and adjoining villages such as
Gavrilovka and Pyra are heavily laced with contamination.
Health Impacts:
A quarter of the city's 300,000 residents are still employed in factories that produce
toxic chemicals. According to a 2003 BBC report it is the young who are most
vulnerable. In the local cemetery, there are a shocking number of graves of people
below the age of 40. In 2003, the death rate was reported to exceed the birth rate by
260%. The city's annual death rate, 17 per 1,000, is higher than Russia's national
average of 14 per 1,000. In the city of 300,000, that translates to about 900 extra
deaths annually. The average life expectancy is reported to be 42 years for men
and 47 for women.

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

26

Status of Clean-Up Activity:
A number of isolated efforts have been undertaken to deal with individual plants and
sources of contamination but there has been no concerted effort to deal with the
huge problems in a systematic way. A local NGO (DRONT), supported by
Blacksmith and in cooperation with the Nizhniy Novgorod municipal government, has
brought together a steering committee to work on the design of a large-scale
remediation and pollution mitigation plan for the entire affected area. Following
support for a baseline study in 2004, Blacksmith Institute, in cooperation with the
local government, funded the installation of water treatment systems in two villages
where drinking water supplies were heavily contaminated – in Pyra and Gavirolvka.
However, these are very small-scale initiatives relative to the efforts needed to
remediate this devastatingly polluted area.
Local officials assert that no ecological disaster is present. However, it is likely that
their tests only monitored pollution levels in the atmosphere and perhaps in surface
waters and not the extent of legacy contamination. The health of local residents is
still threatened by legacy pollution issues.
Resources:
Dzerzhinsk Chemical Plant Workers Call for Better Pensions: FBIS-TAC-97-119: 29 Apr 1997
Russian Chemical Weapons Sites Undergo Foreign Inspection: FBIS-TAC-98-068: 9 Mar 1998
M R. Edelstein. “Empowering Russian And American NGOs To Address Issues Of Future
Sustainability” Final Project Report. Ramapo College of New Jersey
(2005) http://phobos.ramapo.edu/facassem/edelsteinempoweringngos.html
“Dzerzhinksk” Global Security Organization.
http://www.globalsecurity.org/wmd/world/russia/dzerzhinsk_cbw.htm
Tim Samuals, “Russia’s Deadly Factories.” BBC News. March 7, 2003.
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/programmes/correspondent/2821835.stm

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

27

Norilsk, Russia
Potentially Affected
People:
134,000

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Air pollution –
particulates, sulfur
dioxide, heavy metals
(nickel, copper, cobalt,
lead, selenium), phenols,
hydrogen sulfide.

Major nickel and related
metals mining and
processing

The Problem:
An industrial city founded in 1935 as a slave labor camp, the Siberian city of Norilsk,
Russia is the northernmost major city of Russia and the second largest city (after
Murmansk) above the Arctic Circle. Mining and smelting operations began in the
1930s and this city now contains the world’s largest heavy metals smelting complex,
where nearly 500 tons each of copper and nickel oxides and two million tons of
sulphur dioxide are released annually into the air. The city has been accused of
being one of the most polluted places in Russia, where the snow is black, the air
tastes of sulfur and the life expectancy for factory workers is 10 years below the
Russian average. A 1999 study found elevated copper and nickel concentrations in
soils in as much as a 60 km radius of the city.
Norilsk Nickel, the firm responsible for the pollution, is one of Russia's leading
producers of non-ferrous and platinum-group metals. It controls one-third of the
world's nickel deposits and accounts for a substantial portion of the country's total
production of nickel, cobalt, platinum, and palladium. It also ranks first among
Russian industrial enterprises in terms of air pollution. The plants were constructed
during the Soviet era, a period of non-existent environmental standards or controls.
Health Impacts:
The local population is severely affected by the air quality where air samples exceed
the maximum allowable concentrations for both copper and nickel. Children suffer
from numerous respiratory diseases. Investigations evaluating the presence of ear,
nose and throat diseases among schoolchildren revealed that children living near
the copper plant were twice as likely to become ill than those living in further
districts. Similarly, children living near the nickel plant were shown to become ill at a
rate 1.5 times higher than children from further districts. Mortality from respiratory
diseases is considerably higher than the average in Russia, accounting for 15.8% of
all deaths among children. Premature births and late-term pregnancy complications
are also frequent. Sulfur dioxide emissions contribute to chronic diseases of the
lungs, respiratory tracts, and digestive systems – and can result in lung cancer.
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

28

Status of Clean-Up Activity:
According to company reports, Norilsk Nickel has worked consistently to reduce
emissions of major air pollutants. In 2006, the company reported investment of
more than US $5m to maintain and overhaul its dust and gas recovery and removal
systems. It asserts a commitment of nearly US $1.4m for its air pollution prevention
plan. However, official statistics state that emissions remain extremely high.
Norilsk Nickel has been amenable to Blacksmith Institute’s efforts to investigate the
plant and facilities. Blacksmith representatives visited the site in July of 2007 and
confirmed that, indeed, the company was making significant efforts to address the
level of emissions. Norilsk Nickel stated their intention to move the nickel plant
inside the city to a plant just outside. They also aspire to reduce the volume of
sulphur dioxide emissions to 400 thousand tons by 2015 (which would result in
normal atmospheric air) but admit that goal deadline is an extremely ambitious one.
Blacksmith staff also met with leading experts on environment and health while
conducting this recent site assessment. These local experts confirmed extremely
high levels of atmospheric contamination. They reported that although there have
been some reductions in pollution levels, levels of SO2, HS, phenol, formaldehyde,
and dust had increased; levels of nickel and copper had increased by 50%.
Morbidity rates are stable and death rates are decreasing.
Their reports on children’s health confirmed much higher rates of respiratory,
digestive and nervous illnesses and more abortions and premature births than other
cities in the region. Incidences of cancer (especially lung) have increased. Some
estimates state that air pollution is responsible for 37% of children’s morbidity rates
and 21.6% of adult morbidity.
Resources:
Norilsk Nickel. Company Report on Air Pollution Reduction Measures in 2006 and Plans for 2007.
S. M. Allen-Gil, J. Ford, B. K. Lasorsa, M. Monetti, et al. “Heavy metal contamination in the Taimyr
Peninsula, Siberian Arctic”. The Science of the Total Environment 301 (2003) 119-138.
J. M. Blais, K. E. Duff, T.E. Laing, J.P. Smol. “Regional contamination in lakes from the Noril’sk
region in Siberia, Russia”. Water Air Soil Pollut. (1999) 110 (3-4) 389-404.
O.N. Zubareva, L. N. Skripal’shchikova, N. V. Greshilova, and V. I. Kharuk. “Zoning of landscapes
exposed to technogenic emissions from the Norilsk Mining and Smeltering works”. Russian Journal
of Ecology (2003) 34 (6) 375-380.
B. A. Revich. “Public health and ambient air pollution in Arctic and Subarctic cities of Russia”. The
Science of the Total Environment. (1995). 160/161 585-592.

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

29

Chernobyl, Ukraine
Potentially Affected
People:
Initially 5.5 million, now
disputed numbers.

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Radioactive dust
including uranium,
plutonium, cesium-137,
strontium, and other
metals

Meltdown of reactor core
in 1986

The Problem:
The world's worst nuclear disaster took place on April 26, 1986 when testing in the
Chernobyl power plant, 62 miles north of Kiev, triggered a fiery meltdown of the
reactor's core. Thirty people were killed in the accident, 135,000 were evacuated,
and one hundred times more radiation was released than by the atom bombs
dropped over Hiroshima and Nagasaki. Twenty years later, the 19-mile exclusion
zone around the plant remains uninhabitable.
Although an enormous amount of radiation was released during the disaster, most of
the radioactivity has remained trapped within the plant itself. Some estimate that
more than 100 tons of uranium and other radioactive products, such as plutonium,
could be released if there is another accident. Chernobyl is also thought to contain
some 2,000 tons of combustible materials. Leaks in the structure lead experts to fear
that rainwater and fuel dust have formed a toxic liquid that may be contaminating the
groundwater.
Health Impacts:
From 1992 to 2002 in Belarus, Russia and Ukraine more than 4000 cases of thyroid
cancer were diagnosed among children and adolescents, those under 14 years were
most severely affected. Most of these cases have been attributed to elevated
concentrations of radioiodine found in milk. More than five million people currently
inhabit the affected areas of Belarus, Russia, and Ukraine, which have all been
classified as ‘contaminated’ with radionuclides credited to the Chernobyl accident
(above 37 kBq m-2 of 137Cs). Skin lesions, respiratory ailments, infertility and birth
defects were the norm for years following the accident.
A recent WHO report has indicated that the expected impact on future generations
from radioactivity is now quite low. However, this report has been met with
scepticism from some local and international experts.

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

30

Status of Clean-Up Activity:
Within several months of the accident, the reactor was enclosed in a concrete casing
designed to absorb radiation and contain the remaining fuel. However, the
sarcophagus was meant to be a temporary solution and designed to last only 20 or
30 years. A program to further secure the site is underway.
Researchers have carried out studies on health impacts, remediation effects, and
the socioeconomic status of the region surrounding Chernobyl. Plans exist for the
19-mile exclusion zone to be recovered for restricted industrial uses. However, an
appropriate environmental impact assessment needs to be finished before that can
happen and an integrated radioactive waste management program needs to be put
in place before further development. Estimates for remediation projects have been
projected at hundreds of billions of dollars. To date, the costs of the cleanup have
placed significant financial burdens on Belarus, Ukraine, and Russia.
Given its resounding infamy and despite the subsequent progress that has been
made at this site, Chernobyl is included in the Top Ten list due to its residual
environmental impact as well as its potential to further affect an extensive region and
population.
Resources:
IAEA International Atomic Energy Agency. “Chernobyl’s Legacy: Health, Environmental and SocioEconomic Impacts and recommendations to the governments of Belarus, the Russian Federation and
Ukraine.” The Chernobyl Forum: 2003-2005.
http://www.iaea.org/Publications/Booklets/Chernobyl/chernobyl.pdf
IAEA International Atomic Energy Agency. “Environmental consequences of the Chernobyl accident
and their remediation: Twenty Years of Experience” Report of the Chernobyl Forum Expert Group
‘Environment’. (2006)
http://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/publications/PDF/Pub1239_web.pdf
Johnson, Eric. Green Cross Switzerland. 12 December 2005.
World Health Organization. “Health Effects of the Chernobyl Accident and Special Health Care
Programmes.” Report of the UN Chernobyl Forum Expert Group “Health”. (2006)
http://www.who.int/ionizing_radiation/chernobyl/WHO%20Report%20on%20Chernobyl%20Health%2
0Effects%20July%2006.pdf

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

31

Kabwe, Zambia
Potentially Affected
People:
255,000

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Lead, cadmium

Lead mining and
processing

The Problem:
Kabwe, Zambia, is located about 150 kilometres north of the nation's capital,
Lusaka, and is one of six towns in close proximity to the Copperbelt, once Zambia's
thriving industrial base. In 1902, rich deposits of zinc and lead were discovered
there. Mining and smelting commenced soon after and ran almost continuously until
1994 without addressing the potential dangers of lead contamination. The mine and
smelter are no longer operating but have left a city poisoned by debilitating
concentrations of lead dust in the soil and by metals in the water. In one study, the
dispersal in soils of lead, cadmium, copper, and zinc extended over a 20 km radius
at levels much higher than those recommended by the World Health Organization.
A small waterway runs from the mine to the center of town and has been used to
carry waste from the once active smelter. There are no safeguards or restrictions on
use of the waterway and local children use it for bathing. In addition to contaminated
water, dry, dusty, lead-laced soils near workers’ home are a significant source of
contamination for the locals. Most workers and residents are exposed to toxic levels
of lead through inhaling dust in these areas.
Health Impacts:
In some neighbourhoods in Kabwe, blood concentrations of 200 µg/dl or more have
been recorded in children and records show average blood levels of children range
between 50 and 100 µg/dl. On average, children’s blood lead levels in Kabwe are 5
to 10 times the permissible EPA maximum and in many cases are close to those
regarded as potentially fatal. Children who play in the soil and young men who
scavenge the mines for scraps of metal are most susceptible to lead produced by
the mine and smelter.
Status of Clean-Up Activity:
After decades of widespread contamination, the clean-up strategy for Kabwe is
complex and implementation is in its primary stages. Blacksmith has helped by
supporting a local NGO (KERF) to bring information and educational services on
lead poisoning into the local communities. Measures include simple, concrete
advice to avoid poisoning, such as prohibiting children from playing in the dirt and
rinsing dust from plates and food. However some areas of Kabwe require drastic
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

32

remediation and entire neighbourhoods may need to relocate.
In response to local initiatives initiated by Blacksmith, the World Bank has allocated
about US $40 million under the Zambia Copperbelt Environmental Project (CEP) to
clean up waste and to resettle people living in hazardous areas of the Copper Belt
region. CEP also received a $10 million grant from the Nordic Development Fund
(NDF). Work is expected to commence soon and real health benefits should then
begin to be seen. This followed a 2006 Kabwe scoping and design study conducted
by Water Management Consultants for the World Bank which outlined the massive
and debilitating health impacts suffered by the local community in Kabwe due to lead
levels in the environment far exceeding any acceptable international standards.
Resources:
“The Silent Death: Lead Poisoning in Kabwe, Zambia” Blacksmith Institute. 2001.
http://www.blacksmithinstitute.org/kabwe.shtml
Penny Dale. “Zambia’s child poisoning tragedy” BBC, Nov. 6, 2003.
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/africa/3241037.stm
B. Leteinturier, J. Laroche, J. Matera, and F. Malaisse. “Reclamation of lead/zinc processing wastes
at Kabwe, Zambia: a phytogeochemical approach.” South Africaln Journal of Science 97 Nov/Dec
(2001) 624-627.
B. D. Tembo, K Sichilongo, J. Cernak. “Distribution of copper, lead, cadmium, and zinc
concentrations in soils around Kabwe town in Zambia.” Chemosphere (2006) 63 497-501.
Water Management Consultants, ZCCM Investments Holdings PLC, and Copperbelt Environment
Project. Kabwe Scoping & Design Study, Project Synthesis. May 2006.

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

33

The Remainder of the Dirty Thirty
(Sites Listed Alphabetically by Country)

Matanza-Riachuelo River Basin, Argentina
Potentially Affected
People:
Up to 4.5 million

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Organic contamination,
heavy metals such as
lead, mercury, chromium
and other industrial
residues

More than 3500 polluting
industries

The Problem:
The 64-kilometer Matanza-Riachuelo River flows from western Buenos Aires into the
Río de la Plata Estuary. The river basin is Argentina's worst environmental hotspot
with more than 3,500 polluting tanneries, oil, chemical, and metal plants, illicit
sewage pipes and 42 open garbage dumps along the river. Uncoordinated
government action and a lack of environmental controls have allowed industries to
dump their effluents into the river indiscrimately.
Health Impacts:
One area is known as the “flammable slum” because it lies above a toxic dump.
Reportedly, half of the children here have lead poisoning, along with respiratory and
dermatological problems. One study by the Japanese International Cooperation
Agency found that 50 percent of the children aged seven to eleven have traces of
lead in their blood and 10 percent have chlorine in their urine. Overall health
statistics for the residents are poor.
Status of Clean-Up Activity:
In June 2006, the Argentinean Supreme Court demanded that the national
government assist the governments of the province and the city of Buenos Aires to
develop an integrated sanitation plan for the Matanza-Riachuelo watershed within 30
days. The Court also demanded that 44 polluting companies present environmental
impact assessments on the effluents discharged into the river and associated
treatment systems within the month. The national government has presented
legislation to create a new river basin authority, designed to circumvent the
jurisdictional rivalries that have prevented progress. The authority is expected to be
functional sometime this year.
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

34

Resources:
http://www.farn.org.ar/docs/d01/index.html
http://ipsnews.net/interna.asp?idnews=34500
http://ipsnews.net/news.asp?idnews=34610
http://www.planetark.com/dailynewsstory.cfm/newsid/37851/newsDate/28-Aug-2006/story.htm
wwwesd.worldbank.org/bnwpp/index.cfm?display=display_activity&AID=469
http://www.americas.org/item_29436
http://www.avelaboca.org.ar/english-01.php
http://ipsnews.net/news.asp?idnews=34722
World Bank, Argentina, Matanza-Riachuelo Environmental Plan

Hazaribagh, Bangladesh
Potentially Affected
People:
500,000

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Metals including
hexavalent chromium
and organic chemicals

Tanneries

The Problem:
Ninety percent of Bangladesh’ 270 registered tanneries are located in Hazaribagh,
on just 62 acres of land. Many of these tanneries use non- or semi-mechanized
systems and employ antiquated processing methods. The tanneries generate 7.7
million litres of liquid waste and 88 million tons of solid waste every day; 15,000
cubic meters of this untreated chemical waste flows directly into the Buriganga
River.
Health Impacts:
Environment and Human Development (SEHD), a Dhaka-based non-governmental
organization has reported that about 90 percent of tannery workers in Hazaribagh
die before they reach the age of 50 due to a toxic working environment. A study
surveying the health of 179 workers from six tanneries in the city found that more
than half suffered from ulcers, nearly a third developed various skin diseases, more
than a tenth suffered from rheumatic fever and nearly a fifth had jaundice.
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

35

Other ailments include dizziness, headaches, weakness, abdominal pain and vision
problems.
Status of Clean-Up Activity:
The Hazaribagh Tannery Relocation Project (HTRP), has been under
implementation by the Ministry of Industry since 2003 to remedy the effects of toxic
tannery pollution in the capital city and the Buriganga River. The government is
bearing the entire cost of the project while the Bangladesh Small and Cottage
Industries Corporation (BSCIC) is implementing this project in Kantiboilapur,
Chandranarayanpur and Charnarayanpur. The project has not been completed to
date and tanneries at Hazaribagh continue to blatantly disregard environmental
regulations by discharging their untreated wastes.
Resources:
http://www.sdnpbd.org/sdi/international_days/wed/2005/bangladesh/industry/industry.htm
http://www.elaw.org/resources/text.asp?id=1779
http://www.scielosp.org/scielo.php?script=sci_arttext&pid=S0042-96862001000100018
http://www.financialexpressbd.com/index3.asp?cnd=10/23/2005&section_id=5&newsid=4669&spcl=n
http://www.atimes.com/ind-pak/BF23Df01.html
http://www.thedailystar.net/2005/11/21/d511212504121.htm
http://www.sos-arsenic.net/english/environment/leatherindustry.html
http://www.bcas.net/Env.Features/Pollution/2005/May2005/15%20to%2030.htm
http://fem.onthefrontlines.com/documents/whitepaper.pdf

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

36

Huaxi, China
Potentially Affected
People:
53,000

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Heavy metals and
chemicals like trifluralin
and TGIC

Huaxi Industrial Park

The Problem:
Located in Zhejiang Province, Huaxi town is in the southwestern section of
Dongyang City. Since 2001, the Huaxi government has been leasing nearly 2500
acres to the Huaxi Industrial Park, housing thirteen chemical estates. On April 1,
2005, the Dongyang Municipal Government ordered the closure of these thirteen
industries as a result of intense public protest over pollution stemming from them.
Six of these factories were ordered to move out of the town entirely. There are
reports of drums of chemicals being abandoned inside the factory premises and
untreated wastewater simply being covered over with concrete slabs. Severe
agricultural losses have been reported in the area.
Health Impacts:
Stillbirths have been frequently reported are assumed to be linked to pollution
exposure from the chemical industries. The Huaxi Junior Secondary School and
Huaxi Elementary School lie just 400 meters away from the industrial park and
children report eye irritation, likely due to the factory emissions.
Status of Clean-Up Activity:
There are anecdotal reports of the industries remaining operational under the pretext
of carrying out tests. Public protests, with more than 20,000 participants, have
continued with the assertion that petitions have not be addressed. The Zhejiang
provincial party committee and government are purported to be attentively following
developments. The Dongyang City government organized a special meeting on April
19, 2005 to discuss the environmental problem and then accepted the proposed
environmental protection program. Legacy pollution issues continue, even as a
number of factories are said to be non-operational.
Resources:
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wpdyn/content/article/2005/06/12/AR2005061201531.html
http://www.asianews.it/index.php?art=3036&l=en
http://www.nytimes.com/2005/04/13/international/asia/13cndriot.html?ex=1183780800&en=329498fa
3b473d05&ei=5070
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

37

Lanzhou, China
Potentially Affected
People:
3,000,000

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Air pollution,
chemical/heavy metal
river pollution

Automobile and industrial
emissions

The Problem:
Lanzhou, the capitol of China’s Gansu province, is one of the most polluted cities in
China and was once named by World Resources Institute as one of the world’s most
polluted cities. The city is highly industrialized although not nearly as prosperous as
many of China’s other major cities. Major industries include petrochemical
manufacturing and oil refineries. Heavy industrial emissions and the use of coal as
the primary fuel source are the main sources of pollution. Illegal industrial
discharges are commonplace and frequently reported in the local press. Lanzhou is
on a tributary of the Yellow River and is a major contributor to increasing pollution
problems.
The city is located in an arid valley and wind circulation is minimal. Frequent
sandstorms (thirteen in 2006) and a major lack of precipitation further aggravate the
climatic conditions. These natural circumstances, together with industrial and
automobile emissions combine to produce intolerable air pollution. The mayor has
made public calls for residents to walk to work.
Health Impacts:
Respiratory ailments are commonplace, as can be expected. A study comparing
three polluted Chinese cities found that Lanzhou had the highest rates of respiratory
diseases, including pneumonia.
Status of Clean-Up Activity:
Given the notoriety of Lanzhou’s problems, various efforts have been underway to
improve conditions, although the meteorological circumstances are very
unfavourable. In 2005, the city government implemented a pollution control ban to
change the fuel used in buses, taxis, and boilers. A shift from petrol, diesel and coal
to natural gas is expected. Since 1998, the discharged volume of smoke and dust
has been reduced by 17,000 tons, while sulfur dioxide has been reduced by 2,100
tons.
There has been inadequate investment in the city’s civil infrastructure, hampering
improvements in the collection and treatment of municipal waste. The city
government asserts that it plans to invest nearly US$255 million by 2010 to combat
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

38

pollution issues. Progress on that front is likely to be slow as city budgets are
extremely stretched. The National Development and Reform Commission (NDRC)
has chosen Lanzhou as one of the ten demonstration cities under the ‘cleaner
production’ initiative.
Resources:
http://www.time.com/time/asia/magazine/99/0927/lanzhou.html
http://www.chinadaily.com.cn/bizchina/2007-01/17/content_785649.htm
http://www.iges.or.jp/kitakyushu/sp/air/Lanzhou%20(Air%20Pollution).pdf
http://www.worldwatch.org/node/4809
http://www.cctv.com/english/news/20011128/73674.html
Effects of Air Pollution on Children's Respiratory Health in Three Chinese Cities - Archives of
Environmental Health, March, 2000 by Zhengmin Qian, et al.

Urumqi, China
Potentially Affected
People:
200,000

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Air pollution

Automobile and industrial
emissions

The Problem:
The rapidly growing urban center of Urumqi, capital of the Xinjiang Uygur
Autonomous Region, is a large city in the northwest of China. Air pollution has
emerged as a serious threat to the residents of the city. A report released in 1998 by
the World Health Organization on poor air quality in 272 cities worldwide named
Urumqi in its top ten. It rivals Linfen and Lanzhou as the city with the worst air
pollution in China.
Suspended particulates including PM10, sulfur dioxide and nitrous oxides cloud the
air. Anthropogenic, mainly industrial, activities paired with large scale automobile
emissions and particularly stagnant air conditions contribute to the high
concentration of air pollutants.

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

39

Health Impacts:
Serious respiratory diseases have been reported.
Status of Clean-Up Activity:
The local government has recently implemented the Blue-Sky Project, an attempt to
replace old boilers and to utilize cleaner burning fuel sources and central heating.
Urumqi has also strengthened its vehicle emissions controls. Gas-fueled (as
opposed to diesel) vehicles have recently been introduced into the city.
The city has provided 65 CNP and LPG filling stations and replaced 9,714 oil-fueled
vehicles with gas-fueled counterparts. However, the total number of vehicles in the
city continues to increase, further polluting the air.
Resources:
B. Mamtimin, F. X. Meixner. The characteristics of air pollution in the semi-arid City of Urumqi (NW
China) and its relation to climatological processes. Max Planck Institute for Chemistry,
Biogeochemistry Department, P. O. Box 3060, D-55020 Mainz, Germany.
http://environment.guardian.co.uk/waste/story/0,2042999,00.html
http://environment.guardian.co.uk/climatechange/story/0,2042944,00.html
http://www.veccsepa.org.cn/eng/news/news_detail.jsp?newsid=08700http://www.zhb.gov.cn/english/SEPA/newsletter
/2000-10.htm
http://www.xinjiang.gov.cn/1$002/1$002$013/352.jsp?articleid=2005-10-31-0008

Wanshan, China
Potentially Affected
People:
100,000

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Mercury

Mercury mines

The Problem:
Guizhou Province is located in southwestern China in the Global Circum-Pacific
Mercury Belt. Mercury emissions from 13 large-scale mercury mines are estimated
to count for 12% of global anthropogenic emissions into the atmosphere. Wanshan,
located within this Province, has been termed the ‘Mercury Capital’ of China
because more than 60% of the country’s mercury deposits were discovered there.
More than 20,000 tons of mercury was produced in Wanshan between the 1950s
and 1990s. Mercury contamination extends throughout the city’s air, surface water
systems, and soils. Concentrations in soil range from 24.3 to 348 mg/kg (16 to 232
times the maximum national standards for mercury contamination).

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

40

Health Impacts:
Health problems reported by miners include decreased life expectancy, an elevated
occurrence of cancer of the trachea, bronchus, lung, stomach, and liver, pulmonary
tuberculosis, silicosis, and pleural disease, as well as insect-borne diseases like
malaria and dengue fever, noise-induced hearing loss, bacterial and viral diseases;
and diseases of the blood, skin, and musculoskeletal systems. Although the mines
have now been shut down, villagers are still exposed to the mercury from the wastes
that remain behind. Digestion problems, tremors, and weight loss are also
commonplace.
The local population is affected by mercury through air inhalation and by consuming
mercury-contaminated food (rice and fish, in particular) and water. Mercury
concentrations in blood serums have been found to be nearly 40 times that of control
groups. Mean urine concentrations are almost 75 times the level of control groups.
Status of Clean-Up Activity:
Tremendous national and international attention has been given to mercury pollution
in the province and various efforts have been made to deal with different aspects o
the problem. The population mostly at risk is that living in the vicinity of the smelters,
mining activities and waste disposal sites. Although mercury-mining operations
ceased in 2001, more than 100 million tons of calcines and other waste rocks remain
behind.
Resources:
http://pbc.eastwestcenter.org/Abstracts2005/Abstract2005FengXinbin.htm
http://www.envsci.rutgers.edu/info/seminar/abstracts/spring2006/feng.shtml
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?cmd=Retrieve&db=PubMed&list_uids=16310915&dopt=Abst
ract
pubs.acs.org/subscribe/journals/esthag/40/i12/html/061506feature_jiang.h ml
http://lib.bioinfo.pl/auth:Liya,Q

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

41

Haina, Dominican Republic
Potentially Affected
People:
85,000

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Lead

Lead battery
re-processing facility

The Problem:
The densely populated city of Bajos de Haina is severely contaminated with lead
from a closed down automobile battery recycling facility. The Dominican Secretary
of Environment and Natural Resources has identified Haina as a national hotspot of
significant concern. Various studies have found alarming lead pollution in the Haina
community, with blood and soil levels several orders of magnitude above accepted
limits. The contamination is caused by the past industrial operations of the nearby
Metaloxa battery plant. Although the company has moved to a new site (which is
contaminating a new neighbourhood, albeit less populous), the contamination still
remains.
Health Impacts:
Lead poisoning from the smelter area is affecting children's health and development.
When the Metaloxa plant closed in March 1997, 116 children living near the area
were sampled, exposing a mean blood lead concentration of 71 µg/dL (range: 9–234
µg/dL). Another survey was conducted in August 1997 with 146 children revealing
levels of 32 µg/dL (range: 6–130 µg/dL). The study revealed that at least 28% of the
children required immediate treatment and that 5% had lead levels above 79 µg/dL.
Only 9% of these children were under the WHO recommended 10 µg/dL for
maximum tolerable concentrations. The children were also at risk for severe
neurological consequences at the time of the study.
Another study released by the Chemical Institute of Autonomous University of Santo
Domingo (UASD) found lead levels in inhabitants over 100 parts per million (ppm),
whereas "normal" levels in children are considered to be 10 ppm and for adults 20
ppm. Birth deformities, eye damage, learning and personality disorders, and in some
cases, death from lead poisoning have also been reported at a higher than normal
rate due to contamination caused by the past operations of the battery plant.
Status of Clean-Up Activity:
Blacksmith Institute has initiated a stakeholder process that cooperatively includes
the local community, government and Metaloxa. The government, community
groups, industry and local and international scientists have begun to work together
to design and implement a clean-up program. Metaloxa has insisted that it is not to
be held accountable for the entire extent of the pollution since other industries have
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

42

also polluted this industrial town but is discussing the clean-up of their old site. A
Blacksmith Institute assessment team surveyed the site with community leaders in
order to determine an appropriate remediation response.
Blacksmith Institute has organized stakeholders’ meetings along with municipal
authorities, the Ministry of Environment and the Inter-American Development Bank.
The stakeholders’ group expects to have remediation completed within a year’s time.
Haina was in last year’s Top Ten listing but has dropped down into the Dirty Thirty
because of the recent remediation efforts and the size of its affected population
relative to other sites in the Top Ten.
Resources:
J. Caravanos, R. Fuller. “Polluted Places—Initial Site Assessment”. Blacksmith Institute. (2006)
February 22. http://www.blacksmithinstitute.org/docs/haina1.doc
B. Kaul, R. S. Sandhu, C Depratt, and F Reyes. “Follow-up screening of lead-poisoned children near
an auto battery recycling plant, Haina, Dominican Republic”. Environmental Health Perspectives.
(1999). 107 (11)
“Industrial Waste Minimization in the low Haina River Basin”
IWCAM/2nd%20Steering%20Cmttee%20Meeting/Dominican%20Republic%20Demo%20Submission
%20040130.doc

Oriente, Ecuador
Potentially Affected
People:
30,000

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Oil and toxic waste

Oil exploration

The Problem:
From 1964 to 1992, Texaco (now Chevron) built and operated oil exploration and
production facilities in the northern region of the Ecuadorian Amazon, known as the
"Oriente". After three decades of activity, the company left behind 600 open waste
pits and allegedly dumped 18.5 billion gallons of toxic waste into Ecuador's
rainforest. Crude oil dumped in open waterways is allegedly some 30 times worse
than the Exxon Valdez spill.
This toxic dumping is reported to affect not only an indigenous population of 30,000
people but also 2.5 million acres of rain forest.

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

43

Health Impacts:
Increased cancer incidence, reproductive problems and birth defects are the major
health effects. According to a local nurse, 27 town residents have died of cancer
since Texaco began its operations in the area. The entire population of San Carlos
is only 500 people, she said, prompting residents to call it the “cancer zone”. Five
separate peer-reviewed academic studies have documented rates of cancer several
times higher than those in other parts of the Amazon where Texaco did not operate.
One study found rates of childhood leukaemia four times higher in San Carlos than
in other areas.
Water used by local residents for drinking and bathing contains nearly 150 times the
safe exposure levels to hydrocarbons.
Status of Clean-Up Activity:
Texaco is facing a billion dollar legal battle for polluting significant portions of the
Ecuadorean Amazon. The company is accused of using inadequate extraction
techniques and spilling waste products as a consequence. It is also alleged to have
left more than 1,000 open-air toxic waste pits in the Amazonian rainforest. The
company has vehemently denied the accusations and insisted that local authorities
have absolved it of any guilt. An independent damage assessment, estimating the
cost of clean-up to be around US $6.14 billion. Accounting for personal damages
could raise the cost to more than US $10 billion.
Resources:
http://www.iht.com/articles/2004/01/13/edcesar_ed3_.php
http://www.texacotoxico.org/eng/index.php?option=com_content&task=view&id=47&Itemid=2
http://www.ipsnews.net/news.asp?idnews=36940
http://www.chevrontoxico.com/article.php?id=340

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

44

Mahad Industrial Estate, India
Potentially Affected
People:
300,000

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Heavy metals and
organic pollutants

Industrial estate

The Problem:
According to a survey conducted by the Supreme Court Monitoring Committee,
approximately 1,800 tons of hazardous sludge has accumulated at the Mahad
Industrial Estate CETP. There are also reports of hazardous wastes being dumped
illegally on the premises of now defunct industries including Raksha Chemicals Ltd.
and Shri Mahesh Chemicals. The industrial estate of Shri Mahesh Chemicals Ltd.
houses an abandoned H-acid plant. The Raksha Chemical Estate houses not only
its own toxic waste but also hazardous materials for a nearby industrial operation in
Karnataka. The hazardous waste has not been properly contained within the
premises of the industrial estate as asserted by various industrial managers and has
instead leached out into the surrounding area contaminating soil and groundwater.
Health Impacts:
The resident population in the area is being adversely affected by severe
contamination of the local soils and waterways. We are not aware of any health
surveys being conducted in the area but the impact is presumed to be extreme. The
Indian Supreme Court Monitoring Committee has stated that it is pursuing more
detailed information on the serious and chronic health situations that may result.
Status of Clean-Up Activity:
India’s Supreme Court Monitoring Committee directed Mahad CETP to replace
pipelines carrying effluents out into the surrounding area in 2004. The Committee
also ordered that the Mahad treatment plant conform to standards outlined by the
Maharashtra Pollution Control Board (MPCB). The MPCB and the Maharashtra
Industrial Development Corporation are partnering to ensure that Mahad CETP
executes the mandates of the Monitoring Committee. Reports suggest that disposal
of the toxic sludge from the industrial estate began in January of 2005 with a
planned completion date of March of 2005. We have not learned of any definitive
reports or studies confirming that this work was indeed completed.
Resources:
http://mpcb.mah.nic.in/images/5thATR.pdf
http://web.ebscohost.com/ehost/pdf?vid=5&hid=8&sid=17129ca4-c36c-467a-a2d03359ca79204c%40sessionmgr3
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

45

Ranipet, India
Potentially Affected
People:
3,500,000

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Hexavalent chromium,
Azodyes

Tanneries

The Problem:
Ranipet is located about 100 miles upstream from Chennai, the fourth largest urban
area in India. Ranipet is a medium sized town but its pollution problems pose a
potential risk to a larger population due to its proximity to the city of Vellore. A
factory in Ranipet manufactured sodium chromate, chromium salts and basic
chromium sulfate tanning powder that is used locally in the leather tanning process.
The Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board (TN PCB) estimates that about 1,500,000
tons of solid wastes accumulated over two decades of plant operation. These lie
without check in an open yard (three to five meters high and on nearly five and a half
acres of land) on the facility premises and easily leach into the groundwater.
Health Impacts:
The contamination of the soil and groundwater, along with run off from solid wastes
has affected thousands of people in a residential colony about 1 kilometre from the
factory. Three open wells, a dozen bore wells and about 25 public hand pumps
have been abandoned due to high chromium levels in the water. Agricultural land
about a kilometer from the factory has also been affected. There is widespread fear
that if this pollution is left unchecked, the Palar basin, the main drinking water source
in the region, could also be contaminated. Local farmers claim that the waste from
the nearby tanneries degrades the fertility of the land and that, invariably, “only one
in five crops does well.” Farmers also complain of the foul smells that emanate from
the water they use to irrigate their fields and that they suffer from skin ulcerations
from direct contact with the water.
Status of Clean-Up Activity:
In 1996 the government shut down Tamil Nadu Chromates & Chemicals Limited
(TCC), the factory responsible for the estimated 1.5 million tons of untreated
chromate sludge. The Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board authorities have assigned
the National Geophysical Research Institute (NGRI) and National Environmental
Engineering Research Institute (NEERI) to design and implement remediation plans
to clean up this site.
One solution to tackle the issue of chromate leaching from the legacy site would be
to encapsulate the waste dumpsite in order to prevent further leaching. Subsurface
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

46

soils also need to be treated. However, it is understood that no real progress has
been made on tackling the problems.
Resources:
http://www.tehelka.com/story_main13.asp?filename=Ne071605Tanneries_pollute.asp
“Polluted Places” Blacksmith Institute.
http://www.pollutedplaces.org/region/south_asia/india/ranipet.shtml
“Polluted Places: India Initial site assessment and photos”. Asian Development Bank ADB (2006)
http://www.adb.org/Projects/PEP/ind.asp

Ust-Kamenogorsk, Kazakhstan
Potentially Affected
People:
300,000

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Heavy metals, air
pollutants, radioactive
waste

Copper smelters, nuclear
power and testing
facilities, power plants,
metallurgy

The Problem:
One of the most severely polluted sites in Kazakhstan, Ust-Kamenogorsk sits at the
confluence of the Ulba and Irtysh rivers in the northeastern region of the country. It
is home to the regional center of East Kazakhstan Oblast, one of the biggest
industrial estates in the nation. The notorious Semipalatinsk Nuclear Testing Range,
just 250 km away, has left a number of environmental disaster zones in its wake.
Radioactive contaminants litter the surrounding area and may be airborne. Balkash
Copper Smelter, idle for a long period, has restarted its operations in the area and is
now polluting the air with sulphur and nitrogen dioxides and with metallic
particulates.
Extensive industrial operations for over fifty years under careless or absent
environmental standards have led to widespread pollution and hazardous waste
deposits. In the year 2000, roughly a third of the industrial enterprises had no
emissions controls or safe zones. As a result, a considerable population living in
these industrial centers is directly impacted by these pollutants.
Health Impacts:
The concentration of benzaperene is at a level 16 times the maximum admissible
concentration. Lead levels are 170% higher than maximum admissible
concentrations. High morbidity and mortality rates have been reported for the region.
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

47

Status of Clean-Up Activity:
Although industrial production levels have been somewhat reduced in recent years,
air pollution remains at a very high level in Ust-Kamenogorsk. No formal clean-up
efforts are known to be under way.
Resources:
http://www.congress-on-science-inschool.de/2005/congress_e.php?ID=abstracts&Subj=kamenogorsk
http://www.globe-net.ca/procurement_notices/listing.cfm?ID_Region=7&ID_Opportunity=2638
http://wbln0018.worldbank.org/RMC/PHRD/proc%20planning.nsf/01815e2162015aa085256c1b00521
ce9/11285849aa2936b385256c1b0064494d?OpenDocument
http://www.greensalvation.org/English/Publish_eng/Herald_2003-2004/2004_08.htm
http://www-esd.worldbank.org/bnwpp/index.cfm?
display=display_activity&AID=427&Item=5
http://www.oieau.fr/anglais/international/russia_kazakhstan.htm
http://www.atasu.org/eng/projects/docs/FASEP-Final%20Report_brief.pdf
http://72.14.209.104/search?q=cache:wlMSGyrGhBEJ:wwwwds.worldbank.org/servlet/WDSContentServer/WDSP/IB/2004/07/19/000104615_20040721104846/
Original/Ust0Kamenogorsk0PCN0ISDSFinal.doc+ust+kamenogorsk+pollution&hl=en&gl=us&ct=clnk
&cd=26
http://www.counterpart.org/Default.aspx?tabid=340&metaid=F8FK0759-781&skin=cs
http://www.jstage.jst.go.jp/article/jrr/41/1/41_35/_article/-char/en

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

48

Dandora Dumpsite, Kenya
Potentially Affected
People:
100,000

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Heavy metals, chemical
waste, PCBs, POPs

Municipal and industrial
waste

The Problem:
Nairobi produces an estimated 2000 tons of garbage a day, somewhere between a
half and three-quarters of which rots uncollected close to its source. The rest is
carted away to the Dandora dumping ground on the arid plains to the south of the
city. Established by the city council in the mid 1980s, the Dandora dumpsite
sprawls over a disused quarry and the grounds once allocated to "Sector 6" – the
last, unsuccessfully executed phase of a World Bank-Kenyan Government
experiment in low-cost housing designed to accommodate 100,000 people.
However, Dandora is now home to a quarter of a million Nairobi residents. The
dumpsite is 30 solid acres of garbage. The sky over Dandora is dark with noxious
smoke, the result of the city council's half-hearted attempts at incineration.
Concentrated methane gasses regularly result in spontaneous dump fires. Waste
consistently leaches into the Nairobi River, which runs through the lower edge of the
dump before passing through the city slum.
As many as 2,500 people, mostly children, but also men and women, scavenge
here. Once a week, a city council bulldozer arrives to push the unsorted garbage
into a massive heap that sits at the edge of the quarry. The heap is then set on fire,
releasing even more toxic gases into Nairobi's air.
Health Impacts:
Although the effects of constant exposure to the dump's stench and fumes on the
residents and scavengers of Dandora remain unknown, doctors do report a high
incidence of respiratory tract infections. According to the principal of a local school
downwind from the site, nearly all of her 800 students have chronic respiratory
problems. Only 10-15% of children living in the region could be described as
healthy.
According to a University of Nairobi study conducted in early 2007 and surveying the
health of schoolchildren, 50% of children sampled have blood lead levels of over 10
micrograms per decilitre. The haematological systems of most children were
showing signs of damage with 12.5% of children having haemoglobin below normal
levels.
The most exhaustive study of the Dandora dumpsite was published in 1998 by the
Japanese International Co-operation Agency (JICA) as part of an assessment of
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

49

solid waste management in Nairobi. But the report is vague on the environmental
hazards that the site poses, citing only "a high risk of air pollution, which may affect
the health of scavengers and neighbouring residents," and suggesting a possible
threat to ground water pollution.
Status of Clean-Up Activity:
The local government admits that the dumpsite must be relocated though no
concrete plans have been implemented or even proposed.
Resources:
Block, Meredith. Initial Site Assessment: Dandora Dumpsite. Blacksmith Institute, June 2007.

Mailuu-Suu, Kyrgyzstan
Potentially Affected
People:
23,000 immediately,
but millions potentially

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Radioactive waste, heavy Legacy Soviet uranium
metals, cyanides
plant

The Problem:
Dozens of waste rock dumps are scattered throughout Mailuu-Suu, home to a
former Soviet uranium ore mining and processing complex. From 1946-1968 the
plant produced more than 10,000 metric tons of enriched uranium ore, which was
eventually used to produce the Soviet Union’s first atomic bomb. What remains now
are 1.96 million cubic meters of radioactive mining waste that threatens the entire
Ferghana Valley, one of the most fertile and densely populated areas in Central
Asia.
Due to the high rates of seismic activity in the area, millions of people in Central Asia
are potentially at risk from a failure of the waste containment efforts. It is feared that
a landslide could disturb one of the dumps and either expose radioactive material
within the core of the enormous waste piles or force them into nearby rivers. This
fear was nearly realized in May of 2002 when a huge mudslide blocked the course of
the Mailuu-Suu River and threatened to submerge one waste site. In April of 2006,
the Obschestvenny Reiting Newspaper reported that about 300,000 cubic meters of
material fell into the Mailuu-Suu River near the uranium mine tailings, the result of
yet another landslide. The Kyrgyzstan National Sciences Academy (KNASA)
surveyed 170 sites in Mailuu-Suu and concluded that high levels of radioactivity
were indeed present.

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

50

Health Impacts:
The poor design and management of the waste areas allows for transfer of some
material from these piles to surrounding areas by runoff. Research has found some
residents getting very high doses of radon probably due to use of this runoff water in
agriculture. Risk analyses have also been conducted to assess the radioactive
contamination that could occur with further natural disasters and potentially lead to
large-scale environmental contamination. A 1999 study conducted by the Institute of
Oncology and Radioecology showed that twice as many residents suffered from
some form of cancer in Mailuu-Suu than in the rest of the country.
Status of Clean-Up Activity:
The World Bank has begun a project for Kyrgyzstan to minimize human and
environmental exposure to radionucleides. The project includes isolating uranium
mining wastes, improving the national system for disaster management,
preparedness and response and establishing real-time monitoring and warning
systems, seismic stations and sensors. The total cost of the project is $11.76 million,
of which the bank’s International Development Association, an institution that gives
aid to the world’s poorest countries, will provide $6.9 million.
In addition, the Japanese Government has allocated $2 million, the Global
Environment Fund has allocated $1 million and the Kyrgyzstan Government has
allocated $1.8 million for remediation efforts. The National Ecological and
Emergency Ministry has reported that over 20 local and foreign firms have
expressed interest in committing funding. Kyrgyzstan has established the Control
Centre of Crisis Situations (CCCS) under the Ministry of Emergency Situations to
deal with such regional problems. Projects currently underway to remediate MailuuSuu are slated to be completed by 2009 but Kyrgz officials assert that more than $30
million would be needed to complete the work.
Resources:
IRIN News Org. “KYRGYZSTAN: Landslide close to Mailuu-Suu uranium dump”. UN Office for the
coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. (2005) April 14.
http://www.irinnews.org/report.asp?ReportID=46641&SelectRegion=Asia&SelectCountry=KYRGYZS
TAN
IRIN News Org. “KYRGYZSTAN: Mailuu-Suu closely monitored following recent landslide.” UN
Office for the coordination of Humanitarian Affairs. (2005) May.
http://www.irinnews.org/report.asp?ReportID=46933&SelectRegion=Asia
Sarah MacGregor. “Finding a Solution for Uranium Waste in Kyrgyzstan.” OSCE. (2004) February 4.
http://www.osce.org/item/181.html
Environment News Service (ENS). “Kyrgyz Republic Funded to Secure Uranium Waste Dumps”
Mines and Communities Website. (2004). June 17.
http://www.minesandcommunities.org/Action/press375.htm
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

51

M. Kozlova. “Worries Fester over radioactive tailings”. Asia Water Wire.
http://www.asiawaterwire.net/node/74
“Safety of Uranium Dumps in Kirghizia Calls For Attention of International Community” Pravada
(2003) April 21. http://newsfromrussia.com/world/2003/04/21/46158.html
Nurlan Djenchuraev. Current Environmental issues associated with mining wastes in Kyrgyzstan.
Master of science. Department of Environmental Sciences and Policy of Central European
University. (1999). http://enrin.grida.no/case_studies/nucFergana/kyrgyz_12.pdf
I. A. Vasiliev, D. S. Barber, V. M. Alekhina, et al. “Uranium levels in the Naryn and MAiluu-Suu rivers
of Kyrgyz Republic”. Journal of Radioanalytical and Nuclear Chemistry. (2005) 263 207-212.
H. Vandenhove, L. Sweeck, D. Mallants, et al. “Assessment of radiation exposure in the uranium
mining and milling area of Mailuu Suu, Kyrgyzstan”. Journal of Environmental Radioactivity (2006)
88 118-139.
http://www.irinnews.org/report.aspx?reportid=26451
http://www.asiawaterwire.net/taxonomy/term/29

Mexico City, Mexico
Potentially Affected
People:
15 million

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Air pollution: Ozone,
SO2, SOx, NOx, pm2.5pm10, HC, VOC

Automobile and industrial
emissions

The Problem:
Mexico City has the worst air pollution in the country and ranks among the most
polluted cities in the world. Its ozone levels exceed World Health Organization
standards 300 days a year, and it is estimated that the air in the busy border town of
Ciudad Juarez is 40% less contaminated than in the capital. Exhaust fumes from
Mexico City's estimated 4 million motor vehicles, many of which are old models and
especially damaging to the environement, are the main source of air pollutants. The
city's air problem is aggravated by its unique geography. Mexico City resides in a
basin more than 7,400 feet above sea level and is surrounded on three sides by
mountains. These isolate the city from regional weather disturbances and thus trap
pollution.

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

52

Health Impacts:
Severe respiratory problems have expectedly developed across the local population.
It is estimated that even a 10% reduction in PM10 in the air would save 3,000 lives
annually and prevent 10,000 new cases of chronic bronchitis. Reducing the
presence of ozone by 10% would save 300 lives.
Status of Clean-Up Activity:
In 2002, the Secretary of the Environment signed an agreement with World
Resources Institute to implement a sustainable transport system in order to cut back
on emissions. This will focus on bus transport systems and retrofitting of diesel
vehicles in order to cut back air pollutants. Mexico City has recently met air quality
regulation standards for four of the six main pollutants: lead, sulfur dioxide, carbon
monoxide, and nitrogen oxides. The remaining problems are ozone and
particulates. Considerable efforts must be exercised in order to make this city more
habitable.
Resources:
“Index of Leading Environmental Indicators: The nature and sources of ecological progress in the US
and the World” The Pacific Research Institute. (2006).
http://www.pacificresearch.org/pub/sab/enviro/06_enviroindex/27_mexico.html
“Mexico: Environmental Issues.” Energy Information Administration Official Energy Statistics from the
U.S Government. (2004) http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/cabs/mexenv.html
http://www.ess.co.at/GAIA/CASES/MEX/
G McKinley, M Zuk, M Hojer, et al. “Quantification of Local and global benefits from air pollution
control in Mexico City”. Environmental Science and Technology. (2005) 39, 1954-1961.
I Schifter, L. Diaz, E Lopez-Salinas. “Hazardous air pollutants from mobile sources in the
metropolitan area of Mexico City” Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association. (2005) Sep.
55 (9).

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

53

Huancavelica, Peru
Potentially Affected
People:
40,000

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Mercury

Legacy mercury mines

The Problem:
Huancavelica is the largest mercury processing district in the Western Hemisphere.
The majority of the mines at Huancavelica have been operating since the Spanish
colonial period 150 years ago but have been closed for 30 years. At the time,
Huancavelica was crucial to Spain’s silver mining operations, providing the mercury
used to extract silver from ores in the Potosi silver mines in upper Peru (now
Bolivia). Legacy mercury pollution lines the city’s open trenches and waterways.
The residents here have been living with mercury for nearly 400 years. Some of the
locals do still mine mercury on a small scale and the entrance to the main mercury
mines remains open to this day.
Health Impacts:
The effects of the mercury legacy are shown by the fact that the risk of dying is three
times higher in Huancavelica than in nearby El Callao. Life expectancy at birth is
only 56.8 years in Huancavelica, compared to 78.0 years in El Callao. Respiratory
diseases are common, especially among the locals who continue to engage in
mining efforts.
Status of Clean-Up Activity:
The people of Huancavelica are extremely poor and without resources to manage
their own cleanup efforts. Thirty-eight percent of the population is illiterate and 80%
of the children suffer from malnutrition. The government of Peru has so far failed to
deal with this serious pollution issue.
Resources:
http://www.martinbarofund.org/projects/1998.htm

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

54

Meycauayan City and Marilao, Philippines
Potentially Affected
People:
250,000

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Hexavalent chromium,
other heavy metals,
pesticides, sewage, solid
waste and tannery waste

Automobile and industrial
emissions

The Problem:
Industrial waste is haphazardly dumped into the Marilao, Meycauayan and Obando
River system, a source of drinking and agricultural water supplies for the 250,000
people living in and around this suburb of Manila. The river system is extremely
polluted due to wastes received from tanneries, gold and precious metals refineries,
and legacy lead smelting waste, and numerous municipal dumpsites. Substantial
contamination also results from small-scale lead recycling facilities along the river
and from the many tanneries that dump untreated hexavalent chromium-laced
wastewater into the river.
Health Impacts:
The dumping of toxic wastes into the river has had a severe effect on the health of
the local population with complaints of nausea, eye irritation, and various respiratory
ailments. The river also feeds directly into the Manila Bay, and its effluents
contaminate local fishing areas, further endangering health.
Status of Clean-Up Activity:
There has been considerable local effort to deal with the main sources of pollution,
resulting in the creation of a coordinating body to encourage and guide clean up of
this river. This stakeholder group, which has been instigated and supported by
Blacksmith, includes senior representatives of the federal government, the local
municipality, industries from the area and community groups. A process has been
started to collaboratively implement private and public remediation efforts over the
next several years and efforts are ongoing to obtain national and international
financial assistance. 2006 successes include a tannery waste treatment plant paid
for by the Manila Tanneries Association. In addition, Stakeholder group members,
Philippines Recyclers Incorporated (PRI), has committed to strictly regulate
treatment of lead battery waste stockpiles. Strong support from political leadership in
the Philippines has been very important in generating momentum for the clean-up
process.
Resources:
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

55

J. Emmanuel. “Cleaning up toxic wastes in the Asia Pacific region.” US Working Group for Philippine
Bases Clean-up. (1997)
http://www.focusweb.org/publications/1997/Cleaning%20Up%20Toxic%20Wastes%20in%20the%20
Asia%20Pacific%20Region.htm

Bratsk, Russia
Potentially Affected
People:
2.8 million

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Mercury and other heavy
metals, chemicals

Chemical and Aluminium
Plants

The Problem:
The Usolye and Sayansk Chemical Plants have used mercury in the production of
caustic soda and other cleaning agents since the early 1970s. The Usolye Chemical
Plant has admitted to discharging 2.5 tons of metallic mercury into the Angara River
each month. Mercury from the stream has travelled several miles downstream and
concentrating in the sediments of the Bratsk Reservoir, which was once used for
drinking water. The Angara then flows into the Yenisei, which empties into the Arctic
Ocean.
According to Yuri Udodov, head of the Federal Committee on Ecology (FCE) in the
state of Irkutsk, this region has "the highest rate of discharge of metallic mercury into
the environment [in] all of Siberia." If the FCE's figures are accurate, the discharge
rate may be the highest in the world.
The Bratsk Aluminium Plant has been polluting its surroundings to such great
degree that the town of Chikanovskiy was evacuated in 2001 due to repeated health
emergencies. It has been declared an ecological disaster zone.
Health Impacts:
The amount of mercury in local children's hair is almost nine times higher than
normal levels. Incidence rates of cancer and respiratory, vascular and urinary
disorders are massively high as is the occurrence of severe birth defects. Life
expectancy in the region is reported to be 44 years.
Status of Clean-Up Activity:
Local activist groups are attempting to educate people about this urgent problem
while seeking to identify methods to end mercury use and clean up the pollution.
The problem, however, may be unmanageable for any small-scale clean-up plans
for mercury. The extent of pollution in the ground around Bratsk is said to be equal
to half the total global production of mercury in 1992.
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

56

Recently, the U.S. Trade and Development Agency (TDA) financed a study at a cost
of $850,000 on modernization at the Bratsk smelter. Emissions levels have recently
been reduced due to an upgrade in smelter operating technologies.
Resources:
http://www.10000yearsinstitute.org/10k_pdf/Selenga_River.pdf
http://se2.isn.ch/serviceengine/FileContent?serviceID=7&fileid=45316A02-8F2A-5890-EA0135B93519A52E&

Chita, Russia
Potentially Affected
People:
400,000

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Radioactive decay
products

Gold and uranium mines

The Problem:
This remote region of Siberia is the site of Russia's greatest mineral wealth where
many extensive gold, thorium, and uranium deposits have been mined for decades.
In Chita, Krasnokamensk is the last major uranium mine still operating in Russia.
Operations produced five million pounds of uranium in 1995, and at least five million
tons of waste and uranium mill tailings in the process. Uranium and waste
production at this rate (and higher) has occurred for the past 30 years. Massive
volumes of acidic tailings are leaking uranium decay products and heavy metals.
Krasnokamensk has generated fifty to seventy-five million tons of tailings, making it
the largest waste stream at a uranium production site in the world.
A survey in the community of Balei has documented hundreds of homes with
radiation levels as much as 10-20 times permissible levels. Nearly 1000 homes
have radiation levels that far exceed international standards.
Health Impacts:
In some affected areas, nearly 95% of children have been diagnosed with one or
more chronic or inborn diseases or handicaps. There are also high incidences of
babies born without limbs and various other genetic mutations. More than 95
percent of the children in Balei are mentally deficient, according to a report by the
east Siberian branch of the Russian Academy of Sciences. Rates of stillbirths are
five times higher than the Russian average; child mortality rates are 2.5 times
higher, miscarriages and congenital defects in newborns are 1.4 times higher and
incidences of Downs Syndrome are four times higher.
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

57

Status of Clean-Up Activity:
Addressing the impacts of this radioactive waste will require extensive
decontamination and significant groundwater restoration efforts if the polluted areas
are to be remediated effectively. A comprehensive plan should also include the
installation of a new tailings repository for future wastes to replace the present
containment system which is unsound. No such plans have yet been made public.
Resources:
http://www.earthisland.org/project/reportPage2.cfm?reportContentID=13&subSiteID=1&pageID=71
http://www.sric.org/mining/docs/Chitafin.html
http://www.zenhell.com/GetEnlightened/links/nukehell.htm
http://www.kluweronline.com/article.asp?PIPS=5143902&PDF=1
http://www.dartmouth.edu/~dujs/2002F/uranium.pdf

Magnitogorsk, Russia
Potentially Affected
People:
460,000

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Sodium oxides, nitrogen
oxides, benzopyrene,
various heavy metals

Iron and steel works

The Problem:
Located in Western Russia, Magnitogorsk lies on the banks of the Ural River. In the
1930's, one of the largest Russian iron and steel works was established here,
producing steel for half the Russian tanks during WWII. At optimum capacity it could
produce up to 7.5 million tons of steel. The industry was purported to emit 650,000
tons of industrial wastes, including many toxic chemicals, thereby polluting around
4,000 square miles. According to steelworkers, none of the filtering devices were in
working condition.
Health Impacts:

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

58

In an area where it is rumoured unusual to give birth to a healthy baby, the local
hospital estimates that only 1% of all children in Magnitogorsk are in good health.
The massively high cancer rates in the city are attributed to severe pollution from
dioxides and benzopyrene. Only 28% of infants born in 1992 were healthy, and only
27% had healthy mothers. High incidences of bronchitis, asthma, and lung cancers
are reported. The results of a study conducted by the Chelyabinsk Provincial
Institute for Public Health and Environment in 1994 were so extraordinary that the
provincial Ministry for the Environment classified Magnitogorsk as an ecological
disaster zone.
Status of Clean-Up Activity:
Plant managers have asserted that much of their equipment has been upgraded in
recent years. Funds for such new investment are reported to exist at an excess of
US $15 million annually. Emissions per ton of production have indeed been reduced
by about 60%. However, production levels have increased by 39%. Smoke plumes
still hang over the city and the threat of pollution-related disease remains pressing.
Many residents assert that pollution is at its worst.
Resources:
P. Green. “Breathing sulfur and eating lead: Magnitogorsk’s children need oxygen cocktails.” U.S.
News & World Report. (1992) April 13.
http://www.highbeam.com/doc/1G1:12103833/Breathing+sulfur+and+eating+lead%7eC%7e+Magnito
gorsks+children+need+oxygen+cocktails%7eR%7e+(includes+related+article%7eR%7e%7eR%7e%
7eR%7e.html?refid=ency_botnm

Rudnaya Pristan/Dalnegorsk, Russia
Potentially Affected
People:
90,000

Type of Pollutant:

Source of Pollution:

Lead, cadmium, mercury,
antimony

Legacy smelter and mine

The Problem:
Dalnegorsk and Rudnaya Pristan are two towns in the Russian Far East whose
residents suffer from serious lead poisoning from an old smelter and the unsafe
transport of lead concentrate from the local lead mining site. According to the most
recent study, lead concentrations in residential gardens and in roadside soil exceed
USEPA guidance for remediation by large orders of magnitude. Data suggests that
drinking water, interior dust, and garden crops also likely contain dangerous levels of
lead. Water discharged from the smelter averages 2900 m3/day with concentrations
up to 100 kg of lead and 20 kg of arsenic.
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

59

Richard Fuller 10/16/06 11:26 AM
Deleted: s

Health Impacts:
Limited initial testing has revealed that children's blood lead levels are 8 to 20 times
the maximum allowable U.S. levels. Preliminary biokinetic estimates of mean blood
levels suggest that preschool children are at significant risk of lead poisoning from
soil/dust ingestion with levels predicted at an average of 13-27 µg/dl. Annual air
emissions levels include 85 tons of particulate matter, 50 tons of lead and 0.5 tons of
arsenic concentrations. Since 1930 there has not been any attempt to address
associated health concerns by either an educational or a technical environmental
program.
Status of Clean-Up Activity:
The lead smelter was voluntarily shut down after Blacksmith Institute presented the
owner with data on the health risks of lead contamination to children. In addition,
children’s blood lead levels are being tested, and those with elevated levels are
being treated with Blacksmith funding. This funding has also supported education
programs for all residents. A plan to remediate the worst of the contamination is
being developed in detail and the first stage of work is commencing in mid 2007,
with initial funding from Blacksmith Institute and Green Cross Switzerland, and with
support from the University of Idaho.
Resources:
M. C. von Braun, I. H. von Lindern, N. K. Khristoforova, and et a. “Environmental lead contamination
in the Rudnaya Pristan--Dalnegorsk mining and smelter district, Russian far East”. Environmental
Research Section A (2002) 88, 164-173.
A. N. Kachur, V. S. Arzhanova, P. V. Yelpatyevsky, M. C. von Braun, and I.H. von Lindern.
“Environmental conditions in the Rudnaya River watershed––a compilation of Soviet and post-Soviet
era sampling around a lead smelter in the Russian Far East”. The Science of The Total Environment
(2003) 303:1-2 171-185
P.O. Sharov, Lead Contamination of Environment in Rudnaya Pristan, Russia and associated Health
Risks. Far Eastern Health Fund. Vladivostok Dalnauka, 2005.

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

60

About Blacksmith Institute
Founded in 1999, Blacksmith Institute's vision is a clean planet for our children. We
develop and implement solutions for pollution-related problems in the developing
world. We work cooperatively with partnerships of donors, governments, NGO’s and
others, and provide strategic, technical, and financial support to local champions as
they strive to solve specific, pollution-related problems in their communities.
Blacksmith's Strategy
Hazards of Pollution
Industrial wastes, air emissions, and legacy pollution from old industry affect billions
of people around the world. Women and children are especially at risk. Tens of
thousands of people are poisoned and killed each year. Others have reduced
neurological development, damaged immune systems, and long-term health
problems. The World Heath Organization, in conjunction with the World Bank,
estimates that 20 percent of deaths in the developing world are directly attributed to
environmental factors from pollution.
Focus on Highly Polluted Places
The priority of Blacksmith is to work in locations throughout the developing world
where human health is most affected by pollution. Our programs involve a multistep process of:
-

- Identifying polluted places in the developing world, with nominations received
from members of the international community and through the internet;

-

- Assessing the health risks at those locations by reviewing nominations with a
Technical Advisory Board of leading international specialists on a rolling monthly
basis and visiting candidate sites with likely high health risk implication, and
conducting an Initial Site Assessment, a triage protocol that validates likely health
implications, and enables the design of an intervention.

-

- Designing and implementing a remediation strategy tailored to the specifics of
the site in question, using local champions to implement the project in a
cooperative fashion.

Support
Blacksmith supports its local partners with more than just grants. We provide
assistance in other ways so that our partners can initiate solutions to their pollution
problems in the most cost effective and direct manner. Blacksmith provides:
Technical Research: We bring the necessary resources to research a pollution
problem and its proposed solutions thoroughly. We partner with scientific and
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

61

technical groups in the US (and also in Europe) that have demonstrated
expertise in areas relevant to pollution remediation.
Strategic Assistance: We provide help with project planning and
implementation planning, using our experience in similar projects to enable local
champions to describe a credible methodology for site remediation, and move
forward with it.
Networking Capabilities: We develop collaborative networking opportunities for
our partners, linking them to the most appropriate resources to meet their needs,
including organizations such as the World Bank.
Financial Support: Through the generosity of our personal and institutional
funders, we provide both seed money and continuing support to projects, offering
long-term core support, whenever possible, to projects that have demonstrated
clear successes (or the potential for success) in the pollution remediation field.
Blacksmith Institute is a lean organization with hard-working core staff, an active
board, and significant in-kind contributions from our founder. We are committed to
putting as many resources as possible into the hands of local champions and their
organizations in the developing world.

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

62

Technical Advisory Board Members
Listed in alphabetical order.
Margrit von Braun Ph.D. P.E.
Administrative Dean and Founder, Environmental Science Program, University of Idaho.
Dr. von Braun is Dean of the College of Graduate Studies and Professor of Chemical Engineering
and Environmental Science at the University of Idaho. She received her BS in Engineering Science
and Mechanics at the Georgia Institute of Technology in 1974, her MCE in Civil Engineering at the
University of Idaho in 1980, and her Ph.D. in Civil/Environmental Engineering in 1989 at Washington
State University. She was awarded the College of Engineering Outstanding Faculty Award in 1992.
Dr. von Braun was a Kellogg National Leadership Fellow from 1993 to 1996. Her research areas
include human health risk assessment, hazardous waste site characterization with a focus on
sampling dust contaminated with heavy metals, and risk communication. She is establishing a
network of international graduate students involved in assessing risks to community health from
waste sites in the developing world.
Pat Breysse, M.D.
Director of the Division of Environmental Health Engineering Department of Environmental Health
Sciences, Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health
Pat Breysse is currently the Director of the ABET accredited Industrial Hygiene Program and is the
Associate Director of the Center for Childhood Asthma in the Urban Environment. In this context,
most of Dr. Breysse's research concentrates on exposure assessment with a resulting emphasis on
public health problem solving particularly in the workplace. Exposure assessment research includes
pollutant source characterization, exposure measurement and interpretation, development and use of
biomarkers of exposure/dose/effect, and evaluating relationships between sources, exposures, doses
and disease. Dr. Breysse's research contribution has included investigations of electron microscopic
methods for asbestos analysis, and the development and evaluation of optical and electron
microscopic analytical methods for synthetic vitreous fibers exposure assessments.
Timothy Brutus, M. Sc.
Risk Management Specialist for the New York City Department of Environmental Protection
Mr. Brutus is currently the Risk Management Specialist for the New York City Department of
Environmental Protection for the downstate reservoirs that bring all of the water into New York City.
His previous experience is on complex multi-technology remediation projects with CH2M Hill, Inc. He
has extensive site investigation experience including, but not limited to, indoor and outdoor air
sampling, multiple groundwater and soil sampling techniques and technologies. He has also
contributed to other non-profit organizations restoring contaminated brownfields to their former use as
wetlands and worked in analytical laboratories in New York and New Jersey.
Jack Caravanos, Ph.D., CIH, CSP
Director, MS/MPH program in Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences, Hunter College
Jack Caravanos is Professor at Hunter College of the City University of New York where he directs
the MS and MPH program in Environmental and Occupational Health Sciences. He received his
Master of Science from Polytechnic University in NYC and proceeded to earn his Doctorate in Public
Health (Env Health) from Columbia University's School of Public Health in 1984. Dr. Caravanos holds
certification in industrial hygiene (CIH) and industrial safety (CSP) and prides himself as being an
"environmental health practitioner". He specializes in lead poisoning, mold contamination, asbestos
and community environmental health risk.
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

63

Dr. Caravanos has extensive experience in variety of urban environmental and industrial health
problems and is often called upon to assist in environmental health assessments (i.e. lead/zinc
smelter in Mexico, health risks at the World Trade Center, ground water contamination in NJ and
municipal landfill closures in Brooklyn). Presently he is on the technical advisory panel of the Citizens
Advisory Committee for the Brooklyn-Queens Aquifer Feasibility Study (a NYC Department of
Environmental Protection sponsored community action committee evaluating health risks associated
with aquifer restoration).
Josh Ginsberg, Ph.D.
Director of Asia Programs, Wildlife Conservation Society
As Director of Asia Programs at the Wildlife Conservation Society, Josh Ginsberg oversees 100
projects in 16 countries. He received a B.S. from Yale, and holds an M.A. and Ph.D. from Princeton.
Dr. Ginsberg spent 17 years as a field biologist/conservationist working in Asia and Africa on a variety
of wildlife issues. He has held faculty positions at Oxford University, University College London, is an
Adjunct Professor at Columbia University, and is the author of over 40 reviewed papers and three
books on wildlife conservation, ecology and evolution.
David J. Green
Owner and CEO of Phoenix Soil, LLC; United Retek of CT LLC; American Lamp Recycling, LLC;
Green Globe, LLC; and Jayjet Transportation, LLC.
David Green received his M.ed in chemistry and has owned and operated hazardous waste
remediation companies since 1979. His companies have conducted in-situ and ex-situ treatments of
hazardous materials on over 16,700 sites in the US, China, UK, and central Europe. The technologies
incorporated include, low temperature thermal desorption, solidification/stabilization and chemical
treatment. Mr. Green serves as Chairman of the Local Emergancy Planning Commision and the
Director of Operations for the Connecticut’s Department of Homeland Security USAR Team.
David Hanrahan, M.Sc.
Director of Global Programs, Blacksmith Institute
David Hanrahan oversees the technical design and implementation for Blacksmith of over 40 projects
in 14 countries. Prior to joining Blacksmith, Mr. Hanrahan worked at the World Bank for twelve years
on a broad range of environmental operations and issues, across all the Bank’s regions. During
much of this time he was based in the central Environment Department where he held technical and
managerial positions and participated in and led teams on analytical work and lending operations,
including Acting Head of the department for a number of years.
Before joining the World Bank, he had twenty years of experience in international consultancy, during
which time he also earned post-graduate degrees in policy analysis and in environmental
economics. His professional career began in Britain in water resources for a major international
engineering consultant. He then moved to Australia to build the local branch of that firm, where he
helped to develop a broad and varied practice for public and private sector clients. He later returned
to the UK and became Development Director for an environmental consultancy and subsequently
Business Manager for a firm of applied economics consultants. In 1994 he was recruited by the
World Bank to join its expanding Environment Department.

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

64

David Hunter, Sc.D.
Professor of Epidemiology and Nutrition, Harvard University School of Public Health
Dr. Hunter received an M.B.B.S. (Australian Medical Degree) from the University of Sydney. He
continued his formal education at Harvard University, receiving his Sc.D. in 1988. Dr. Hunter is a
Professor of Epidemiology and Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health. Dr. Hunter is involved with
several large, population-based cohort studies, including the Nurses' Health Study (I and II), Health
Professionals Follow-up Study, and the Physicians' Health Study. Among the goals of these large
cohort studies is to investigate gene-environment interactions, including the impact of lifestyle factors,
on disease causation. Disease endpoints of interest for some of these cohorts include cardiovascular
disease, diabetes, and osteoporosis. He is also involved in long running studies of nutritional
influences on HIV progression in Tanzania.
Eric Johnson
Member of the Board of Trustees, Green Cross Switzerland
Eric Johnson has a broad perspective on the environment and chemical contamination. He began his
career as an editor of Chemical Engineering and Chemical Week magazines. He then became
involved in the selection, assessment and remediation of industrial sites. One of his major projects
was the remediation and conversion of a former aluminum smelter to alternate land-use. Mr.
Robinson was an early adopter of life-cycle assessment. That, combined with his experience in
environmental impact assessment, led to his 1996 appointment as editor of Environmental Impact
Assessment Review – a leading peer-reviewed journal in the field.
Mr. Johnson has analyzed numerous environmental issues that touch on the chemical industry
including: alternative fuels, brominated flame retardants, CFCs and replacements, ecolabels (for
detergents, furniture polishes, hairsprays and personal computers), GHG emissions and trading,
plastics recycling, PVC and the chlorine-chain, REACH, socially-responsible investing, tri-butyl tins
and TRI and environmental reporting. In 1994 he organized the first Responsible Care conference for
plant managers in Europe. Currently his main work is in comparing the carbon footprints of various
sources of energy. He has worked internationally, concentrating mainly on the US and Europe. Mr.
Robinson is an active member of the Board of Green Cross Switzerland.
Donald E. Jones
Donald Jones is the founder of Quality Environmental Solutions, Inc. and was previously Director of
the IT Corporation national program for clients with hydrocarbon-related environmental problems and
development of environmental management programs. He has served as an elected Board of Health
member and was appointed as Right-To-Know and Hazardous Waste Coordinator in the State of
Massachusetts. Mr. Jones currently serves on the Local Water Board, as technical consultant to the
local Facilities Board and provides editorial review of technical papers and publications for the
National Ground Water Association.
Mukesh Khare, Ph.D.
Professor, Environmental Engineering & Management, Department of Civil Engineering, Indian
Institute of Technology Delhi, Former Atlantic LNG Chair (Professor) in Environmental Engineering,
University of West Indies, St. Augustine Campus, Trinidad & Tobago.
Dr. Mukesh Khare is Professor in the Department of Civil Engineering at Indian Institute of
Technology Delhi, India. Professor Khare received his PhD from the Faculty of Engineering
(Specialized in Air Quality) from the University of Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK in 1989. He has
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

65

published more than 45 refereed articles to date in professional journals, 30 articles in refereed
conferences/seminars, and two books: Modelling Vehicular Exhaust Emissions, WIT Press, UK;
Artificial Neural Networks in Vehicular Pollution Modelling, Springer, USA. Additionally, he has
published nearly 20 technical reports on research/consultancies conducted for government agencies
and private industries. Dr Khare continues to serve as peer reviewer for several government
ministries grants programs and state programs and consultant/advisor to the Government of NCR
Delhi. He is also serving as casual reviewer to many journals and publishing houses in and outside
the country. Professor Khare is on the editorial board of International Journal of Environment and
Waste Management and is guest editing one of its special issues on Urban Air Pollution, Control and
Management.
Philip J. Landrigan, M.D., M.Sc.
Director, Center for Children's Health and the Environment, Chair, Department of Community and
Preventive Medicine, and Director, Environmental and Occupational Medicine, Mount Sinai School of
Medicine
Dr. Landrigan is a member of the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences. He is
Editor-in-Chief of the American Journal of Industrial Medicine and previously was Editor of
Environmental Research. From 1988 to 1993, Dr. Landrigan chaired a National Academy of Sciences
Committee whose final report—Pesticides in the Diets of Infants and Children—provided the principal
intellectual foundation for the Food Quality Protection Act of 1996. From 1995 to 1997, Dr. Landrigan
served on the Presidential Advisory Committee on Gulf War Veteran's Illnesses. From 1997 to 1998,
Dr. Landrigan served as Senior Advisor on Children's Health to the Administrator of the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency. He was responsible at EPA for establishing a new Office of
Children's Health Protection. From 1970 to 1985, Dr. Landrigan served as a commissioned officer in
the United States Public Health Service. He served as an Epidemic Intelligence Service Officer and
then as a Medical Epidemiologist with the Centers for Disease Control in Atlanta. In his years at the
CDC, Dr. Landrigan participated in epidemiologic studies of measles and rubella; directed research
and developed activities for the Global Smallpox Eradication Program; and established and directed
the Environmental Hazards Branch of the Bureau of Epidemiology.
Dr. Landrigan obtained his medical degree from the Harvard Medical School in 1967. He interned at
Cleveland Metropolitan General Hospital and completed a residency in Pediatrics at the Children's
Hospital Medical Center in Boston. He obtained a Master of Science in occupational medicine and a
Diploma of Industrial Health from the University of London.
Ian von Lindern Ph.D
CEO and Chairman, Terra Graphics Environmental Engineering, Inc.
Dr. Ian von Lindern received his B.S. in Chemical Engineering (1971) from Carnegie-Mellon
University, Pittsburgh, PA; and his M.S. in Biometeorology and Atmospheric Studies (1973) and
Ph.D. in Environmental Science and Engineering (1980) from Yale University, New Haven , CT. Dr.
von Lindern has 30 years of environmental engineering and science experience in Idaho. He has
directed over 30 major environmental investigations, involving solvent contamination of groundwater
in the Southwest, an abandoned petroleum refinery, secondary smelters and battery processors,
landfills, uranium mill tailings, and several major lead sites including: Dallas, TX; the Niagara and
Riverdale Projects in Toronto, Canada; the Marjol Battery Site in Throop, PA; ASARCO/Tacoma, WA;
East Helena and Butte/Anaconda in MT; Anzon Industries in Philadelphia, PA and the Rudnaya
Pristan-Dalnegorsk Mining District, Russian Far East. Through TerraGraphics, Dr. von Lindern has
worked continually for Idaho Department of Environmental Quality on various projects since the
company’s inception in 1984. He has been the lead Risk Assessor for the Bunker Hill Superfund Site
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

66

in north Idaho, communicating associated risk issues at many public meetings in the community. In
the last few years, Dr. von Lindern directed and completed the Union Pacific Railroad “Rails-to-Trails
Risk Assessment;” the exhaustive Five-Year Review of the Populated Areas of the BHSS; the Human
Health Risk Assessment for the Basin; and several other technical tasks.
Dr. von Lindern has served as a U.S. EPA Science Advisory Board (SAB) Member on three
occasions: the Review Subcommittee for Urban Soil Lead Abatement Demonstration Project, 1993;
the Subcommittee Assessing the Consistency of Lead Health Regulations in U.S. EPA Programs,
Special Report to the Administrator, 1992; and the Review Subcommittee Assessing the Use of the
Biokinetic Model for Lead Absorption in Children at RCRA/CERCLA Sites, 1988. He also served on
the U.S. EPA Clean Air Scientific Advisory
Bill Lorenz
Former Director, Environmental Resources Management, Young Leaders Programme Director, GIFT
Ira May
Ira May has worked as a geologist with the U.S. Army Environmental Center for more than twenty
years. He has extensive experience with the clean up of hazardous waste sites at army facilities
throughout the United States. Mr. May serves as a reviewer for the Groundwater magazine, a
publication of the National Ground Water Association and is Vice Chairman of the Long Term
Monitoring Committee of the Geotechnical Institute, American Society of Civil Engineers.
Stephan Robinson, Ph.D.
Director of the International Disarmament Program, Green Cross Switzerland
Stephan Robinson holds a PhD in experimental nuclear physics from Basel University. In 1994, he
joined Green Cross Switzerland where he serves today as International Director of its Legacy of the
Cold War Programme. The Programme addresses the full implementation of arms control and
disarmament agreements; the safe and environmentally sound destruction of weapons arsenals; the
conversion and clean-up of military facilities and lands; reduced environmental impacts of military
practices; improvements in the areas of public health, education, and social infrastructure in regions
affected by military legacies; stakeholder involvement on military-environmental issues; and the
building of a civil society. Since 1995, the facilitation of chemical weapons destruction in both Russia
and the U.S. has been a focus point of the Programme, which includes the operation of a network of
eleven local and regional public outreach offices, the organisation of a Russian National Dialogue on
chemical weapons destruction, but also practical community projects aiming at improving emergency
preparedness and the health infrastructure. Other activities include the clean-up of a major oil spill at
a nuclear missile in the Baltic area; the scientific investigation of a site of former chemical weapons
destruction (open pit burning site); different risk assessments of military facilities; an inventory of the
Soviet nuclear legacy; and epidemiological studies of public health impacts by chemical weapons
storage. Stephan Robinson is regularly in Eastern Europe for on-site visits of projects and for
meetings with various groups of stakeholders from government officials to local citizens.
Paul Roux
Paul Roux is the CEO/founder of Roux Associates, Inc., a successful environmental consulting firm
that ranked among the top 200 Environmental Consulting Firms in the July 2004 Engineering News
Records. He has over 30 years of experience as a hydrogeologist and serves on the Board of
Registration at the American Institute of Hydrology.

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

67

Leona D. Samson, Ph.D.
Ellison American Cancer Society Research Professor Director, Center for Environmental Health
Sciences Professor of Biological Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology
Leona Samson received her Ph.D. in Molecular Biology from University College, London University,
and received postdoctoral training in the United States at UCSF and UC Berkeley. After serving on
the faculty of the Harvard School of Public Health for eighteen years, she joined the Massachusetts
Institute of Technology in 2001 as a Professor of Biological Engineering and the Director of the
Center for Environmental Health Sciences. Dr. Samson's research has focused on how cells, tissues
and animals respond to environmental toxicants. Dr. Samson has been the recipient of numerous
awards during her career, including the Burroughs Wellcome Toxicology Scholar Award (1993-98);
the Charlotte Friend Women in Cancer Research Award (2000); the Environmental Mutagen Society
Annual Award for Research Excellence (2001). In 2001, Dr. Samson was named the American
Cancer Society Research Professor, one of the most prestigious awards given by the society. The
ACS Professorship was subsequently underwritten by the Ellison Foundation of Massachusetts. In
2003, she was elected as a member of the Institute of Medicine of the National Academies of
Science, and she will become the President of the Environmental Mutagen Society in 2004.

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

68

The World’s Worst Polluted Places Selection Criteria for
the Technical Advisory Board – Revised for 2007 Review
Selection Process
The process for the 2007 Top Ten World’s Worst Polluted Places is very similar
to the one used last year and is intended to be logical, practical and robust.
The starting point was the full database of sites nominated for Blacksmith
consideration. Blacksmith staff initially screened the nominations in order to
identify sites with clearly documented problems. These were then reviewed in
greater detail to produce a long list of sites to be reviewed by the TAB. About
half of the long list has been flagged as the most serious contenders for the
Top Ten. However, any nominated site may be proposed as a contender for
the Top Ten by any TAB member, based on his or her individual review.
The nomination and selection process has been refined for 2007, following a
day-long TAB conference. It still remains heavily dependant on the experience
and professional judgment of TAB members.
Nominations
The structure of the database of nominated sites has been upgraded and a
number of new sites have been added. This brings the total number of sites in
our database to nearly 400 but there remain many sites across the world that
have not yet been identified. A focused effort is being put in place to expand
the coverage. However, it is not expected that the database will be regarded
as complete for some time yet. The 2007 World’s Worst review is based on a
better, but still incomplete, list of nominations.
A key factor in this year’s process is that of representative-ness. The TAB
review recommended that the sites put to the full TAB for selection of the
World’s Worst should be representative in terms of both the types of sites in the
database and also their geographical distribution. The long list has therefore
been presented in the form of a matrix of candidate sites.
Scoring
The scoring system again involves an algorithm that takes into account the
same basic selection criteria as last year. This approach is based on basic
hazard assessment logic that can be summarized as:
IMPACT = POLLUTANT & PATHWAY & PEOPLE
Each of these essential links in the causal chain is represented by criteria that
are included in the scoring methodology presented below. Details of the
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

69

factors and the weights attached to them have been reviewed and revised from
the 2006 version, based on the advice of the Technical Advisory Board.
REVISED CRITERIA
A. POLLUTANT
Factor #A1 Severity of Toxin
Score
Group A – Toxins that are not assessed as acute or
systemic.

1

e.g. organics such as toluene or xylene

Group B - Organics that are probable carcinogens
(USEPA Class 2 and 3) or substances with some
systemic toxicity.

2

e.g. VOC’s, PAHs, PCBs, air pollutants such as PM10 and PM
2.5

Group C - Known carcinogens or chemicals with
significant systemic or organ system toxicity.

3

e.g vinyl chloride, benzene, lead, radionuclides, hexchromium,
cadmium, organophosphate pesticides.
Note: these are broad categories: TAB members are asked to use knowledge and
experience of the specific pollutants to judge the weighting to be given in any instance.

Factor #A2 Amount or scale of pollutant source
Limited
Moderate
Large

1
1.5
2

These two factors are taken as multiplicative and so the overall score for this
element is as follows:
SCORE A = A1xA2
B. PATHWAY
Factor #B1 Evidence of Human Exposure Pathway
Clear pathway
Multiple pathways
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

1
2
70

Factor #B2 Reliable Evidence of Health Impact
No
Yes

0
1

These two factors are taken as additive and so the overall score for this
element is as follows:
SCORE B = B1+B2
C. PEOPLE
Factor #C1 Number of People Potentially Affected
< 10,000
10,000 to 100,000
>100,000

1
2
3

Factor #C2 Level of exposure
Low
Medium
High

1
1.5
2

Factors C1 and C2 are taken as multiplicative
Factor #C3 Large numbers of children particularly at risk
No
Yes

0
1

(e.g. play areas, schools)

This factor is taken as additive to the other two and so the overall score for
this element is as follows:
SCORE C = (C1xC2)+C3
DISCRETIONARY ELEMENT
Factor #D Additional High Risk Element (TAB member discretion)
No
Yes
Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

0
1
71

TOTALS
On the above basis, the total score is calculated as:
SCORE = [A1xA2] + [B1+B2] + [(C1XC2)+C3] + D
On this basis, the maximum score that could be assigned to a site is 17,
as follows:
MAX SCORE = (3x2) +(2+1) + (3x2+1) + 1 = 6+3+7+1 = 17

Blacksmith Institute
www.blacksmithinstitute.org

72

Blacksmith Institute
2014 Fifth Avenue
New York, New York
10035
USA
www.Blacksmithinstitute.org

