85  STAT.  ] 

PUBLIC  LAW 92-207-DEC.  18,  1971 

739 

(b)  The  per  capita  shares  shall  be  determined  on  the  basis  of  the 
number  of  persons  eligible  for  per  capitas  and  the  number  of  persons 
rejected  for  per  capitas  who  have  taken  a  timely  appeal.  The  shares 
of  those persons whose appeals are denied shall revert to the  Shoshone-
Bannock  Tribes  to  be  expended  for  any  purpose  designated  by  the 
tribal  governing body  and  approved  bjr the  Secretary. 

(c)  Sums  payable  to  enrollees or  their  heirs  or  legatees  who  are  less 
than  twenty-one  years  of  age or  who  are  under  a legal  disability  shall 
be  paid  in  accordance  with  such  procedures,  including  the  establish(cid:173)
ment  of  trusts, as the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  determines  appropriate 
to protect the best interests of such persons. 

(d)  The  funds  remaining  after  provision  is made for  the per  capita 
distribution  may  be used,  advanced,  expended,  invested,  or  reinvested 
for  any purpose authorized  by the tribal governing body  and  approved 
by the Secretary of the  Interior. 

SEC.  8.  The  funds  apportioned  to  the  Shoshone  Tribe  of  the  Wind 
River  Reservation  shall  be  placed  to  its  credit  in  the  United  States 
Treasury  and  shall be distributed  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of 
the Act of  May  19,1947, as amended  (61 Stat.  102; 25 U.S.C.  611-613). 
SEC.  9.  Any  funds  distributed  per  capita  under  provisions  of  this 

Act  shall  not  be  subject  to  Federal  or  State  income  tax. 

SEC. 10. The Secretary  of the Interior  is authorized  to prescribe  rules 

and regulations to carry out the provisions of this Act. 

Approved  December  18,  1971. 

Public  Law  92-207 

To establish the Capitol Reef National Park in the State of Utah. 

AN ACT 

He  it  enacted  hy  the  Senate  and  House  of  Representative's  of  the 
in  Congress  as.semhled^  That  (a)  subject  to 
Vnlted  States  of  America 
valid existing rights, the lands, Avaters. and interests therein within  the 
boundary  generally  depicted  on  the  map  entitled  "Boundary  Map, 
l^roposed  Capitol  Reef  Xational  Park.  L^tah,"  numbered  158-91,002, 
and  dated  January  1971,  are  hereb}'  established  as  the  Capitol  Reef 
Xational  Park  (hereinafter  referred  to as the "park"). Such map  shall 
1)e  (m  file  and  available  for  public  inspection  in  the  offices  of  the 
Xational  Park  Service,  Department  of  the  Interior. 

(b)  The  Capitol  Reef  Xational  Monument  is herebj-  abolished,  and 
any  funds  available  for  purposes  of  the  monument  shall  be  avail(cid:173)
able  for  purposes  of  the  park.  Federal  lands,  waters,  and  interests 
therein  excluded  from  the monument by this Act  shall be  administered 
by  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  (hereinafter  referred  to  as the  "Sec(cid:173)
retary")  in  accordance  with  the  laws  applicable  to  tlie  public  lands of 
the  United  States. 

SEC. 2. The  Secretary  is authorized  to  ac(iuire by  donation,  purchase 
with  donated  or  appropriated  fluids,  transfer  from  any  Federal 
agency,  exchange,  or  otherwise,  the  lands  and  interests  in 
lands 
(lescribed  in  the  first  section  of  this  Act,  except  that  lands  or  interests 
therein  owned  by  the  State  of  Utah,  or  any  political  subdivision 
thereof,  may  be  acquired  only  with  the  approval  of  such  State  or 
political  subdivision. 

75-432  0 - 7 2 - 49 

Shoshone  Tribe 

of  Wind  River 
Reservation. 

72  Stat.  5 4 1. 
Tax  exemption. 

Rules  and  regu(cid:173)

l a t i o n s. 

December  18,  1971 

[S.  29] 

Capitol  Reef 
National  Park, 
Utah. 

Establishment. 

Land  a c q u i s i(cid:173)

tion. 

740 

Grazing  priv(cid:173)

i l e g e s. 

.  Livestock 
trails,  watering 
rights. 

Administration. 

Rights-of-way. 

Report  to  P r e s i(cid:173)

dent. 

Roads,  study. 

Report  to 

Congress. 

Appropriation. 

PUBLIC  LAW 92-207-DEC.  18,  1971 

[85  STAT. 

SEC.  3.  Where  any  Federal  lands  inclnded  within  tlie  park  are 
legally  occupied  or  utilized  on  the  date  of  approval  of  this  Act  for 
<irazing  purposes,  pursuant  to  a  lease,  permit,  or  license  for  a  fixed 
term  of  years  issued  or  authorized  by  any  department,  establishment, 
or ag-ency of  the L'nited  States, the  Secretaiy  of  the Interior  shall  per(cid:173)
mit  the  pei"Sons holding  such  grazing  privileges  or  their  heirs  to  con(cid:173)
tinue  in  the  exercise  thereof  during  the  term  of  the  lease,  permit,  or 
license, and one period of  renewal  thereafter. 

SEC.  4.  Xothing  in  this  Act  shall  be  construed  as  alfecting  in  any 
way rights  of  owners  and  operators  of  cattle  and  sheep  herds,  existing 
on  the  date  immediately  prior  to  the  enactment  of  this  Act,  to  trail 
their  herds  on  traditional  courses  used  by  them  prior  to  such  date  of 
enactment,  and  to water  their  stock, notwithstanding  the  fact  that  the 
lands involving such trails  and  watering  are  situated  within  the  park: 
Provided^  That  the  Secretary  may  promulgate  reasonable  regulations 
providing for the use of such  driveways. 

SEC.  5.  (a)  The  National  Park  Service,  under  the  direction  of  the 
Secretary,  shall  administer,  protect,  and  develop  the  park,  subject  to 
the  provisions  of  the  Act  entitled  "An  Act  to  establish  a  National 
Park  Service,  and  for  other  purposes",  approved  August  25,  1916 
(39  Stat.  535)  as  amended  and  supplemented  (16  U.S.C.  1-4). 

(b)  The  Secretary  shall  grant  easements  and  rights-of-way  on  a 

nondiscriminatory  basis upon, over, under, across, or along any compo(cid:173)
nent  of  the  park  area  unless he  finds  that  the  route  of  such  easements 
and  rights-of-way  would  have  significant  adverse  effects  on 
the 
administration  of  the  park. 

(c)  Within  three  years  from  the  date  of  enactment  of  this  Act,  the 
Secretary  of  the  Interior  shall  report  to  the  President,  in  accordance 
with  subsections  3(c)  and  3(d)  of  the  Wilderness  Act  (78  Stat.  890; 
16 U.S.C. 1132  (c)  and  ( d ) ), his recommendations  as to the  suitability 
or  nonsuitability  of  any  area  within  the  park  for  preservation  as 
wilderness, and  any  designation  of  any  such  area  as a  wilderness  shall 
be in accordance with said Wilderness  Act. 

SEC.  6.  (a)  The  Secretary,  in  consultation  with  appropriate  Federal 
departments  and  appropriate  agencies  of  the  State  and  its  political 
subdivisions  shall  conduct  a study  of  proposed  road  alinements  within 
and  adjacent  to  the  park.  Such  study  shall  consider  what  roads  are 
appropriate  and  necessary  for  full  utilization  of  the  area  for  the  pur(cid:173)
poses of  this Act  as well  as to  connect  with  roads  of  ingress  and  egress 
to the  area. 

(b)  A  report  of  the  findings  and  conclusions  of  the  Secretary  shall 
be submitted to the  Congress within  tw^o years of  the  date of  enactment 
of  this  Act,  including  recommendations  for  such  further  legislation 
as  may  be  necessary  to  implement  the  findings  and  conclusions  devel(cid:173)
oped from  the  study. 

SEC.  7.  There  are  hereby  authorized  to  be  appropriated  such  sums 
as  may  be  necessary  to  carry  out  the  purposes  of  this  Act,  not  to 
exceed,  however,  $423,000  for  the  acquisition  of  lands  and  interests  in 
lands  and  not  to  exceed  $1,052,700  (April  1970  prices)  for  develop(cid:173)
ment, plus or minus such amounts, if  any, as may  be justified  by  reason 
of  ordinary  fluctuations 
in  construction  costs  as  indicated  by  engi(cid:173)
neering  cost  indexes  applicable  to  the  types  of  construction  involved 
herein.  The  sums  authorized  in  this  section  shall  be  available  for 
acquisition  and  development  undertaken  subsequent  to  the  approval 
of this Act. 

Approved  December  18,  1971. 

