Measuring the Impact of Security Breaches on Stock Valuations of Firms 

 

Sanjay Goel, Christopher Brown, Hany Shawky 

School of Business, University at Albany 

 

 
 
Abstract 

 
Security breaches can have a significant impact on the financial performance of firms. 
Information has become the most valuable asset of an organization and security breaches can 
lead to loss of confidentiality, availability, and integrity of information as well as to disruption 
of critical services. With public disclosure laws in place, security breaches of personal private 
information  of  clients  can  cause  damage  to  the  firms  reputation  and  also  lead  to  legislative 
sanctions.  The  evidence  on  the  impact  of  security  breaches  is  clear.  However,  the  impact  is 
typically  difficult  to  estimate.  In  this  research,  the  impact  of  security  breaches  on  an 
organization  is  gauged  via  the  reaction  of  the  market.  The  impact  of  public  disclosure  of 
security  breaches  on  market  valuations  is  estimated  using  the  event  study  methodology.  To 
conduct  this  study,  incidents  of  security  breaches  were  collected  over  the  last  three  years.  In 
addition, reports and news articles corresponding to these breaches were collected from public 
sources  to  accurately  determine  when  the  event  was  disclosed  publicly.  The  study  considers 
both  severity  and  type  of  breach  to  more  precisely  calibrate  market  reaction.  Data  on  stock 
returns  of  firms  obtained  from  the  CRSP  database  is  used  for  the  event  study.  This  paper 
describes our research approach, data collection, and the work that will be conducted. 

 

 
1.0 Introduction 
 
Security  breaches  can  lead  to  the  compromise  of  organizational  information,  potentially 
revealing  company  secrets  or  confidential  client  information.  Leakage  of  sensitive  information 
can have a harmful effect on the company leading to litigation, government sanctions, and loss of 
competitive edge. Organizations are reluctant to publicly reveal information concerning security 
breaches  for  fear  of  providing  information  to  other  hackers.  An  even  greater  concern  is  the 
erosion of market value that follows a public revelation of security breaches (Gordon and Loeb, 
2002).  The  severity  of  damage  caused  to  organizations  due  to  the  disclosure  can  vary 
significantly based on the amount as well as the value of information. However, we believe that 
in the past there was a disproportionate reaction of the market and the erosion of market value 
exceeded  the  actual  damage  to  the  organization.  The  disproportionate  erosion  of  market  value 
can be attributed to psychological factors.  

  

Firms  typically  institute  managerial,  technical,  and  operational  controls  in  an  attempt  to 
minimize exposure of their valuable assets. Selection of controls is an optimization problem that 
requires  balancing  the  potential  damage  against  the  cost  of  controls.  The  potential  damage  is 
estimated by the value of each asset and probability of it being damaged. The impact of controls 
on reducing the potential damage is then balanced against the cost of controls. The fundamental 
problem  in  this  approach  is  that  data  collection  is  cumbersome  and  estimates  rely  heavily  on 

In Proceedings of the 6th Annual Security Conference, April 11-12, 2007, Las Vegas, NV 

www.security-conference.org 

 
 

Pg 32-2 

 

subjective judgment of the analysts. Consequently, there can be a high level of uncertainty in the 
analysis  rendering  the  entire  process  fruitless.  In  addition,  since  technology  and  threats  change 
continually, the analysis can become obsolete quickly.  
Determining the impact  of breaches to organizations by utilizing the fluctuations in the market 
value of publicly traded companies in response to security breaches provides an efficient means 
of  computing  security  risks.  The  efficient  market  hypothesis  asserts  that  financial  markets  are 
informationally efficient, and that prices on traded assets, e.g., stocks, bonds, or property, already 
reflect  all  known  information  and  therefore  are  unbiased  in  the  sense  that  they  reflect  the 
collective beliefs of all investors about future prospects. Thus, the impact of security breaches 
can be measured by observing fluctuations of the market in response to  security breaches. The 
impact  of  different  kinds  of  breaches  should  be  reflected  in  differential  changes  to  market 
valuations. In this study, mandatory data disclosures made by organizations, that include the type 
of breach (e.g. malicious code, stolen hardware, and insider attacks) and the severity (in terms of 
the number of people impact) are identified.  By  classifying the breaches  based on severity  and 
type, the market reaction can be calibrated precisely for different types of breaches for use in risk 
analysis.  
 
The  potential  benefit  of  this  research  will  be  to  assist  organizations  in  making  sound  business 
cases  for  information  security  investments,  as  well  as  providing  better  guidance  on  managing 
public disclosure of security breaches.  Several high profile cases have been mishandled where 
organizations were not forthcoming with information and released it only under public and legal 
pressure.    This  study  has  two  main  objectives  1)  to  determine  the  market  reaction  to  security 
breaches in publicly traded organizations, and 2) quantify the impact of security breaches for risk 
analysis. 
 
An  event  study  methodology  is  employed  for  this  investigation.  We  hypothesize  that  investors 
would  react  rationally  to  breaches  and  their  response  would  be  measured  based  on  breach 
impact. Research will also examine the impact of repeated breaches on the market value of firms. 
Campell  et  al.  (2003)  have  examined  the  impact  of  security  breaches  on  market  performance; 
however, their study does not discriminate between the different types of attacks or the severity 
of  attacks.  Hovav  and  D'Arcy  (2004,  2005)  have  examined  this  effect  for  a  limited  subset  of 
attacks  (viruses,  worms,  and  denial-of-service)  but  the  relative  impact  of  the  different  types  of 
breaches is not clear. Of the utmost importance today is the impact of identity theft, which has 
led  to  the  creation  of  public  disclosure  laws  requiring  corporations  to  report  incidents  where 
customers personal information is unlawfully or accidentally revealed. Given that identity theft 
could potentially jeopardize the victims credit ratings, there is much larger publicity associated 
with these types of incidents. The impact of identity theft on the market value of publicly traded 
companies will be empirically examined using stock market data.  
 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2.0 describes the approach of Event Study 
analysis that we are planning to use and Section 3.0 describes the data collection methodology 
and Section 4.0 presents a brief summary of our work and future plans.  
 
 
 

In Proceedings of the 6th Annual Security Conference, April 11-12, 2007, Las Vegas, NV 

www.security-conference.org 

 
 
 

Pg 32-3 

 

2.0 Methodology 
 
In an event study, prices around the time of an event are examined to analyze the impact of the 
event  on  firm  valuation.  The  basic  premise  in  such  studies  is  that  if  the  market  is  rational,  the 
true  economic  effects  (detrimental  or  benign)  will  be  reflected  in  the  security  price  of  the 
affected  firm.  Three  broad  types  of  event  studies  are:  market  efficiency  studies,  information 
usefulness studies, and metric explanation studies (Henderson, 1990). Market efficiency studies 
evaluate how quickly and accurately financial markets react to information, such as earnings or 
merger announcements, while information usefulness studies determine how security prices react 
to  those  pieces  of  information  (Henderson,  1990).  Conversely,  metric  explanation  studies  use 
cross-sectional regression in an attempt to explain abnormal returns experienced around the time 
of  an  event  (Henderson,  1990).  Examining  security  price  behavior  for  organizations  that 
experienced  an  information  security  related  incident  would  shed  light  on  the  impact,  if  any,  of 
security breaches on security prices, as well as determine how quickly the market reacts to such 
news. This study is a hybrid between market efficiency and information usefulness. 
 
In  the  late  1960s,  two  influential  event  studies  were  conducted;  Ball  and  Brown  (1968) 
investigated the impact of earnings announcements, while Fama, Fisher, Jensen, and Roll (1969) 
measured market efficiency with regards to stock splits. These studies introduced the event study 
methodology  that  is  still  predominantly  employed  today.  MacKinlay  (1997)  presents  a 
comprehensive review for this type of research and clearly defines the required steps: 
 
1)  Define a window of time around the event in which the stock price is monitored: A window 
of one day around the event is typically used, however longer windows  would be useful in 
case  information  is  trickling  in  slowly  prior  to  the  event  or  if  repercussions  of  an  event 
become gradually clear after the occurrence of the event. Since the public fathoms the impact 
of security breaches slowly, a larger window might be more appropriate.   

2)  Determine  the  selection  criteria  of  firms  in  the  study:  Several  criteria,  such  as  market 
capitalization  or  business  industry  can  be  used  to  narrow  down  the  firms  in  the  corpus  to 
reduce potential biases in the study.  

3)  Determine the model for computing the abnormal return: Abnormal returns can be defined as 
the difference between the actual and the normal return of the firm over the event window.  
The normal return can be defined as the expected return when no incidents occur.  It can be 
computed using two different models 1)  constant mean return model 2)  market model. The 
constant  mean  return  model  assumes  that  the  mean  return  of  a  given  security  is  constant 
through time and the market model assumes a stable linear relation between the market return 
and the security return.  

4)  Design of the testing framework for the abnormal returns: Defining the null hypothesis and 
determining techniques for aggregating abnormal returns for individual firms. Statistical tests 
will be identified for analyzing the data. 

5)  Collection of Data for Analysis: Firms need to be identified for which event information is 
available and stock prices for those firms over that period of time need to be extracted from 
databases.  

In Proceedings of the 6th Annual Security Conference, April 11-12, 2007, Las Vegas, NV 

www.security-conference.org 

 
 
 

 

Pg 32-4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

(2) 

(1) 

 
There  are  three  essential  calculations  to  be  performed  in  an  event  study.    First,  normal 
performance  for  the  organization  must  be  estimated.  The  market  model  of  estimating  normal 
returns is a one-factor model that assumes a linear relationship between the return of the market 
portfolio  and  the  individual  security  (MacKinlay,  1997).    Specifically,  the  estimated  normal 
return for security i is defined in Equation 1. 
 
Rit = i + iRmt + it 
 
Where, Rit is the return on security i in period t and Rmt is the return on the market portfolio. it is 
the zero mean disturbance term, i is a measure of risk-adjusted performance, and i is a measure 
of  risk  (MacKinlay,  1997).  Having  estimated  the  normal  return,  abnormal  returns  can  then  be 
calculated by subtracting the normal return from the actual return as shown in Equation 2. 
 
ARit = Kit - Rit   
 
 
Where, ARit  is the abnormal return on security i in period t and Kit is the actual return on security 
I in period t. The final step is to aggregate the abnormal returns for each security in the sample.  
The cumulative abnormal return from period t1 through t2, is defined in Equation 3. 
 
CARi(t1, t2) =  ARit 
 
Although  the  event  study  structure  is  relatively  simple,  some  statistical  issues  need  to  be 
considered especially when the event window is long (typically greater than 12 months). Long-
horizon studies typically lack the ability to detect abnormal performance, and are sensitive about 
the  return  generating  process  (Kothari  &  Warner,  2006).  Short-horizon  studies,  on  the  other 
hand, generally do not suffer from these limitations (Kothari & Warner, 2006). 
 
3.0 Data Collection and Analysis 
 
The research entails collection of data on security breaches, classification of data, and correlation 
of  data  with  stock  valuations  for  firms  where  security  breaches  have  occurred  in  the  past.  The 
data required for this research includes security breach disclosures, reports in media, and stock 
market returns. The reports are available from public sources, such as Lexis Nexis, Wall Street 
Journal, PC Week, Register, etc. Several states have enacted laws to force corporations to inform 
people  possibly  affected  by  the  compromise  of  personal  information  through  breaches.  This 
information is open to pubic and has been obtained for this research. The data also contains the 
severity of each incident in terms of the number of people impacted. Eventus (CITE) is used for 
the event study  analysis, which employs the CRSP (Center for Research in Stock Prices) stock 
database.  
 
For  each  security  breach  that  was  identified,  media  reports  covering  the  security  breach  were 
collected  and  stored  in  a  database.  As  many  media  reports  as  possible  were  collected  for  each 
security  breach.  Using  the  approximate  date  of  the  security  breach  as  a  starting  point,  public 

(3) 

 

 

 

In Proceedings of the 6th Annual Security Conference, April 11-12, 2007, Las Vegas, NV 

www.security-conference.org 

 
 
 

Pg 32-5 

 

databases like Lexis Nexis were queried for media reports. Media reports that covered more than 
one  individual  security  breach  were  associated  with  each  security  breach  reported  on  (i.e.  a 
media report detailing security breaches at Wachovia and Bank of America would be associated 
with both security breaches). In the event that a single report was published in numerous media 
outlets (e.g. an Associated Press story printed in various newspapers), all reports were logged in 
the database and associated with a single report ID. Such redundancy was warranted in order to 
capture the sheer exposure of a media report.     
 
The database contains six main tables: Incident, IncidentTypes, Report, ReportOutlet, Company, 
and  Incident-NonIncident-Companies  as  shown  in  Figure  1.    The  Incident  table  contains  data 
pertaining  to  actual  security  breaches  and  has  attributes  like  company  ID  (ticker  symbol), 
incident type (e.g. stolen hardware, lost backup, fraud, etc), date (either date of internal discovery 
or first media reporting), cost associated with breach, number of people affected, and whether or 
not legal action has occurred as a result of the incident.   
 

 

Figure 1: Database Schema for the Security Breach Database 
 
The IncidentTypes table consists of only two attributes: type of security breach and a two-letter 
code associated with that type of security breach. Types of security breaches included exposed 
information (EI), fraud (FR), hackers (HA), insiders (IN), lost backup tape (LB), malicious code 
  Trojan  (MCT),  malicious  code    virus  (MCV),  malicious  code    worm  (MCW),  and  stolen 
hardware (SH). 
 
The Report table houses media report data. Each report has an original source (i.e. publication), 
author,  and  date,  and  could  be  associated  with  many  security  breaches.  As  alluded  to  earlier, 
some  reports  reference  numerous  security  breaches,  and  it  is  critically  important  to  ensure  that 
each  incident  mentioned  is  associated  with  the  report.  Related  to  the  Report  table  is  the 
ReportOutlet table. This table was used to account for the fact that some reports would be printed 
in numerous publications 
 
The Company table contains data for all companies. There are two types of companies: those that 
have  experienced  a  security  breach  and  those  that  have  not  experienced  a  security  breach.  

In Proceedings of the 6th Annual Security Conference, April 11-12, 2007, Las Vegas, NV 

www.security-conference.org 

 
 
 

Pg 32-6 

 

Regardless of the type of company, there are critical elements collected for every company.  A 
companys ticker symbol is used as the company  ID, and in order to ensure compatibility with 
the  CRSP  database,  CUSIP  (Committee  on  Uniform  Securities  Identification  Procedures) 
identifiers  were  also  obtained.  Market  capitalizations  and  revenues  were  also  retrieved  to 
determine  if  the  size  of  a  company  has  any  bearing  on  the  markets  response  to  news  of  a 
security breach. Finally, industry and sector information were collected to determine if the type 
of business affects the markets response.  For every company that experienced a security breach, 
information for one or two similar companies that did not experience a security breach was also 
logged  in  the  database.  Similarity  is  determined  on  the  basis  of  market  capitalization  and 
business  area.  The  Incident-NonIncident-Companies  table  is  used  to  correlate  companies  that 
have  experienced  a  security  breach  with  those  similar  comparison  companies  that  have  not 
experienced a security breach.     
 
4.0 Summary       
 
We  attempt  to  address  the  fundamental  issue  that  the  stock  market  valuations  are  impacted  by 
security breaches in an organization. Using the date of the first news release as the event date, we 
examine a window of 5 days before this date to test for leakage of information prior to the press 
release. Furthermore, a  window of 5 days beyond the incident is also  examined as information 
may percolate slowly to investors and delayed information may be released. We also consider a 
long  window  to  observe  the  long-term  impact  of  the  change  in  the  returns;  for  instance,  short-
term  losses  may  be  corrected  over  the  longer  term  in  case  of  an  irrational  short-term  reaction. 
While  initial  results  demonstrate  a  correlation  between  stock  market  valuations  and  security 
breaches, due diligence is still required to confirm the results of the event study and the results 
will be presented in the full version of the paper. 
 
References 
 

[1]  Campbell, K., L.A. Gordon, M. P. Loeb and L. Zhou, The Economic Cost of Publicly Announced 
Information Security Breaches: Empirical Evidence from the Stock Market, Journal of Computer 
Security, Vol. 11, No. 3, 2003.  

[2]  Gordon, L. A. and M. P. Loeb, The Economics Information Security Investment, ACM Transactions on 

Information and System Security, November 2002. 

[3]  Hovav, A. and DArcy, J. (2005). Capital Market Reaction to Defective IT Products: The Case of 

Computer Viruses, Computers & Security, Vol. 24(5) pp. 409-424. 

[4]  Hovav, A. and D'Arcy, J. (2004). The Impact of Virus Attack Announcements on the Market Value of 

Firms, Information Systems Security, Vol. 13(3) pp. 32-40. 

[5]  Dolley, J. C., Characteristics and Procedure of Common Stock Split-Ups, Harvard Bus. Rev., Apr. 1933, 

11, pp. 31626.  

[6]  MacKinlay, A.C., (1997) Event Studies in Economics and Finance, Journal of Economic Literature, 

Vol. XXXV (March 1997), pp. 1339. 

In Proceedings of the 6th Annual Security Conference, April 11-12, 2007, Las Vegas, NV 

www.security-conference.org 

 
 
 

