 

 

Article 

Cyber-Attacks and the Use of Force: Back to the 
Future of Article 2(4) 

Matthew C. Waxman 

I. 
II. 

III. 

IV. 

V. 

INTRODUCTION .............................................................................................................................. 421 
ARTICLE 2(4) AND THE MEANING OF FORCE ............................................................................ 426 
A. 
Historical Divides over Charter Interpretation ............................................................... 427 
Force as Armed Violence ..................................................................................... 427 
1. 
2. 
Force as Coercion ................................................................................................ 428 
3. 
Force as Interference ........................................................................................... 429 
B. 
Cyber-Threats and Emergent U.S. Interpretation ............................................................ 431 
C. 
An Interpretive Reorientation ........................................................................................... 437 
CYBER-ATTACKS AND CHANGING MODES OF CONFLICT ............................................................ 440 
A. 
Cold War Conflict and the U.N. Charter ......................................................................... 441 
B. 
Legal Process, Enforcement Challenges, and Technologies of Conflict .................... 443 
THE LAW OF CYBER-WARFARE AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF POWER .......................................... 448 
Cold War Power Relations and the U.N. Charter ........................................................... 449 
A. 
B. 
Technology, Power Shifts, and the Strategic Logic of Legal Interpretation ................... 450 
C. 
Divergent Interests and Implications for Charter Interpretation .................................... 454 
CONCLUSION ................................................................................................................................. 458 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

Suppose that the United States, in opposing Irans suspected development 
of nuclear weapons, decides that the best way to halt or slow Irans program is 
to undermine the Iranian banking system, calculating that the ensuing financial 
pressure would dissuade or prevent Iran from continuing on its current course. 
And further suppose that the United States draws up the following four options, 
all of which are believed likely to produce roughly the same impact on Irans 
financial system and have similar effects on Irans economy and population: 
 

(1)  Military air strikes against key Iranian banking facilities to destroy some 

of the financial systems physical infrastructure; 

  

 
 
Associate Professor, Columbia Law School; Adjunct Senior Fellow, Council on Foreign 
Relations;  Member  of  the  Hoover  Institution  Task  Force  on  National  Security  and  Law.  I  thank  the 
following  for  their  comments  on  earlier  drafts  of  this  paper:  Gabriella  Blum,  Philip  Bobbitt,  Jeffrey 
Cooper, Ashley Deeks, Joshua Dorosin, Colleen Garcia, Jack Goldsmith, Duncan Hollis, Eric Jensen, 
Sean  Kanuck,  David  Kaye,  Andrew  McLaughlin,  Saira  Mohamed,  Daniel  Prieto,  Adam  Segal,  Bo 
Simmons, Paul Stephan, Tim Wu, and workshop participants at Columbia Law School and the Hoover 
Institution Task Force on National Security and Law. 
 
 

 

422 

THE YALE JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 

[Vol. 36: 421 

(2)  A  regulatory  cut-off  of  Iranian  banks  from  the  U.S.  financial  system, 

making it difficult for Iran to conduct dollarized transactions;1 

(3)  Covert  flooding  of  the  Iranian  economy  with  counterfeit  currency  and 

other financial instruments; 

(4)  Scrambling  Iranian  banking  data  by  infiltrating  and  corrupting  its 

financial sectors computer networks. 

 
Which of these options constitute uses of force, subject to the U.N. Charters 
prohibitions and self-defense provisions? 

I pose this set of hypothetical options for several reasons. First, it is an 
exercise  in  legal  line  drawing.  The  development  and  deployment  of  new 
technologiesboth their offensive potential and the vulnerabilities they create 
for  states  reliant  on  those  technologiesraise  questions  about  permissible 
versus impermissible modes of interstate conduct and conflict. Military attacks 
are generally illegal, with exceptions for self-defense or when authorized by the 
U.N. Security Council.2 Most economic and diplomatic measures, even if they 
exact tremendous costs on target states (including significant loss of life), are 
generally not barred by the U.N. Charter, though some of them may be barred 
by  other  legal  principles.3  Where  along  the  spectrum  of  permissible  to 
impermissible conduct do various types of cyber-attacks lie? 

Definitions of cyber-attacks vary, and the range of hostile activities that 
can  be  carried  out  over  information  networks  is  immense,  ranging  from 
malicious hacking and defacement of websites to large-scale destruction of the 
military  or  civilian  infrastructures  that  rely  on  those  networks.  By  cyber-
attacks  I  mean  efforts  to  alter,  disrupt,  or  destroy  computer  systems  or 
networks  or  the  information  or  programs  on  them,4  which  is  still  a  broad 
category. That breadthencompassing activities that range in target (military 
versus  civilian,  public  versus  private),  consequences  (minor  versus  major, 
direct versus indirect),  and duration  (temporary  versus  long-term)is  part  of 
what  makes  international  legal  interpretation  or  regulation  in  this  area  so 
difficult. 

Global 

through 

interconnectedness  brought  about 

For a discussion of this capability, see Juan C. Zarate, Harnessing the Financial Furies: 

linked  digital 
information networks brings immense benefits, but it also places a new set of 
offensive weapons in the hands of states and nonstate actors, including terrorist 
groups.5  Military  defense  networks  can  be  remotely  disabled  or  damaged.6 
 
 
Smart Financial Power and National Security, WASH. Q., Oct. 2009, at 43. 
See infra notes 19-31 and accompanying text. 
 
See infra notes 32-36 and accompanying text. 
 
 
This definition is based heavily on the one used in COMM. ON OFFENSIVE INFO. WARFARE, 
NATL RESEARCH COUNCIL, TECHNOLOGY, POLICY, LAW, AND ETHICS REGARDING U.S. ACQUISITION 
AND USE OF CYBERATTACK CAPABILITIES 10-11 (2009) [hereinafter NRC COMMITTEE REPORT]. 
 
Estimates vary widely about the threat of cyber-attacks and cyber-war. Former Director of 
National Intelligence Michael McConnell argues that [t]he United States is fighting a cyber-war today, 
and we are losing. . . . As the most wired nation on Earth, we offer the most targets of significance, yet 
our cyber-defenses are woefully lacking. Mike McConnell, To Win the Cyber-War, Look to the Cold 
War,  WASH.  POST,  Feb.  28,  2010,  at  B1.  Others  experts  believe  that  cyber-espionagestealing 
government and corporate secrets through infiltration of information systemsis a major challenge, but 
 

1. 

2. 
3. 
4. 

5. 

 

2011] 

Cyber-Attacks and the Use of Force 

423 

Private sector networks can be infiltrated, disrupted, or destroyed.7 Denial of 
service attacksflooding an Internet site, server, or router with data requests 
to  overwhelm  its  capacity  to  functioncan  be  used  to  take  down  major 
information networks. This method of attack was demonstrated in Estonia (one 
of the most wired nations in the world) during a period of diplomatic tensions 
with Russia in 2007,8 when such attacks disrupted government and commercial 
functions  for  weeks,  including  banking,  media,  and  communications.9  More 
recently,  it  has  been  widely  reported  that  a  computer  code  dubbed  Stuxnet, 
perhaps  created  and  deployed  by  the  United  States  or  Israel,  infected  and 
significantly impaired Irans uranium enrichment program by disrupting parts 
of its control system.10 

The  London-based  International  Institute  for  Strategic  Studies  recently 
highlighted the growing consensus that future conflicts may feature the use 
of cyber-warfare to disable a countrys infrastructure, meddle with the integrity 
of  another  countrys  internal  military  data,  try  to  confuse  its  financial 
transactions or to accomplish any number of other possibly crippling aims.11 A 
 
that  threat  assessments  of  major  cyber-attacks  are  overblown.  See  Seymour  M.  Hersh,  The  Online 
Threat, NEW YORKER, Nov. 1, 2010, at 44, 48. 
 
Many experts assess that terrorist or criminal groups pose cyber-threats, too, but that for now the 
greatest  potential  for  damage  through  cyber-attacks  lies  with  a  handful  of  states.  See  CTR.  FOR 
STRATEGIC & INTL STUDIES, SECURING CYBERSPACE FOR THE 44TH PRESIDENCY 13 (2008), available 
at  http://csis.org/files/media/csis/pubs/081208_securingcyberspace_44.pdf 
(Our  most  dangerous 
opponents  are  the  militaries  and  intelligence  services  of  other  nations.  They  are  sophisticated,  well 
resourced, and persistent. Their intentions are clear, and their successes are notable.); Bill Gertz, China 
Bolsters for Cyber Arms Race with U.S., WASH. TIMES, May 12, 2009, at A1 (discussing Russia and 
China  as  the  main  peers  to  the  United  States  in  cyber-warfare  capability).  This  is  not  to  deny  that 
terrorist  or  criminal  groups  also  pose  a  significant  threat.  See  William  J.  Lynn  III,  Defending  a  New 
Domain: The Pentagons Cyberstrategy, FOREIGN AFF., Sept./Oct. 2010, at 97, 101. Thus far, however, 
terrorist groups have focused their cyber-activities on propaganda. See War in the Fifth Domain: Are the 
Mouse  and  Keyboard  the  New  Weapons  of  Conflict?,  ECONOMIST,  July  1,  2010,  at  25,  27.  The 
possibility that terrorist groups or other nonstate or private actors might resort to cyber-attacks would 
also raise questions of state attribution. For example, questions arise as to whether actions by nonstate 
actors  may  legally  be  imputed  to  a  state  that  allowed  the  cyber-attacks  to  occur  in  its  territory  or 
supported  the  attackers  in  other  ways.  The  fact  that  a  state  may  use  a  third-party  states  territory, 
infrastructure,  or  information  systems  as  part  of  an  offensive  or  defensive  cyber-operation  also 
implicates  a  host  of  self-defense  issues  and  questions  under  neutrality  law.  For  a  discussion  of  these 
issues, see Eric Talbot Jensen, Computer Attacks on Critical National Infrastructure: A Use of Force 
Invoking the Right of Self-Defense, 38 STAN. J. INTL L. 207, 232-39 (2002); see also infra note 171 
(noting issues involved with attempting to attribute nonstate actors attacks to state supporters). 
See Lynn, supra note 5, at 97. 
 
For a discussion of offensive cyber-attack capabilities and scenarios, see id. at 100-01. 
 
 
See  Evgeny  Morozov,  The  Fog  of  Cyberwar,  NEWSWEEK  (Apr.  18,  2009),  http://www
.newsweek.com/2009/04/17/the-fog-of-cyberwar.html;  John  Schwartz,  When  Computers  Attack,  N.Y. 
TIMES, June 24, 2007, at 1; Ian Traynor, Russia Accused of Unleashing Cyberwar To Disable Estonia, 
GUARDIAN, May 17, 2007, at 1. 
 
See  Scott  J.  Shackelford,  From  Nuclear  War  to  Net  War:  Analogizing  Cyber  Attacks  in 
International Law, 27 BERKELEY J.  INTL  L. 192, 193-94 (2009). According to the Estonian Defense 
Minister, All major commercial banks, telcos, media outlets, and name serversthe phone books of the 
Internetfelt the impact, and this affected the majority of the Estonian population. This was the first 
time that a botnet threatened the national security of  an entire nation.  Joshua Davis, Web War One, 
WIRED, Sept. 2007, at 165, 165 (quoting the Estonian Defense Minister). 
 
E. Sanger, Iran Fights Malware Attacking Computers, N.Y. TIMES, Sept. 26, 2010, at 4. 
11.  Press Release, John Chipman, Dir.-Gen. & Chief Exec., Intl Inst. for Strategic Studies, 
 
Military Balance 2010Press Statement (Feb. 3, 2010), available at http://www.iiss.org/publications/
military-balance/the-military-balance-2010/military-balance-2010-press-statement/. 
 
 

10.  See Ken Dilanian, Iran and the Era of Cyber War, L.A. TIMES, Jan. 17, 2011, at A1; David 

6. 
7. 
8. 

9. 

 

424 

THE YALE JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 

[Vol. 36: 421 

and 

creates 

U.N.-convened panel of governmental experts recently echoed that conclusion, 
noting that existing and potential threats in the sphere of information security 
are  among  the  most  serious  challenges of  the  twenty-first  century.  .  . .  Their 
effects carry significant risk for public safety, the security of nations and the 
stability of the globally linked international community as a whole.12 In short, 
electronic 
tremendous 
vulnerabilities,  and  some  experts  speculate  that  the  United  States  may  be 
especially  at  risk  because  of  its  high  economic  and  military  dependency  on 
networked information technology.13 

interconnectivity 

informational 

Computer  information  system  capabilities  and  vulnerabilities  raise 
international legal questions of tremendous public policy import. What are the 
permissible  uses  of  offensive  cyber-capabilities?  To  what  extent  is  existing 
international law adequate to regulate these capabilities today and in the future? 
And what international legal authority do states have to respond, including with 
military  force,  to  cyber-attacks  or  cyber-threats  by  states  or  nonstate  actors? 
Note that I am concerned here with jus ad bellum issuesincluding whether 
cyber-attacks constitute an act of aggression or would justify resort to armed 
force  in  responsebut  not  jus  in  bello  issues,  that  is,  how  the  laws  of  war 
would govern the use of cyber-attacks during an ongoing armed conflict.14 

Besides illustrating some new interpretive challenges with regard to the 
U.N. Charter, another reason I pose the opening hypothetical is to illustrate that 
legal  line  drawing  with  respect  to  cyber-attacks  will  produce  winners  and 
losers,  and  to  illuminate  the  implications  of  those  disparate  effects  for 
international legal development. States have different capabilities and different 
vulnerabilities  to  those  capabilities.  Not  all  states,  for  example,  have  the 
financial and trade muscle to coerce other states economically, and states have 
varying  strength  to  withstand  economic  pressure.  The  same  is  true  of  cyber-
attack  and  defense  capabilities,  so  legal  rules  that  affect  the  costs  of  using 
cyber-attacks  have  disparate  strategic  consequences.  Legal  line  drawing  with 
respect  to  the  use  of  force  and  modes  of  conflict  has  distributive  effects  on 
power,  and  is  therefore  likely  to  be  shaped  by  power  relations.15  For  major 
 
 
in the Context of Intl Sec., 65th Sess.,  1, U.N. Doc. A/65/201 (July 30, 2010). 
 
13.  See NRC COMMITTEE REPORT, supra note 4, at 18-20; Walter Gary Sharp, Sr., The Past, 
Present, and Future of Cybersecurity, 4 J. NATL SECURITY L. & POLY 13 (2010). For a discussion of 
early U.S. government concerns about such vulnerabilities during the 1990s, see Charles J. Dunlap, Jr., 
How  We  Lost  the  High-Tech  War  of  2007:  A  Warning  from  the  Future,  WKLY.  STANDARD,  Jan.  29, 
1996, at 22; and Mark Thompson & Douglas Waller, Onward Cyber Soldiers, TIME, Aug. 21, 1995, at 
38. 
14.  For a discussion of jus in bello issues in relation to cyber-attacks, see, for example, NRC 
 
COMMITTEE REPORT, supra note 4, at 262-68. In many future cases, the most vexing legal questions will 
not involve whether a cyber-attack alone is legally prohibited or justifies self-defense, but rather whether 
cyber-attacks are a legal means of engaging in a conflict that has already erupted. A useful illustration is 
Russias  alleged  cyber-attacks  on  Georgian  public  and  private  information  networks  during  the  2008 
conflict  amid  significant  conventional  military  operations.  See  2  REPORT  OF  THE  INDEPENDENT 
INTERNATIONAL  FACT-FINDING  MISSION  ON  THE  CONFLICT  IN  GEORGIA  217-19  (2009),  available  at 
http://www.ceiig.ch/pdf/IIFFMCG_Volume_II.pdf. 
 
15.  For a discussion of the distributive effects of international use of force rules, see Matthew 
C. Waxman, Self-Defense and the Limits of WMD Intelligence, in FUTURE CHALLENGES IN NATIONAL 
SECURITY AND LAW 14-15 (Peter Berkowitz ed., 2010), available at http://www.hoover.org/taskforces/
 

12.  See Rep. of the Grp. of Governmental Experts on Dev. in the Field of Info. & Telecomm. 

 

2011] 

Cyber-Attacks and the Use of Force 

425 

actors  like  the  United  States,  aligning  legal  interpretation  with  strategic 
interests  is  exceptionally  difficult  because  the  future  effects  of  information 
technology on power and conflict remain so uncertain. 

To  better  understand  contemporary  relationships  between  international 
law regulating force and cutting-edge technologies, this Article looks backward 
in time to international legal disputes and scholarly debates of the Cold War. A 
central theme is that these fundamental issues are not entirely new or unique to 
cyber-technology, even if they have new dimensions that make them harder to 
solve  or  navigate.  Modes  and  technologies  of  conflict  change,  and  the  law 
adjusts  with  varying  degrees  of  success  to  deal  with  them.16  Throughout  the 
U.N.  Charter  regimes  sixty-plus  years  of  development,  the  means  by  which 
states and international actors wage conflict has changed so dramatically that 
every  so  often  major  international  legal  figures  debate  whether  the  Charters 
most  basic  tenets  are  dead.17  Cyber-warfare  capabilities  and  vulnerabilities 
will  strain  the  Charter  and  its  basic  prohibition  on  force  once  again,  and  the 
lessons of history can help us understand how. 

This Article makes two overarching arguments. First, strategy is a major 
driver  of legal  evolution. Most  scholarship  and  commentary  on cyber-attacks 
capture  only  one  dimension  of  this  point,  focusing  on  how  international  law 
might  be  interpreted  or  amended  to  take  account  of  new  technologies  and 
threats.  The  focus  here,  however,  is  on  the  dynamic  interplay  of  law  and 
strategystrategy  generates  reappraisal  and  revision  of  law,  while  law  itself 
shapes strategyand the moves and countermoves among actors with varying 
interests, capabilities, and vulnerabilities. The purpose is not to come down in 
favor of one legal interpretation or another, and the conclusions are necessarily 
speculative  because  no  governments  speak  in  much  detail  about  their  cyber-
warfare capabilities and strategies at this point. There are downside risks and 
tensions inherent in any plausible approach, though, and this analysis helps in 
understanding their implications. 

interests 

that  will  pull 

Second,  it  will  be  difficult  to  achieve  international  agreement  on  legal 
interpretation  and  to  enforce  it  with  respect  to  cyber-attacks.18  The  current 
trajectory  of  U.S.  interpretation  is  a  reasonable  effort  to  overcome  the 
translation  problems  inherent  in  a  U.N.  Charter  built  for  a  different  era  of 
conflict.  However,  not  only  do  certain  features  of  cyber-activities  make 
international  legal  regulation  very  difficult,  but  major  actors  also  have 
divergent  strategic 
their  preferred  doctrinal 
interpretations and aspirations in different directions, impeding formation of a 
 
national-security/challenges. 
 
16.  See Yoram Dinstein, Computer Network Attacks and Self-Defense, 76 INTL L. STUD. 99, 
114-15 (2002) (The novelty of a weaponany weaponalways baffles statesmen and lawyers, many 
of whom are perplexed by technological innovation. . . . [A]fter a period of gestation, it usually dawns 
on belligerent parties that there is no insuperable difficulty in applying the general principles and rules 
of international law to the novel weapon . . . .). 
17.  See, e.g., David Wippman, The Nine Lives of Article 2(4), 16 MINN. J. INTL L. 387 (2007). 
 
 
18. 
In that regard, I am less sanguine than scholars like Anthony DAmato, who predict[s] 
that attacks on the Internet will soon be seen as clearly illegal under international law and suggests that 
customary  international  law  [may  have]  already  reached  that  position.  Anthony  DAmato, 
International Law, Cybernetics, and Cyberspace, 76 INTL L. STUD. 59, 67 (1999). 
 
 

 

426 

THE YALE JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 

[Vol. 36: 421 

stable  international  consensus.  U.S.  policymakers  should  therefore  prepare  to 
operate in a highly contested and uncertain legal environment. The prescription 
is  not  to  abandon  interpretive  or  multilateral  legal  efforts  to  regulate  cyber-
attacks; rather, it is to recognize the likely limits of these efforts and to consider 
the  implications  of  legal  proposals  or  negotiations  in  the  context  of  broader 
security strategy. 

The  Article  proceeds  as  follows.  Part  II  dissects  a  long-running  debate 
over the meaning of force and armed attack in Articles 2(4) and 51 of the 
U.N. Charter, and examines the challenges of fitting cyber-attacks into existing 
legal categories. This Part does not offer a doctrinal conclusion about where the 
lines  should  ultimately  be  drawn,  though  it  discusses  the  most  salient  merits 
and  problems  of  alternative  interpretations.  Instead,  this  Part  uses  the 
hypothetical  options  laid  out  above  as  a  way  to  illustrate  the  implications  of 
competing  interpretations,  which  echo  past  interpretive  disputes.  It  also 
describes the general thrust of U.S. government doctrinal thinking about cyber-
warfare  and  the  regulation  of  force,  which  emphasizes  the  effects  of  cyber-
attacks in analyzing whether they cross the U.N. Charters legal thresholds. 

Part III considers parallels between cyber-warfare and the low-intensity 
conflict or proxy warfare waged by the superpowers and their clients during 
the Cold War. As in that latter context, the low visibility of states moves and 
countermoves in cyberspace will slow the process of interpretive development. 
This Part draws on Cold War lessons to argue that Article 2(4) will probably be 
a weak constraint on offensive cyber-attacks because of, among other reasons, 
the  difficulty  of  observing  them  and  attributing  them  to  their  sources  or 
sponsors.  Those  weaknesses  will  also  likely  plague  any  attempt  to  negotiate 
and enforce new international agreements limiting cyber-warfare. 

Part IV draws again on early Charter history to argue that interpretations 
of Articles 2(4) and 51 have distributive effects on power and therefore have 
strategic  consequences.  Rather  than  urging  one  interpretation  or  another,  this 
Part aims to shed light on the strategic logic likely driving U.S. legal thinking, 
and it urges a more cautious and multidimensional assessment than is usually 
found in this burgeoning scholarly field. Whether emergent U.S. interpretations 
of  the  Charter  serve  U.S.  interests  or  broader  international  societal  goals  of 
global  order  depends  on  the  validity  of  assumptions  about  an  unpredictable 
future security environment. 

II.  ARTICLE 2(4) AND THE MEANING OF FORCE 

Modern legal regulation of the use of force begins with the U.N. Charter, 
specifically  Article  2(4).  That  provision  directs  that  [a]ll  Members  shall 
refrain in their international relations from the threat or use of force against the 
territorial  integrity  or  political  independence  of  any  state,  or  in  any  other 
manner inconsistent with the Purposes of the United Nations.19 Article 51 of 
the Charter then provides that [n]othing in the present Charter shall impair the 

 
 
 

19.  U.N. Charter art. 2, para. 4. 

 

2011] 

Cyber-Attacks and the Use of Force 

427 

inherent right of individual or collective self-defence if an armed attack occurs 
against a Member of the United Nations.20 Although there is significant debate 
about  the  scope  of  the  self-defense  right  to  resort  to  military  force,  it  is 
generally  agreed  that  Article  51  carves  out  an  exception  to  Article  2(4)s 
otherwise strict prohibition of force,21 and it is widely understood that armed 
attack is, although closely related, a narrower category than threat or use of 
force.22 

With  respect to  offensive  cyber-capabilities  and  the  U.N.  Charter, then, 
these provisions raise two major issues. First, in terms of Article 2(4), might 
certain  types  of  cyber-attacks  constitute  a  prohibited  use  of  force?  This 
question  has  to  do  with  whether  the  existing  legal  framework  imposes 
significant  constraints  on  hostile  cyber-activities.  Second,  in  terms  of  Article 
51, might a cyber-attack give rise to a right to use military force in response?23 
This question raises the additional issue of what remedies are available to states 
that suffer cyber-attacks or threats of them. 

A.  Historical Divides over Charter Interpretation 

Article 2(4)s express prohibition is both straightforward and ambiguous. 
It  is  direct  and  absolute  on  its  face,  yet,  as  Oscar  Schachter  observed,  [t]he 
paragraph  is  complex  in  its  structure[,]  and  nearly  all  of  its  key  terms  raise 
questions of interpretation.24 As the opening hypothetical helps illustrate, new 
technologies raise interpretive puzzles with echoes of previous eras. 

1. 

Force as Armed Violence 

Id. art. 51. 

20. 
21.  See THOMAS M. FRANCK, RECOURSE TO FORCE: STATE ACTION AGAINST THREATS AND 

The dominant view in the United States and among its major allies has 
long  been  that  the  Article  2(4)  prohibition  of  force  and  the  complementary 
Article 51 right of self-defense apply to military attacks or armed violence.25 
 
 
 
ARMED ATTACKS 45-52 (2002). 
 
22.  See Albrecht Randelzhofer, Article  51, in 1 THE CHARTER  OF  THE UNITED NATIONS:  A 
COMMENTARY 788, 796 (Bruno Simma ed., 2d ed. 2002). The U.S. position on this issue, which differs 
from that of many states and authorities, is discussed infra Section II.C. 
23.  For  a  survey  of  approaches  to  these  legal  questions,  see  Daniel  B.  Silver,  Computer 
 
Network Attack as a Use of Force Under Article 2(4) of the United Nations Charter, 76 INTL L. STUD. 
73 (2002). There is continuing debate about whether there is a gap between Articles 2(4) and 51, insofar 
as a use of force prohibited by Article 2(4) might not be sufficient to trigger a right to use military force 
in self-defense. See Randelzhofer, supra note 22, at 790. 
 
(1984). 
 
25.  See NRC COMMITTEE REPORT, supra note 4, at 253 (Traditional [law of armed conflict] 
emphasizes  death  or  physical  injury  to  people  and destruction  of physical  property  as  criteria  for  the 
definitions of use of force and armed attack.); Tom J. Farer, Political and Economic Coercion in 
Contemporary  International  Law,  79  AM.  J.  INTL  L.  405,  408-09  (1985)  (describing  two  main 
interpretations of Articles 2(4) and 51, and arguing that only the one wherein the only justification for 
force is prior (or imminent) armed force by ones adversary is logically sound); Albrecht Randelzhofer, 
Article 2(4), in 1 THE CHARTER OF THE UNITED NATIONS: A COMMENTARY, supra note 22, at 112, 117 
(noting that the term force, as used in Article 2(4) is, according to the correct and prevailing view, 
limited to armed force); Bert V. A. Roling, The Ban on the Use of Force and the U.N. Charter, in THE 
CURRENT LEGAL REGULATION OF THE USE OF FORCE 3, 3 (A. Cassese ed., 1986) (It seems obvious to 
 
 

24.  Oscar Schachter, The Right of States To Use Armed Force, 82 MICH. L. REV. 1620, 1624 

 

428 

THE YALE JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 

[Vol. 36: 421 

The plain meaning of the text supports this view, as do other structural aspects 
of the U.N. Charter. For example, the Charters preamble sets out the goal that 
armed  force  .  .  .  not  be  used  save  in  the  common  interest.26  Similarly, 
Articles 41 and 42 authorize, respectively, the Security Council to take actions 
not  involving  armed  force  and,  should  those  measures  be  inadequate,  to 
escalate to armed force.27 Moreover, Article 51 speaks of self-defense against 
armed  attacks.28  There  are  textual  counter-arguments,  such  as  that  Article 
51s  more  specific  limit  to  armed  attacks  suggests  that  drafters  envisioned 
prohibited  force  as  a  broader  category  not  limited  to  particular  methods. 
However, the discussions of means throughout the Charter and the documents 
negotiating  history  strongly  suggest  the  drafters  intention  to  regulate  armed 
force  differently  and  more  strictly  than  other  coercive  instruments.29  This 
interpretation has generally prevailed over alternatives outlined below. 

Under  the  strictest  version  of  this  approach,  only  the  first  scenario 
described  abovea  military  strike  against  Iranian  banking  facilitiescould 
violate  Article  2(4)  (unless  it  were  authorized  by  the  Security  Council  or 
justified  as  self-defense)  or  could  itself  give  rise  to  a  right  of  armed  self-
defense.30 The other scenarios (financial regulatory measures, covert economic 
disruptions, or computer network attacks) may or may not be unlawful under 
international law for other reasons,31 but only the first involves an attack with 
military violence. 

2. 

Force as Coercion 

Id. arts. 41-42. 
Id. art. 51. 

Another  view  of  Article  2(4)  reads  its  purpose  more  expansively  and 
looks not at the instrument used but its general effect: that it prohibits coercion. 
Armed  force  is  only  one  instrument  of  coercion,  and  the  easiest  to  identify. 
This interpretation of Article 2(4) stresses its purpose over its text. At various 
times,  some  statesusually  those  of  the  developing  world,  and,  during  the 
Cold  War,  often  with  Soviet  bloc  support32pushed  the  notion  that  force 
 
the present writer that the force referred to in Art. 2(4) is military force.). 
26.  U.N. Charter pmbl. (emphasis added). 
 
27. 
 
28. 
 
 
29.  See Michael N. Schmitt, Computer Network Attack and the Use of Force in International 
Law: Thoughts on a Normative Framework, 37 COLUM. J. TRANSNATL L. 885, 905 (1999); see also 
Marco Roscini, World Wide WarfareJus ad Bellum and the Use of Cyber Force, 14 MAX PLANCK 
Y.B.  UNITED  NATIONS  L.  85,  105  (2010)  (noting  that  early  Charter  history  and  [t]he  travaux 
preparatoires also reveal that the drafters did not intend to extend the prohibition to economic coercion 
and political pressures.). 
 
30.  Although  this  example  raises  a  separate  legal  question  as  to  whether  such  an  attack  on 
civilian infrastructure would violate the jus in bello principle of distinction, as previously mentioned this 
Article focuses on jus ad bellum issues. 
 
31.  See infra note 60; see also Military and Paramilitary Activities in and Against Nicaragua 
(Nicar. v. U.S.), 1986 I.C.J. 14,  202 (June 27) (The principle of non-intervention involves the right of 
every sovereign State to conduct its affairs without outside interference. . . . Expressions of an opinio 
juris regarding the existence of this principle . . . are numerous . . . .). 
 
32.  For  an  influential  Soviet  perspective,  see  GRIGORI  TUNKIN,  LAW  AND  FORCE  IN  THE 
INTERNATIONAL  SYSTEM  (Progress  Publishers  trans.,  1985).  Tunkin  wrote  that  [i]n  the  literature  of 
socialist  states  on  international  law  a  broad  interpretation  of  force  is  defended,  while  a  narrow 
interpretation of that concept prevails in the literature of capitalist states according to which force in 
 

 

2011] 

Cyber-Attacks and the Use of Force 

429 

includes  other  forms  of  pressure,  including  political  and  economic  coercion 
threatening to state autonomy.33 Debates similar to that over the definition of 
force and armed attack in Articles 2(4) and 51 have played out in the U.N. 
General Assembly over the definition of aggression, with the United States 
and its Western allies pushing a narrow definition focused on military attacks, 
and developing states pushing an expansive definition including other forms of 
coercion or economic pressure.34 

Under this approach, any or all of the four hypothesized scenarios could 
conceivably  constitute  prohibited  force.  Each  is  intended  and  is  likely  to 
exert coercive pressure on Iran to forego its nuclear ambitions by exacting or 
threatening  crippling  costs  to  its  financial  sector.  A  further  extension  of  this 
approach might go so far as to say that economic coercion could be so intense 
as to justify armed force in self-defense under Article 51.35 One problem with 
this  approach  has  always  been  the  difficulty  of  distinguishing  unlawful 
coercion  from  lawful  pressure.  After  all,  coercion  in  a  general  sense  is  ever-
present  in  international  affairs  and  a  part  of  everyday  diplomacy  and 
statecraft.36 

3. 

Force as Interference 

A third possible approach to interpreting Articles 2(4) and 51 would focus 
on the violation and defense of rightsspecifically, a states right of sovereign 
dominion. Such an approach ties the concept of force to improper interference 
with the rights of other states, focusing on the object and specific character of a 
states actions rather than a narrow set of means or their coercive effect.37 The 
 
the sense employed in the United Nations Charter refers only to armed force. Id. at 82. He went on to 
write that [t]here is no doubt that the use of economic force, for example, by one or more states against 
one or more other states may represent a very considerable threat to the political independence of states, 
particularly  if  they  are  small,  and  may  produce  a  significant  destabilisation  of  international  relations 
. . . . Id. However, the Soviet bloc did not always side with the developing world on these questions: 
[I]n the realm of force two groupings (socialist and developing countries) tend to agree only up to a 
point, whereas on certain issues the goals and interests of the USSR coincide with those of the U.S. and 
a few Western Great Powers. Antonio Cassese, Return to Westphalia? Considerations on the Gradual 
Erosion of the Charter System, in THE CURRENT LEGAL REGULATION OF THE USE OF FORCE, supra note 
25, at 505, 508. 
 
33.  See AHMED M. RIFAAT, INTERNATIONAL AGGRESSION: A STUDY OF THE LEGAL CONCEPT 
120, 234 (1980); Hans Kelsen, General International Law and the Law of the United Nations, in THE 
UNITED NATIONS: TEN YEARS LEGAL PROGRESS 1, 5 (1956) (It is . . . quite possible to interpret this 
provision to mean the Members are forbidden not only to use armed force, but also non-armed force 
constituted  by  an  illegal  action  directed  against  another  Member  without  its  consent  .  .  .  .); 
Randelzhofer, supra note 22, at 118 (The developing countries and formerly the Eastern bloc countries 
have repeatedly claimed that the prohibition of the use of force also comprises other forms of force, for 
instance, political and, in particular, economic coercion.). 
34.  See JULIUS STONE, CONFLICT THROUGH CONSENSUS 115-36 (1977). 
 
 
35.  See Oscar Schachter, In Defense of International Rules on the Use of Force, 53 U. CHI. L. 
REV. 113, 121-44 (1986) (discussing pressures to revise the limits on self-defense drawn by the U.N. 
Charter but arguing against moves to do so). 
 
36.  See Farer, supra note 25, at 406; Alexander L. George, Coercive Diplomacy: Definition 
and Characteristics, in THE LIMITS OF COERCIVE DIPLOMACY 7, 7-11 (Alexander L. George & William 
E. Simons eds., 2d ed. 1994). 
 

37.  As Quincy Wright explained in 1960: 
Domain,  like  property  in  systems  of  national  law,  implies  the  right  to  use,  enjoy  and 
transfer without interference from others, and the obligation to each state to respect the 

 

 

 

430 

THE YALE JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 

[Vol. 36: 421 

issue  of  subversive  intervention,  or  interference  with  other  states  political 
systems,  was  of  particular  concern  in  the  U.N.  General  Assembly  during  the 
early  Cold  War.38  States  advocating  expansive  interpretations  of  prohibited 
force that would include subversion sought to hermetically seal their domestic 
system  from  outside  interference  while  still  participating  in  the  broader 
international political community. In a similar way, some states today want the 
benefits  of  international  informational  connectivity  while  insulating  their 
computer  and  communication  networks  from  outside  influences  or  intrusions 
deemed hostile or undermining. 

Reading Article 2(4)s prohibition of force to include such intrusion into 
another  sovereigns  domain  would  lead  to  the  conclusion  that  the  fourth 
scenario  abovecyber-attackis  equally  prohibited  as  the  first  and  third
military  attacks  and  covert  financial  intrusion.39  The  secondfinancial 
sanctionsmight  be  excluded  from  the  prohibition  on  the  ground  that  the 
United  States  has  its  own  sovereign  right  to  choose  with  whom  it  wants  to 
conduct commerce. 

Like  past  efforts  to  define  Article  2(4)  force  as  coercion,  efforts  to 
expand  its  coverage  beyond  armed  force  so  as  to  include  violations  of 
sovereign  domain  such  as  propaganda  or  political  subversion  never  gained 
significant  traction.40  Pragmatic  considerations  precluded  the  much  broader 
interpretation,41 though this alternative approach raises the question of whether 
cyber-attacks  might  be  analogized  to  other  covert  efforts,  like  propaganda 
campaigns, to undermine political or economic systems.42 

 

domain of others. The precise definition of this obligation is the major contribution which 
international law can make toward maintaining the peaceful co-existence of states. 

Quincy Wright, Subversive Intervention, 54 AM. J. INTL L. 521, 528 (1960). 
38.  See Declaration on the Inadmissibility of Intervention into the Domestic Affairs of States 
 
and the Protection of Their Independence and Sovereignty, G.A. Res. 2131,  1-2, U.N. GAOR, 20th 
Sess.,  Supp.  No.  14,  U.N.  Doc.  A/6014,  at  12  (Dec.  21,  1965)  ([A]ll  .  .  .  forms  of  interference  or 
attempted  threats  against  the  personality  of  the  State  or  against  its  political,  economic  and  cultural 
elements, are condemned. . . . No State may use or encourage the use of economic, political or any other 
type of measures to coerce another State in order to obtain from it the subordination of the exercise of its 
sovereign rights or to secure from it advantages of any kind.). 
 
To  be  sure,  the  United  States  and  other  states  were  not  always  completely  consistent  in  their 
interpretations,  especially  in  light  of  the  geostrategic  context.  An  early  crisis  for  the  United  States 
involved  alleged  Yugoslavian,  Albanian,  and  Bulgarian  support  for  guerrilla  movements  inside  U.S.-
allied  Greece.  In  seeking  U.N.  Security  Council  consideration  of  the  issue,  the  U.S.  ambassador 
explained that [i]nvasion by organized armies is not the only means for delivering an attack against a 
countrys  independence.  Force  is  effectively  used  today  through  devious  methods  of  infiltration, 
intimidation and subterfuge. U.N. SCOR, 2d Year, 147th mtg. at 1120, U.N. Doc. S/360 (1947). 
 
Doc. A/CN.4/25 (discussing whether fomenting civil strife could constitute aggression). 
40.  Wright, supra note 37, at 529 (It is clear that [its provisions] prohibit only the threat or 
 
use of armed force or an armed attack. They cannot be construed to include other hostile acts such as 
propaganda, infiltration or subversion.). 
 
41.  See FRANCK, supra note 21, at 75 ([D]uring the Cold War, a fairly bright line may be said 
to have been drawn between . . . a states export of revolution by direct or indirect military action . . . 
and  .  .  .  a  states  export  of  revolution  by  propaganda,  cultural  subversion,  and  other  non-military 
assistance.); Wright, supra note 37, at 529-30. 
 
42.  For a discussion of international law regulating covert political and economic activities, 
see  Lori  Fisler  Damrosch,  Politics  Across  Borders:  Nonintervention  and  Nonforcible  Influence  over 
Domestic Affairs, 83 AM. J. INTL L. 1 (1989). 
 

39.  Cf. Summary Records of the 56th Meeting, [1950] 2 Y.B. INTL L. COMMN 123-24, U.N. 

 

2011] 

Cyber-Attacks and the Use of Force 

431 

B.  Cyber-Threats and Emergent U.S. Interpretation 

To whatever extent Article 2(4)s meaning was settled and stable by the 
end of the Cold War, and to the extent that this meaning generally favored a 
narrow  focus  on  military  violence,  cyber-warfare  will  challenge  and  test  the 
Charters  bounds.  Offensive  cyber-attack  capabilities,  such  as  inserting 
malicious computer code to take down public or private information systems or 
functions  that  rely  on  them,  bear  some  similarities  to  kinetic  military  force, 
economic coercion, and subversion. At the same time, cyber-attacks also have 
unique characteristics and are evolving rapidly and in unpredictable ways. 

To  deal  with  these  challenges,  some  scholars  and  policy  experts 
emphasize the need for clarity in interpreting Articles 2(4) and 51s application 
to  cyber-attacks.43  Government  officials  considering  offensive  and  defensive 
options need to understand legal bounds and risks, the argument often goes.44 
Others  emphasize  the  need  for  new  legal  instruments,  reasoning  that  the 
ambiguity or indeterminacy of Charter provisions and jus ad bellum doctrine as 
applied in this context is best solved through more specific treaty law.45 Such 
efforts might build on the International Convention on Cybercrime, adopted in 
2001 by the Council of Europe and open to nonmember states, which requires 
parties  to  develop  criminal  laws  against  hacking  and  other  illicit  cyber-
activities  like  computer  fraud.46  A  new  treaty  might,  for  example,  prohibit 
certain additional categories of hostile cyber-activities or provide for particular 
remedies. 

The  United  States  government  has  not  publicly  articulated  a  general 
position on cyber-attacks and Articles 2(4) and 51.47 In the meantime, there is 
considerable momentum among American scholars and policy experts behind 
the idea that some cyber-attacks ought to fall within Article 2(4)s prohibition 
of force or could constitute an armed attack, at least insofar as those terms 
should be interpreted to cover attacks with features and consequences closely 
resembling conventional military attacks or kinetic force. A National Research 
 
 
43.  See,  e.g.,  LAWRENCE  T.  GREENBERG,  SEYMOUR  E.  GOODMAN  &  KEVIN  J.  SOO  HOO, 
INFORMATION  WARFARE  AND  INTERNATIONAL  LAW  14-19  (1998);  James  A.  Lewis,  Multilateral 
Agreements To Constrain Cyberconflict, ARMS CONTROL TODAY, June 2010, at 16 (arguing that states 
should develop mutual understandings on what actions can be considered a violation of sovereignty, on 
what constitutes an act of war, and what actions are seen as escalatory). 
 
International Coercion: Elements of a Legal Framework, 12 EUR. J. INTL L. 825, 863-64 (2001). 
45.  See, e.g., ROBERT K. KNAKE, COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS, INTERNET GOVERNANCE 
 
IN  AN  AGE  OF  CYBER  INSECURITY  21-23  (2010)  (recommending  that  the  United  States  pursue 
international  legal  agreements  to  limit  cyber-attacks);  Duncan  B.  Hollis,  Why  States  Need  an 
International Law for Information Operations, 11 LEWIS & CLARK L. REV. 1023 (2007) (arguing that 
new international legal regimes or instruments are needed to regulate cyber-operations); Silver, supra 
note 23, at 94 (calling for a new international convention to regulate cyber-attacks). 
46.  Convention  on  Cybercrime,  Council  of  Europe,  done  Nov.  21,  2001,  E.T.S.  No.  185 
 
(entered into force Jan. 7, 2004). A list of Council of Europe member states as well as nonmember states 
that have signed or ratified the Convention (including the United States) is available at Convention on 
Cybercrime,  CETS  No.:  185,  COUNCIL  OF  EUROPE,  http://conventions.coe.int/Treaty/Commun/
ChercheSig.asp?NT=185&CM=8&DF=28/10/2010&CL=ENG (last visited Apr. 23, 2011). 
 
legal determinations developed through the interagency process. 
 

47.  However, one would presume that the U.S. governments actions are guided internally by 
 

44.  See,  e.g.,  Christopher  C.  Joyner  &  Catherine  Lotrionte,  Information  Warfare  as 

 

432 

THE YALE JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 

[Vol. 36: 421 

Council  committee  charged  with  studying  the  issue  concluded  that  cyber-
attacks should be judged under the U.N. Charter and customary jus ad bellum 
principles by incorporating analysis of whether the effects of cyber-attacks are 
tantamount to a military attack.48 Michael Schmitt, in an influential article on 
the  topic,  proposes  that  whether  a  cyber-attack  constitutes  force  depends  on 
multiple factors derived from what historically made military force special in 
international  law,  including  severity,  immediacy,  directness,  invasiveness, 
measurability, and presumptive legitimacy.49 Some policy experts have come to 
similar  conclusions  regarding  U.S.  defensive  doctrine  against  cyber-attacks, 
emphasizing that the permissibility and appropriateness of military responses to 
cyber-attacks should turn at least in part on their effects or consequences.50 

Statements  by  senior  U.S.  government  officials  have  either  hinted 
strongly that the United States would regard some cyber-attacks as prohibited 
force or declined to rule out that possibilitythough the U.S. government has 
not formalized a definitive public position on the issue or articulated clear lines 
or standards.51 This suggests that at least one prong of the U.S. strategy may 
involve a classic  military defense and deterrence model, in which the United 
States would consider the first use of some types of cyber-attacks generally off-
limits  except  in  self-defense,  and  would  consider  military  responses  to  some 
cyber-attacks  by  others.52  A  1999  Defense  Department  Assessment  of 
 
 
48.  See NRC COMMITTEE REPORT, supra note 4, at 33-34; see also Abraham D. Sofaer, David 
Clark  &  Whitfield  Diffie,  Cyber  Security  and  International  Agreements,  in  PROCEEDINGS  OF  A 
WORKSHOP ON DETERRING CYBERATTACKS: INFORMING STRATEGIES AND DEVELOPING OPTIONS FOR 
(2010),  available  at  http://www.nap.edu/openbook.php?record_id
U.S.  POLICY  179,  185 
=12997&page=179  ([T]he  right  of  states  to  exercise  self-defense  or  to  take  countermeasures  in 
response to such attacks would depend on their potential consequences.). 
 
49.  See  Schmitt,  supra  note  29,  at  914-15;  see  also  Horace  B.  Robertson,  Jr.,  Self-Defense 
Against Computer Network Attack Under International Law, 76 INTL L. STUD. 121, 140 (2002) ([T]he 
term armed attack may also include attacks upon computer networks solely by electronic means if the 
consequences of such attacks include either substantial harm to vital civil or military networks, or loss of 
human  life,  or  both.).  For  an  Estonian  view  along  similar  lines,  which  is  interesting  because  of  the 
countrys experience in this area, see Erik Kodar, Computer Network Attacks in the Gray Areas of Jus ad 
Bellum and Jus in Bello, 9 BALTIC Y.B. INTL L. 133, 139 (2009) (The consequences of [computer 
network  attacks]  should  be  assessed  case-by-case  to  ascertain  whether  they  are  similar  to  the 
consequences of an armed attack or whether consequences stay below the level of threshold for use of 
force.). 
 
50.  See, e.g., RICHARD A. CLARKE & ROBERT K. KNAKE, CYBER WAR 178 (2010) (proposing 
a  doctrine  of  cyber  equivalency,  in  which  cyber  attacks  are  to  be  judged  by  their  effects,  not  their 
means.  They  would  be  judged  as  if  they  were  kinetic  attacks,  and  may  be  responded  to  by  kinetic 
attacks, or other means.); Lewis, supra note 43, at 16 (Agreement on what constitutes an act of war in 
cyberspace would be helpful. This could be defined as any action that produced an effect equivalent to 
an  armed  attack  using  kinetic  weapons.);  Silver,  supra  note  23,  at  92-93  (discussing  effects-based 
analysis);  David  Tubbs,  Perry  G.  Luzwick  &  Walter  Gary  Sharp,  Sr.,  Technology  and  Law:  The 
Evolution  of  Digital  Warfare,  76  INTL  L.  STUD.  7,  15  (2002)  (Until  a  legal  regime  matures  that 
comprehensively address State activities in cyberspace . . . legal advisers must principally conduct an 
effects-based  analysis  of  international  law  to  determine  the  lawfulness  of  State  activities  in 
cyberspace.). 
 
IN 
ADDRESSING GLOBAL CYBERSECURITY AND GOVERNANCE 38-39 (2010); see also William Matthews, 
DoD Expanding Domestic Cyber Role, DEFENSENEWS (Oct. 20, 2010), http://www.defensenews.com/
story.php?i=4939254&amp;c=POL&amp;s=TOP  (discussing  legal  and  conceptual  uncertainties  about 
cyber-attacks inside the U.S. defense establishment). 
52.  See Mark Clayton, The New Cyber Arms Race, CHRISTIAN SCI. MONITOR (Mar. 7, 2011), 
 
http://www.csmonitor.com/USA/Military/2011/0307/The-new-cyber-arms-race  (quoting  former  U.S. 
 

51.  See  GOVT  ACCOUNTABILITY  OFFICE,  UNITED  STATES  FACES  CHALLENGES 

 

2011] 

Cyber-Attacks and the Use of Force 

433 

International Legal Issues in Information Operations noted: 

If  we  focused  on  the  means  used,  we  might  conclude  that  electronic  signals 
imperceptible to human senses dont closely resemble bombs, bullets or troops. 
On  the  other  hand,  it  seems  likely  that  the  international  community  will  be 
more interested in the consequences of a computer network attack than in its 
mechanism.53 

The report went on to suggest that cyber-attacks could constitute armed attacks 
giving rise to the right of military self-defense.54 

More  recent  U.S.  government  statements  amplify  that  reports  logic. 
Secretary of State Hillary Clinton in 2010 declared the United Statess intention 
to  defend  its  cyber-security  in  terms  similar  to  those  usually  used  to  discuss 
military security and self-defense: 

States, terrorists, and those who would act as their proxies must know that the 
United  States  will  protect  our  networks.  .  .  .  [Those  who]  engage  in  cyber 
attacks  should  face  consequences  and  international  condemnation.  In  an 
interconnected world, an attack on one nations networks can be an attack on 
all.55 

In testifying before the Senate Committee considering his nomination to head 
the  new  Pentagon  Cyber  Command,  Lieutenant  General  Keith  Alexander 
explained that [t]here is no international consensus on a precise definition of a 
use  of  force,  in  or  out  of  cyberspace.  Consequently,  individual  nations  may 
assert  different  definitions,  and  may  apply  different  thresholds  for  what 
constitutes  a  use  of  force.56  He  went  on  to  suggest,  however,  that  [i]f  the 
President  determines  a  cyber  event  does  meet  the  threshold  of  a  use  of 
force/armed  attack,  he  may  determine  that  the  activity  is  of  such  scope, 
duration, or intensity that it warrants exercising our right to self-defense and/or 
the initiation of hostilities as an appropriate response.57 
 
government  officials  stating  U.S.  intentions  to  respond  to  some  cyber-attack  scenarios  with  armed 
force). 
 
53.  U.S. DEPT OF DEF., AN ASSESSMENT OF INTERNATIONAL LEGAL ISSUES IN INFORMATION 
OPERATIONS 18 (1999), available at http://www.au.af.mil/au/awc/awcgate/dod-io-legal/dod-io-legal.pdf, 
reprinted in 76 INTL L. STUD. 459, 483 (2002). The document goes on to conclude: 

It  is  far  from  clear  the  extent  to  which  the  world  community  will  regard  computer 
network  attacks  as  armed  attacks  or  uses  of  force,  and  how  the  doctrines  of  self-
defense and countermeasures will be applied to computer network attacks. The outcome 
will  probably  depend  more  on  the  consequences  of  such  attacks  than  on  their 
mechanisms. 

54.  See U.S. DEPT OF DEF., supra note 53, at 25. 
55.  Hillary Rodham Clinton, U.S. Secy of State, Remarks at the Newseum in Washington, 

Id. at 25; see also John Markoff, Step Taken To End Impasse Over Cybersecurity Talks, N.Y. TIMES, 
July 17, 2010, at A7 (quoting a foreign diplomat, who stated that [t]he U.S. put forward a simple notion 
that we hadnt said before . . . [that] [t]he same laws that apply to the use of kinetic weapons should 
apply to state behavior in cyberspace.). 
 
 
D.C. (Jan. 21, 2010), available at http://www.state.gov/secretary/rm/2010/01/135519.htm. 
 
56.  Advance  Questions  for  Lieutenant  General  Keith  Alexander,  USA  Nominee  for 
Commander,  United  States  Cyber  Command:  Before  the  S.  Armed  Services  Comm.,  111th  Cong.  11 
(Apr.  15,  2010),  available  at  http://armed-services.senate.gov/statemnt/2010/04%20April/Alexander
%2004-15-10.pdf. 
 
Id. at 12; see also Military Asserts Right To Return Cyber Attacks, CBS NEWS (Apr. 14, 
(quoting 
2010), 
Lieutenant General Alexander as asserting that while this right has not been specifically established by 
legal  precedent  to  apply  to  attacks  in  cyberspace,  it  is  reasonable  to  assume  that  returning  fire  in 
 
 

http://www.cbsnews.com/stories/2010/04/14/ap/cabstatepent/main6394031.shtml 

57. 

 

434 

THE YALE JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 

[Vol. 36: 421 

traditional 

that 

In addition to these statements, from which we can draw some inferences 
about the U.S. governments legal and strategic thinking, the U.S. government 
is reportedly considering a cyber-security strategy that may include preemptive 
cyber-strikes, designed under certain circumstances to knock out adversaries 
computer systems and networks perceived as hostile.58 This strategy suggests 
that  in  addition  to  the  more  traditional  military  defense  and  deterrence 
strategies  just  described,  the  U.S.  government  may  also  be  considering  legal 
interpretations  flexible  enough  to  permit  its  own  offensive  cyber-operations 
below  a  certain  threshold  or  against  inchoate  hostile  cyber-activities.59 
Depending  on  the  context  and  details,  other  international  legal  constraints 
might come into play, though, and the United States also may be prepared in 
some cases to go beyond the lines it draws for others. For reasons discussed 
below,  the  U.S.  government  is  probably  concluding  that  it  cannot  rely  very 
heavily  on 
forms  of  military  deterrence.  Strategies  and 
accompanying 
include  possible  preemptive  cyber-
operations are a way of supplementing the United Statess defensive strategy 
with additional layers.60 

interpretations 

If these inferences about U.S. government strategic thinking are correct, 
the  U.S.  government  probably  prefers  an  effects-  or  consequences-based 
interpretation  of  force  or  armed  attack  with  respect  to  cyber-attacks  not 
only  for  what  it  includes  (and  therefore  what  the  Charter  prohibits  and  what 
could trigger self-defense rights), but also for what it excludes. Computer-based 
espionage, intelligence collection, or even some preemptive cyber-operations or 
 
cyberspace, as long as it complied with law of war principles . . . would be lawful.). The same article 
goes on to report Lieutenant General Alexander as noting that there is no international consensus on the 
definition  of  use  of  force,  in  or  out  of  cyberspace  and  that  uncertainty  creates  the  potential  for 
disagreements among nations. Id. 
 
Meanwhile,  the  North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organization  (NATO)  has  been  working  on  a  joint 
approach to cyber-security, though NATOs official rhetoric in the field of self-defense has been quite 
cautious.  See  North  Atlantic  Treaty  Org.,  Strategic  Concept  for  the  Defence  and  Security  of  the 
Members  of  the  North  Atlantic  Treaty  Organization,    19  (2010),  available  at  http://www.nato.int/
lisbon2010/strategic-concept-2010-eng.pdf  (discussing  the  need  to  develop  joint  policies  on  cyber-
defense);  Admiral  James  Stavridis,  Supreme  Allied  Commander  Europe,  Address  to  Armed  Forces 
(Feb.  2,  2010),  available  at  http://www
Communications  and  Electronics  Association 
.aco.nato.int/page27750625.aspx  (asking  whether  NATOs  reciprocal  alliance  protection  guarantees 
might  be  extended  to  cyber-attacks).  The  British  governments  public  posture  has  also  been  cautious 
with respect to cyber-security and issues of force, though the government declared in 2009 that [j]ust as 
in  the  19th  century  we  had  to  secure  the  seas  for  our  national  safety  and  prosperity,  and  in  the  20th 
century  we  had  to  secure  the  air,  in  the  21st  century  we  also  have  to  secure  our  advantage  in  cyber 
space. U.K. OFFICE OF CYBER SEC., CYBER SECURITY STRATEGY OF THE UNITED KINGDOM 5 (2009). 
58.  See Ellen Nakashima, U.S. Eyes Preemptive Cyber-Defense Strategy, WASH. POST, Aug. 
 
29, 2010, at A5; Gene J. Koprowski, Pentagon Launches Salvo in War To Protect an Army of 7 Million, 
FOXNEWS.COM 
(June  15,  2010),  http://www.foxnews.com/scitech/2010/06/15/pentagon-cyber-
command-cyber-war/. 
 
59.  See Ellen Nakashima, Pentagon Is Debating Cyber-Attacks, WASH. POST, Nov. 6, 2010, at 
A1 (The Pentagons new Cyber Command is seeking authority to carry out computer network attacks 
around  the  globe  to  protect  U.S.  interests,  drawing  objections  from  administration  lawyers  uncertain 
about the legality of offensive operations.). 
 
60.  These activities might implicate sources of international law other than the U.N. Charter, 
however, including the laws of neutrality, customary international law principles related to sovereignty, 
and rules related to countermeasures. Thus, the U.S. interpretation of Article 2(4) will not occur in a 
vacuum,  and  even  a  flexible  interpretation  of  Article  2(4)  may  not  leave  U.S.  cyber-operations 
unconstrained as a matter of international law. 
 

 

2011] 

Cyber-Attacks and the Use of Force 

435 

information 

to  penetrate  and  collect 

countermeasures designed to disable an adversarys threatening capabilities, for 
example,  would  generally  not  constitute  prohibited  force  because  these 
activities  do  not  produce  destructive  consequences  analogous  to  a  kinetic 
military attack.61 Experts inside and outside the government widely agree that 
the United States is especially strong relative to other states with respect to its 
from  others  systems.62 
ability 
Consequently,  while  very  concerned  about  U.S.  vulnerabilities  to  these 
activities  and  eager  to  prevent  them,  U.S.  planners  may  be  reluctant  to  draw 
boundaries too tight, lest those boundaries impede their own ability to infiltrate 
and extract information from others systems or to prepare to knock out hostile 
systems in advance of full-fledged attacks. Of course, efforts to draw clear lines 
between  these  efforts  regarded  as  short  of  force  and  prohibited  offensive 
attacks  raise  tough  questions  of  how  to  measure  and  judge  the  consequences 
and causal proximity of hostile intrusions, as well as tough technical questions 
of  distinguishing  intelligence  collection  (e.g.,  extraction  of  data  or  mapping 
foreign  information  systems)  from  initiation  of  offensive  operations  (e.g., 
installing  malicious  code  intended  to  disrupt  those  systems).  In  cyberspace, 
these activities may look identical, especially in real time.63 

The  main  alternatives  to  assessing  force  by  reference  to  effects  (or 
looking to specific sub-factors, such as magnitude, immediacy, and directness) 
have  significant  drawbacks.  These  drawbacks  probably  weaken 
their 
attractiveness  to  the  U.S.  government,  though  Section  IV.B  below  highlights 
some  counter-dangers  often  neglected  in  the  governments  limited  public 
pronouncements  and  by  advocates  of  defining  force  in  terms  of  its  effects. 
Along  a  spectrum  of  alternatives,  at  one  end,  one  might  take  a  very  legally 
restrictive  view  of  cyber-attacks.  Although  I  am  not  aware  of  any  serious 
proposal  that  cyber-attacks  categorically  could never  constitute  force  or  an 
armed attack, some legal experts have suggested that to so qualify a cyber-
attack  must  produce  violent  consequences.64  Presumably,  this  would  mean 
that causing a major power system to explode by infiltrating and disrupting its 
computer control system might constitute force or armed attack, but causing it 
to shut down by the same meanseven for a long timeprobably would not. 
This view places heavy emphasis on the mechanism used to produce harmful 
 
 
61.  See NRC COMMITTEE REPORT, supra note 4, at 259-61. As a general matter, international 
law has very little to say about intelligence collection. See Sean P. Kanuck, Information Warefare: New 
Challenges for Public International Law, 37 HARV. INTL L.J. 272, 275-76 (1996); see also Jeffrey H. 
Smith, State Intelligence Gathering and International Law: Keynote Address, 28 MICH. J. INTL L. 543, 
544  (2007)  ([B]ecause  espionage  is  such  a  fixture  in  international  affairs,  it  is  fair  to  say  that  the 
practice of states recognizes espionage as a legitimate function of the state, and therefore it is legal as a 
matter of customary international law.). 
 
62.  See Kim Zetter, Former NSA Director: Countries Spewing Cyber Attacks Should Be Held 
Responsible,  WIRED  (July  29,  2010,  3:52  PM),  http://www.wired.com/threatlevel/2010/07/hayden-at-
blackhat/  (quoting  former  NSA  Director  Michael  Hayden  as  saying  that  the  U.S.  military  doesnt 
consider intelligence attacks acts of war but the kind of normal espionage thing that routinely happens 
between states, and that [w]ithout going into great detail, were actually pretty good at this, and the 
Chinese arent the only ones doing this). 
 
 
hand . . . but the violent consequences of action taken. (emphasis added)). 
 

63.  See NRC COMMITTEE REPORT, supra note 4, at 121-126, 135-42. 
64.  See, e.g., Dinstein, supra note 16, at 103 (The crux of the matter is not the medium at 
 

 

436 

THE YALE JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 

[Vol. 36: 421 

effects,65  and  it  implies  that  a  state  facing  cyber-attacks  could  take 
countermeasures  of  its  own  against  most  attacks  in  cyberspace  but could  not 
resort to armed self-defense. A significant problem with this view is that in a 
world  of  heavy  economic,  political,  military,  and  social  dependence  on 
information  systems,  the  nonviolent  harms  of  cyber-attacks  could  easily 
dwarf  the  violent  ones.  Consider,  for  example,  a  take-down  of  banking 
systems, causing cascades of financial panic, or the disabling of a power grid 
system  for  an  extended  period  of  time,  causing  massive  economic  disruption 
and public health emergencies.66 

At the other end of the spectrum, one might take a very broad view of 
cyber-attacks and argue that any cyber-attacks of certain types (such as those 
targeting  critical  infrastructure  like  power  grids)  constitute  per  se  prohibited 
force  or  an  armed  attack.67  This  interpretation is  premised  on  the notion that 
modern  society  and  its  reliance  on  information  systems  are  such  that 
nonmilitary means can often cause much more harm and pose greater threats 
than military ones.68 A significant problem with this view is that it fails to draw 
a principled distinction between cyber-attacks and other nonmilitary political or 
economic interference, which can also cause significant harm.69 

The apparently emergent U.S. view lies between these positions, trying to 
account  in  a  principled  way  for  the  destructive  potential  of  cyber-operations 
without  radically  expanding  the  Charters  scope.  However,  because  the  main 
bureaucratic  actors  have  divergent  policy  priorities  amid  a  rapidly  evolving 
strategic environment, it probably has been and likely will remain difficult for 
the  U.S.  government  to  develop  and  articulate  clear  legal  positions  on  what 
sorts  of  actions  in  cyberspace  constitute  illicit  force.  Some  parts  of  the 
government  prioritize  the  integrity  of  U.S.  military  capabilities,  while  others 
prioritize  protecting  U.S.  civilian  infrastructure,  including  that  of  the  private 
sector;  some  parts  seek  to  prevent  any  cyber-attacks  by  establishing  high 
normative  barriers  to  any  hostile  cyber-activity,  while  others  seek  to  prevent 
cyber-attacks  through  preemptive  cyber-attacks  of  their  own;  some  parts 
prioritize  intelligence  collection,  often  involving  infiltration  of  foreign 
computer  networks  and  information  systems,  while  others  are  focused  on 
transnational law enforcement and promoting cooperation.70 Even if the United 
 
 
POLY 87, 91 (2010). 
 
66.  See NRC COMMITTEE REPORT, supra note 4, at 253-54 (arguing that the traditional legal 
emphasis on death or physical damage is problematic because modern society depends on the existence 
and proper functioning of an extensive infrastructure that itself is increasingly controlled by information 
technology,  and  that  therefore  [a]ctions  that  significantly  interfere  with  the  functionality  of  that 
infrastructure can reasonably be regarded as uses of force, whether or not they cause immediate physical 
damage). 
 
67.  See, e.g., WALTER GARY SHARP, SR., CYBERSPACE  AND  THE USE  OF FORCE 140 (1999) 
(Any  computer  network  attack  that  intentionally  causes  any  destructive  effect  within  the  sovereign 
territory of another state is an unlawful use of force within the meaning of Article 2(4) that may produce 
the effects of an armed attack prompting the right of self-defense.). Graham calls this a strict liability 
approach. See Graham, supra note 65, at 91. 
 
 
 
 

68.  See SHARP, supra note 67, at 101-02. 
69.  See Jensen, supra note 5, at 224-30 (discussing critiques of Sharps view). 
70.  See  GOVT  ACCOUNTABILITY  OFFICE,  supra  note  51,  at  38-39  (discussing  challenges  to 

65.  See David E. Graham, Cyber Threats and the Laws of War, 4 J. NATL SECURITY L.  & 

 

2011] 

Cyber-Attacks and the Use of Force 

437 

States  is  generally  moving  toward  an  effects-based  approach  to  categorizing 
cyber-attacks under the U.N. Charter, these divergent policy priorities make it 
difficult to agree on how broadly or narrowly to draw legal lines, whether to 
drive toward legal clarity at all, and how actively to engage internationally on 
these points. 

C.  An Interpretive Reorientation 

An approach to overcoming translation problems of Charter rules (which 
were  designed  to  deal  primarily  with  conventional  warfare)  that  focuses  on 
effects  tantamount  to  a  military  attack  and  holds  that  cyber-attacks  could 
constitute  force  or  armed  attack  is  not  inconsistent  with  the  narrow 
interpretations  generally  advocated  by  the  United  States  during  most  of  the 
Charters history.71 However, it does represent an argumentative reorientation, 
since for most of that history the United States was in the position of resisting 
flexible standards for understanding Article 2(4)s scope as advocated by those 
who sought to broaden the Charters prohibitive scope beyond armed violence. 
As  a  result  of  networked  information  infrastructures  and  global  economic 
linkages  and  supply  chains,  U.S.  security  planners  now  believe  the  United 
States has an interest in expanding the Charter, at least at the edges, so as to 
cover  some  hostile  cyber-activities  that  might  not  fit  within  its  traditional 
understandings of force or the triggers of self-defense rights. 

Such  interpretive  reorientation  raises  subsidiary  doctrinal  issues  that 
might not sit comfortably with extant U.S. legal positions about the resort to 
force  more  generally.  For  example,  in  recent  years  the  U.S.  government  has 
pushed an interpretation of anticipatory self-defensethe doctrinal notion that 
a  state  may  resort  to  self-defensive  force  in  advance  of  an  imminent  attack, 
rather than  having to  wait  to  suffer the  first  blowthat  permits  flexibility in 
assessing the imminence of a threat so as to take account of the difficulty of 
assessing  when  contemporary  security  threats  are  temporally  immediate.72  If 
cyber-attacks with certain effects could give rise to rights of self-defense, could 
an impending one give rise to such a right in advance as well? Moreover, how 
would  a  state  even  assess  imminence  in  this  context?73  Anticipatory  self-
defense is especially difficult to evaluate in this context because even if hostile 
cyber-attack capabilities and intentions are identified, there may be little or no 
indication of their future timing. It may also be impossible to assess their likely 

 
reaching interagency consensus on international legal issues related to cyber-operations); see also Ellen 
Nakashima, Obama To Name Former Bush, Microsoft Official as Cyber-Czar, WASH. POST, Dec. 22, 
2009,  at  A4  (discussing  challenges  of  interagency  coordination  with  respect  to  cyber-defense  and 
operations). 
 
71.  Cf. IAN BROWNLIE, INTERNATIONAL LAW AND THE USE OF FORCE BY STATES 362 (1963) 
(interpreting  use  of  force  narrowly  but  looking  beyond  immediate  death  or  injury  from  physical 
impact to the destructive effects). 
 
72.  See Walter B. Slocombe, Force, Pre-Emption and Legitimacy, 45 SURVIVAL 117, 124-25 
(2003); William H. Taft IV & Todd F. Buchwald, Preemption, Iraq, and International Law, 97 AM. J. 
INTL L. 557, 557 n.1 (2003). 
 
doctrine in the context of cyber-threats); Schmitt, supra note 29, at 930-34 (same). 
 

73.  See  generally  Jensen,  supra  note  5,  at  223-39  (discussing  anticipatory  self-defense 
 

 

438 

THE YALE JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 

[Vol. 36: 421 

consequences  in  advance,  because  modern  societys  heavy  reliance  on 
interconnected  information  systems  means  that  the  indirect  secondary  or 
tertiary  effects  of  cyber-attacks  may  be  much  more  consequential  than  the 
direct and immediate ones.74 

Historically, the restrictive U.S. interpretation of the substantive sweep of 
Article  2(4)s  prohibition  and  Article  51s  self-defense  triggerthat  they 
generally  apply  only  to  armed  violencewas  also  often  paired  with  a  fairly 
permissive  interpretation  of  Article  51s  magnitude  threshold,  that  is,  the 
severity  of  an  attack  or  threat  needed  to  justify  armed  self-defense.75  For 
example,  in  the  Oil  Platforms  case  before  the  International  Court  of  Justice 
(ICJ),  which  concerned  the  legality  of  U.S.  naval  attacks  against  Iranian  oil 
platforms in the Persian Gulf, the United States argued (unsuccessfully) for a 
low Article 51 threshold.76 The United States argued in that case that firing on 
or mining a vessel could, as a legal matter, be enough to trigger a states right 
of  armed  self-defense,77  although  any  force  used  in  response  would  still  be 
limited  legally  by  the  requirement  of  proportionality.78  The  policy  rationale 
behind the defensively permissive U.S. reading of armed attack thresholds has 
been  that  to  impose  a  stricter  magnitude-of-attack  requirement  would 
irresponsibly  tie  a  states  hands  in  the  face  of  dangers  and  encourage 
antagonists to employ small-scale assaults below that floor.79 In other words, 
the  U.S.  position  with  respect  to  the  substantive  scope  of  Article  2(4)s 
prohibition and Article 51s trigger has historically been a narrow one, focused 
on armed violence, but it has simultaneously advanced a broad view of Article 
 
 
74.  See  David  Elliott,  Weighing  the  Case  for  a  Convention  To  Limit  Cyberwarfare,  ARMS 
CONTROL TODAY, Nov. 2009, at 21, 24 (Secondary and tertiary systemic and socioeconomic effects of 
an attack will often be more important than the initial effect. Because projecting these effects requires 
difficult-to-obtain specialized knowledge of the interdependence of the systems involved, such estimates 
will be unreliable.). 
 
75.  See Abraham D. Sofaer, Terrorism, the Law, and the National Defense, 126 MIL. L. REV. 
89, 92-93 (1989) (The United States has always assumed that [Articles 2(4) and 51] . . . make clear that 
force  means  physical  violence,  not  other  forms  of  coercion  [and]  .  .  .  has  long  assumed  that  the 
inherent right of self defense potentially applies against any illegal use of force . . . .); see also supra 
notes  21-22  and  accompanying  text  (noting  a  widely  held  view  that  differs  from  that  of  the  United 
States). 
 
Id.; see also Harvey Rishikof, When Naked Came the Doctrine of Self-Defense: What Is 
 
the Proper Role of the International Court of Justice in Use of Force Cases?, 29 YALE J. INTL L. 331, 
341-42  (2004)  (discussing  U.S.  government  thinking  regarding  the  necessity  of  an  armed  response 
during the tanker crisis). The U.S. view is well summarized by William H. Taft IV at the time he served 
as State Department Legal Adviser, who wrote of the Oil Platform decision: 

76.  Oil Platforms (Iran v. U.S.), 2003 I.C.J. 161,  46-77 (Nov. 6).  
77. 

These statements might be read to suggest that uses of deadly force by a States regular 
armed forces, such as the attacks by Iran at issue in this case, do not qualify as an armed 
attack unless they reach a certain level of gravity. Such a proposition, however, would be 
inconsistent with well-settled principles of international law. 

William H. Taft IV, Self-Defense and the Oil Platforms Decision, 29 YALE J. INTL L. 295, 300 (2004). 
Taft further concluded: 

[T]he  Court  made  statements  that  might  be  read  as  suggesting  that  the  attacks  were 
required to reach some unspecified level of gravity before they would qualify as armed 
attacks. . . . [That] proposition is [incorrect] as a matter of international law, however, and 
the United States does not interpret the opinion as relying on [it]. 

Id. at 299-300. 
 
 
 

78.  See Taft, supra note 77, at 303-06. 
79.  See id. at 300-01; Sofaer, supra note 75, at 93-96. 

 

2011] 

Cyber-Attacks and the Use of Force 

439 

51 with respect to the quantum of armed violence that would trigger a right to 
self-defensive military force.80 

If the United States is reorienting its thinking about the types of actions 
that  would  constitute  prohibited  force  or  justify  self-defensive  actions 
(including  military  action  or  its  own  cyber-operations  that  others  might 
consider  aggressive  force),  one  must  wonder  whether  it  might  also  be 
recalibrating  its  view  of  Article  51s  magnitude  threshold  in  this  particular 
context. One possibility would be for the United States to take the position that 
the magnitude of threat or damage from a cyber-attack must be high to trigger 
armed self-defense (or even constitute prohibited force), while still allowing for 
self-defensive  cyber-operations  as  necessary  countermeasures.  The  U.S. 
government statements referred to earlier are ambiguous on this point, but they 
could be read to suggest that only severe cyber-attacks (measured in terms of 
effect), as opposed to those causing low levels of harm, could qualify as armed 
attacks.81  This  would  seemingly  mark  an  exception  to  the  United  Statess 
general  position  on  Article  51,  and  therefore  establish  different  thresholds 
based  on  instrument  of  attack:  armed  violence  (low  self-defense  magnitude 
threshold) versus cyber-activities (high threshold). 

As discussed below, such a threshold differential might make sense from 
a policy perspective if the goal is to avoid crisis escalation to armed conflict, 
though a corresponding danger is that it  might undermine deterrence of low-
level  cyber-attacks.82  If  adopted,  such  analytical  moves  would  represent 
another subtle but significant interpretive adjustment of U.S. self-defense legal 
doctrine in light of technological advances. 

Another  possibility  is  that  the  United  States  will  maintain  its  relatively 
permissive view that a hostile use of force need not be very severe to trigger 
self-defense rights across the board, even in cyberspace. Thinking back to the 
Oil  Platforms  case,  the  United  States  could  take  the  position  that  the  cyber-
equivalent of laying sea mines would justify armed self-defense. But this then 
returns  to  the  prior  question  of  when  a  cyber-attack  is  legally  equivalent  to 
 
80.  The  ICJ  case  Military  and  Paramilitary  Activities  in  and  Against  Nicaragua,  discussed 
 
infra  notes  119-121  and  accompanying  text,  is  another  such  example.  In  this  case,  the  United  States 
argued  that  Nicaraguas  aggressive  support  for  rebels  in  El  Salvador  triggered  a  right  of  collective 
military self-defense. The ICJ rejected that view, holding that Nicaraguas actions were not substantial 
enough  to  justify  a  resort  to  armed  force.  See  Military  and  Paramilitary  Activities  in  and  Against 
Nicaragua (Nicar. v. U.S.), 1986 I.C.J. 14,  187-200, 227-32 (June 27). 
 
81.  The  1999  Defense  Department  legal  assessment  offers  examples  of  cyber-attacks  that 
would  likely  constitute  armed  attacks.  The  harms  in  all  those  examples  are  hypothesized  to  be 
widespread, seriously threaten national security, or interfere with military operations. U.S. DEPT OF 
DEF.,  supra  note  53,  at  15,  18.  Lieutenant  General  Alexander  mentioned  scope  and  intensity  as 
factors  likely  relevant  to  self-defense  analysis.  Alexander,  supra  note  56,  at  12.  Outside  the  U.S. 
government, the National Research Council Report expressly states that cyber-attacks must be severe to 
trigger  self-defense,  but  that  stems  from  its  interpretation  of  Article  51,  under  which  even  kinetic 
military force only constitutes an armed attack if it is sufficiently severe: 

Scale of effect is one important factor in distinguishing between an armed attack and a 
use of force. For example, an armed attack would presumably involve a use of force that 
resulted in a large scale of effect. It is unclear if there are other differentiating factors in 
addition to scale of effect. 

NRC COMMITTEE REPORT, supra note 4, at 254. 
 
 

82.  See infra notes 155-156 and accompanying text. 

 

 

440 

THE YALE JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 

[Vol. 36: 421 

force at all: when is a cyber-attack like deploying sea mines? Again, the few 
public statements by U.S. government agencies or officials are ambiguous as to 
whether severity or magnitude is an important or necessary factor in assessing 
whether cyber-attacks constitute force within the Charters scope; meanwhile, 
many  scholarly  treatments  of  the  issue  include  severity  or  magnitude  as  a 
factor.83 The more important severity is to classifying cyber-attacks as force or 
armed attacks, the more distinct that analysis looks from U.S. interpretations of 
conventional military attacks, which tend not to put much weight on severity. 

 

*     *     * 

 

From  a  U.S.  policy  standpoint,  answering  these  sorts  of  interpretive 
questions  is  important  in  order  to  plan  and  guide  offensive  and  defensive 
actions,84  and  it  may  be  useful  in  signaling  U.S.  intentions.  Although  much 
depends  on  detailed  analysis  and  application  to  specific  fact  patterns,  the 
apparent trajectory of U.S. effortsinferred from public statements to date that 
look  to  cyber-attacks  effects  to  determine  whether  they  cross  U.N.  Charter 
prohibitions  or 
translate 
foundational  rules  drawn  up  for  an  era  of  conventional  warfare  in  physical 
space  to  a  new  era  of  electronic  and  informational  warfare  in  cyberspace. 
However,  as  discussed  below,  it  carries  some  strategic  dangers  as  well.85 
International lawyers  may also object that the apparent interpretive trajectory 
replaces  relatively  clear  rules  that  are  in  many  cases  easy  to  administer 
(because armed violence is generally observable and easy to distinguish from 
other forms of interstate behavior) with less determinate, blurry tests.86 

thresholdsrepresents  a  reasonable  effort 

to 

With  these  questions  and  concerns  about  emerging  U.S.  positions  in 
mind, and looking more broadly at the international legal system as a whole, 
how likely is it that emergent U.S. interpretations will take hold? Even if they 
do, how potent will the U.N. Charter be in restraining cyber-attacks? The next 
Parts take up these questions. 

III.  CYBER-ATTACKS AND CHANGING MODES OF CONFLICT 

In thinking about how future modes of conflict might fit within the U.N. 
Charter legal regime, it is useful to look backward in time. Other revolutionary 
changes in the way conflict is waged strained the U.N. Charter during the Cold 
War, sometimes close to the breaking point. An examination of those changes 
 
 
83.  See, e.g., NRC COMMITTEE REPORT, supra note 4, at 254-56 (discussing scale of cyber-
attacks as a factor in assessing whether cyber-attacks constitute force); Schmitt, supra note 29, at 916-17 
(discussing severity as a factor in assessing whether cyber-attacks constitute force). 
 
weapons until international legal questions are resolved). 
85.  See infra Section IV.B. 
 
 
86.  Fifty  years  ago,  Ian  Brownlie  wrestled  with  this  issue,  too,  in  arguing  that  chemical  or 
biological  weapons  likely  could  be  considered  force  because  they  destroy  life  and  property.  He  was 
more skeptical about whether the release of large quantities of water down a valley, and the spreading 
of  fire  through  a  built  up  area  or  woodland  across  a  frontier  (either  of  which  might  be  thought 
analogous to some cyber-attacks) would constitute force. BROWNLIE, supra note 71, at 362-63. 
 

84.  See  Nakashima,  supra  note  58  (reporting  that  U.S.  officials  are  reluctant  to  use  cyber-

 

2011] 

Cyber-Attacks and the Use of Force 

441 

and the legal responses to them highlights how some likely attributes of cyber-
attacksincluding low visibility of offenses and responses, and difficulties in 
attributing attacks to their sources or sponsorswill undermine the Charters 
constraining influence in this context. 

A.  Cold War Conflict and the U.N. Charter 

About midway through the Cold War, Thomas Franck famously lamented 
the  death  of  Article  2(4)  in  the  pages  of  the  American  Journal  of 
International  Law.  He  believed  that  rapid  changes  in  the  way  conflict  was 
waged had made its prohibitions of force obsolete: 

The  great  wars  of  the  past,  up  to  the  time  of  the  San  Francisco  Conference, 
were generally initiated by organized incursions of large military formations of 
one  state  onto  the  territory  of  another,  incursions  usually  preceded  by 
mobilization and massing of troops and underscored by formal declarations of 
war. Because it was so familiar to them, it was to aggression of this kind that 
the drafters of Article 51 addressed themselves. Modern warfare, however has 
inconveniently by-passed these Queensberry-like practices.87 

Small-scale wars and subversion and counter-subversion waged through local 
proxies  became  a  common  mode  of  superpower  conflict,  rather  than  direct 
conventional  military  action.88  In  places  such  as  Greece,  Laos,  Vietnam,  and 
Lebanon, the superpowers routinely supported insurgencies, rebel movements, 
and  coups  against  states  supporting  the  other  power  with  various  forms  of 
assistance,  including  arms.89  Many  Latin  American  and  African  states  also 
became  superpower  battlegrounds,  fought  over  through  insurgencies  and 
counterinsurgencies.90  At  the  same  time,  the  swift  and  devastating  nature  of 
nuclear attacks and the development of nuclear deterrence doctrines meant that 
major powers were locked in a permanent state of threatened force.91 In both 
respects,  the  technology  (broadly  speaking)  and  strategy  of  conflict  had 
moved  in  directions  for  which  the  U.N.  Charters  regulatory  content  and 
structure were ill equipped.92 

In  retrospect,  Franck  was  half  right.  Louis  Henkin  responded
correctlythat  Article  2(4)  was  battered  and  bruised  but  not  killed:  [T]he 
death certificate is premature and the indictment for legicide must be redrawn 
to charge lesser though aggravated degrees of assault.93 Even where force is 
 
87.  Thomas M. Franck, Who Killed Article 2(4)? Or: Changing Norms Governing the Use of 
 
Force by States, 64 AM. J. INTL L. 809, 812 (1970); see also Michael J. Glennon, How International 
Rules Die, 93 GEO. L.J. 939 (2005) (concluding that Article 2(4) had been violated so frequently that it 
had fallen into desuetude). 
 
 
 
67 INTL L. STUD. 25, 28 (1995). 
91.  See Franck, supra note 87, at 820.  
 
 
92.  See id. at 820-22; see also Legality of the Threat or Use of Nuclear Weapons, Advisory 
Opinion, 1996 I.C.J. 226,  43 (July 8) (declining to hold the use or threat of using nuclear weapons to 
be per se unlawful under the U.N. Charter). 
 
J. INTL L. 544, 544 (1971).  
 

93.  Louis Henkin, The Reports of the Death of Article 2(4) Are Greatly Exaggerated, 65 AM. 
 

88.  Franck, supra note 87, at 812-20.  
89. 
90.  See, e.g., John Norton Moore, Low-Intensity Conflict and the International Legal System, 

Id. at 813. 

 

442 

THE YALE JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 

[Vol. 36: 421 

used,  Henkin  continued,  the  fact  that  it  is  unlawful  cannot  be  left  out  of 
account and limits the scope, the weapons, the duration, the purposes for which 
force is used.94 

In  other  words,  while  it  was  never  really  likely  to  prevent  warfare 
completely without strong supranational institutions powerful and independent 
enough  to  enforce  it,  Article  2(4)s  prohibitions  may  make  aggression  less 
likely and influence the form it takes by raising the costs of some actions. At 
minimum, the Charters normative principles constrain states actions to defend 
or advance their security interests by shaping the way those actions are justified 
publicly  and  perceived  and  measured  against 
international  community 
expectations,  thereby  affecting  political,  diplomatic,  and  other  costs.95  Some 
scholars  would  go  further  and  argue  that  norms  regarding  force  have  more 
significant internal pull on state decisionmaking, at least among some types of 
states.96 In any event, the Charters basic prohibitions had some strength and 
resilience  through  the  Cold  War  because  powerful  states  shared  a  collective 
interest in their vitality, especially when any conventional war had the potential 
for unlimited escalation.97  

Franck  and  Henkin  were  both  correct  in  their  approach  to  assessing 
Article  2(4)s  continued  value.  Each  looked  beyond  the  question  of  whether 
states used force at all and instead considered, first, the way that states used 
force, and second, whether Article 2(4)s ability to impose costs on purported 
violators could keep pace with changing warfare. Indeed, the costs Article 2(4) 
imposed  on  conventional  military  attacks  across  borders  may  even  have  had 
substitution  effects,  pushing  actors  in  the  international  system  toward  other 
modes of conflict.98 This is similar to the way the United States today may be 
pushed  toward  options  other  than  military  strikes  in  the  introductory 

Id. 

 
94. 
 
95.  See ABRAM CHAYES, THE CUBAN MISSILE CRISIS: INTERNATIONAL CRISES AND THE ROLE 
 
OF LAW 103-04 (1974); Sean D. Murphy, The Doctrine of Preemptive Self-Defense, 50 VILL. L. REV. 
699, 702-05 (2005); Matthew C. Waxman, The Use of Force Against States that Might Have Weapons 
of Mass Destruction, 31 MICH. J. INTL L. 1, 53-55 (2009). 
 
96.  See Thomas H. Lee, International Law, International Relations Theory, and Preemptive 
War: The Vitality of Sovereign Equality Today, 67 LAW & CONTEMP. PROBS. 147, 158 (2004). Others 
theorize  that  norms  have  greater  influence  on  state  behavior,  particularly  over  liberal  state  behavior, 
when  addressing  issues  pertaining  to  war  and  peace.  See  DAVID  ARMSTRONG,  THEO  FARRELL  & 
HELENE LAMBERT, INTERNATIONAL LAW AND INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS 140 (2007). 
 
97.  See PAUL GORDON LAUREN, GORDON A. CRAIG & ALEXANDER L. GEORGE, FORCE AND 
STATECRAFT  95  (4th  ed.  2007)  (Every  major  crisis  .  .  .  always  was  coupled  with  the  fear  that  any 
shooting  war  between  American  and  Soviet  forces,  no  matter  at  how  modest  a  level  initially,  could 
escalate completely out of control.). 
 
98.  See  Alberto  R.  Coll,  Unconventional  Warfare,  Liberal  Democracies,  and  International 
Order,  67  INTL  L.  STUD.  3,  3  (1992)  (The  high  political,  military,  and  economic  risks  increasingly 
associated through the course of the twentieth century with open, conventional war have led many States 
and non-State entities to shift to other forms of violence as instruments of foreign policy.); Alexander 
L. George & William E. Simons, Findings and Conclusions, in THE LIMITS OF COERCIVE DIPLOMACY, 
supra note 36, at 267, 272 (Covert sponsorship or encouragement of internal upheaval and irregular 
forms of aggression by others . . . makes it difficult for the defenders to clearly define the aggressive 
behavior  and  assign  political  responsibility  for  that  behavior.);  Robert  F.  Turner,  State  Sovereignty, 
International Law, and the Use of Force in Countering Low-Intensity Aggression the Modern World, 67 
INTL L. STUD. 43, 60 (1992) ([T]he low-intensity conflict scenario is selected because it provides a 
colorable claim of legitimacy (being less obvious).). 
 

 

2011] 

Cyber-Attacks and the Use of Force 

443 

hypothetical, and the way Stuxnet malware was probably used to attack Irans 
nuclear  program  as  a  substitute  for  military  options.99  That  is,  by  heavily 
regulating  some  modes  of  conflict  but  not  others,  the  law  may  have  pushed 
antagonists toward the latter. 

As  information  technology  opens  up  new  modes  of  interstate  conflict, 
questions for cyber-warfare include the following: can Article 2(4)s contours 
adjust to cyber-capabilities in ways that differentiate illicit conduct from legal 
activities?  Can  those  changes  help  impose  costs  for  noncompliance?  And  in 
doing so, can they command the respect and support of powerful actors in the 
international system? 

B.  Legal Process, Enforcement Challenges, and Technologies of 

Conflict 

The  Cold  War  history  of  Article  2(4)  teaches  several  lessons  about  the 
effect  of  new  technologies  on  waging  and  regulating  conflict.  First,  as  new 
technologies  of  conflict  develop,  reaching  broad  international  consensus  on 
interpretation  of  the  U.N.  Charter  may  be  slow  and  difficult.  Second,  some 
technologies  or  modes  of  conflict  will  be  especially  challenging  to  regulate 
because their features match poorly with the general enforcement mechanisms 
of  the  law  regulating  force.100  These  mechanisms  sometimes  include  U.N. 
Security  Council  processes  or  other  U.N.  organs,  but  more  often  involve 
decentralized assessments and evaluations by states, international institutions, 
and other influential international actors. As Michael Reisman puts it: 

International  law  is  still  largely  a  decentralized  process,  in  which  much 
lawmaking  (particularly  for  the  most  innovative  matters)  is  initiated  by 
unilateral  claim,  whether  explicit  or  behavioral.  Claims  to  change  inherited 
security arrangements . . . ignite a process of counterclaims, responses, replies, 
and rejoinders until stable expectations of right behavior emerge.101 

One  reason  why  cyber-attacks  will  be  difficult  to  regulate  through  such 
processes  is  that  the  factual  bases  for  asserting  or  contesting  a  violation  of 
Article 2(4) or a right of armed self-defense under Article 51 will be subject to 
great  uncertainty,  debate,  opacity,  and  lack  of  verifiability.102  There  are 
technical, legal, and political or strategic reasons for these difficulties. 

102.  For a general discussion of proof standards and self-defense amid factual uncertainty about 

As a technical matter, those who study the problem of legally regulating 
cyber-attacks are usually quick to point out the problems of identification and 
attribution:  it  is  not  always  possible  to  discern  quickly  or  accurately  who 
launched  or  directed  an  attack.103  The  nature  of  digital 
information 
 
 
99.  According  to  former  NSA  General  Counsel  Stewart  Baker,  Its  the  first  time  weve 
actually seen a weapon created by a state to achieve a goal that you would otherwise have used multiple 
cruise missiles to achieve. Christopher Dickey et al., The Shadow War, NEWSWEEK, Dec. 20, 2010, at 
28, 31 (quoting Stewart Baker). 
 
 
82 (2003). 
 
threats, see Waxman, supra note 95, at 57-77. 
 
 

103.  See  NRC  COMMITTEE  REPORT,  supra  note  4,  at  138-41,  252;  Hollis,  supra  note  45,  at 
 

100.  See Schachter, supra note 24, at 1645-46; Waxman, supra note 95, at 53-55. 
101.  W. Michael Reisman, Assessing Claims To Revise the Laws of War, 97 AM. J. INTL L. 82, 

 

444 

THE YALE JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 

[Vol. 36: 421 

infrastructure  facilitates  anonymity,  and  adversaries  can  route  their  attacks 
through others computer systems. Meanwhile, forensics are such that it may be 
very difficult to link a penetration or disruption of a computer or information 
networks  to  the  responsible  party,  though  forensic  capabilities  are  generally 
improving, albeit unevenly across states.104 Even if individual perpetrators can 
be identified, it  may be difficult to substantiate as a  matter of fact on whose 
behalf they are operating. 

These technical issues are exacerbated by jurisdictional concerns. There 
are  jurisdictional  limits  on  any  states  ability  to  investigate  beyond  its  own 
bordersan especially daunting problem when electronic attacks can include 
transit computers and networks spanning dozens of countries.105 As one early 
study  of  this  problem  put  it,  Investigators  tracing  attacks  across  computer 
networks  may  be  stymied  by  a  collision  between  fundamental  principles  of 
physics and those of international law, namely that electrons may flow through 
networks  freely  across  international  borders,  but  the  authority  of  agents  of 
national governments does not.106 

then, 

Moreover,  even if  investigation  processes  can  trace  a cyber-attack  back 
through  digital  networks  to  its  source,  it  may  be  difficult  to  publicize  that 
information in a timely and convincing way, especially when states or private 
entities are likely to have strong incentives not to discuss the technical details 
of  informational  security  breaches  or  reveal  their  own  capabilities  to 
adversaries or third parties.107 As a case in point, the U.S. government waited 
two years before disclosing that in 2008 it suffered the most significant breach 
of  U.S.  military  computers  ever  when  a  flash  drive  inserted  into  a  U.S. 
military  laptop  surreptitiously  introduced  malware  into  the  Pentagons 
classified  and  unclassified  computer  systems.108  Even 
the  U.S. 
government  disclosed  few  details  about  the  extent  of  harm  and  said  nothing 
about its knowledge of the likely perpetrators.109 Iran has likewise been very 
reticent about Stuxnet, its effects, and Irans knowledge of the codes source.110 
 
1031-32; see also Duncan B. Hollis, An e-SOS for Cyberspace, 52 HARV. INTL L.J. (forthcoming 2011) 
(manuscript  at  26-33),  available  at  http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1670330& 
(discussing the attribution problem). 
104.  For a discussion of the attribution challenges specific to different types of cyber-attacks, 
 
including Internet-based attacks, non-Internet cyber-attacks, and threats of malicious code inserted into 
supply chains, see Untangling Attribution: Moving to Accountability in Cyberspace, Planning for the 
Future of Cyber Attack: Hearing Before the H. Subcomm. on Tech. and Innovation of the H. Comm. on 
Sci.  and  Tech.,  111th  Cong.  (July  15,  2010)  (statement  of  Robert  K.  Knake,  Intl  Aff.  Fellow  in 
Residence,  Council  on  Foreign  Relations),  available  at  http://gop.science.house.gov/Media/hearings/
ets10/july15/Knake.pdf. 
 
the Internet is not.); Hollis, An e-SOS for Cyberspace, supra note 103, at 26-30. 
106.  GREENBERG ET AL., supra note 43, at 23. 
 
107.  See NRC COMMITTEE REPORT, supra note 4, at 138-41. 
 
108.  See Lynn, supra note 5, at 97. 
 
 
109.  See  Ellen  Nakashima,  Defense  Official  Discloses  Cyberattack,  WASH.  POST,  Aug.  25, 
2010, at A3. In 2008, anonymous sources told the Los Angeles Times that they suspected the incursion 
originated in Russia, but they could not be sure whether the program was created by private hackers or 
whether  the  Russian  government  was  involved.  See  Julian  E.  Barnes,  Pentagon  Computer  Networks 
Attacked, L.A. TIMES, Nov. 28, 2008, at A1. 
110.  See Sanger, supra note 10, at 4. 
 
 

105.  See KNAKE, supra note 45, at 16 (Whereas national legal authority is bounded by borders, 

 

2011] 

Cyber-Attacks and the Use of Force 

445 

Others  have  noted  that  the  attribution  challenges  of  cyber-attacks  pose 
problems  for  deterrence  (because  if  you cannot  identify  the perpetrators,  you 
cannot  threaten  them)111  and  for  enforcing  the  law  (because  you  cannot  hold 
unidentifiable  perpetrators  accountable).112  In  addition  to  those  problems,  the 
argument here goes further. Attribution challengesboth the technical aspects 
and the ability to make those findings public in a credible, persuasive wayas 
well  as  the  secrecy  and  low  visibility  of  some  states  responsive  actions  in 
cyberspace, pose challenges for the substantive development of the law. It will 
be difficult to develop consensus understandings even of the fact patterns on 
which states legal claims and counterclaims are based, assuming those claims 
are leveled publicly at all. 

Put  another  way,  the  ability  to  determine  the  ultimate  perpetrator  and 
sponsor  of  cyber-attacks  may  be  necessary  to  take  effective  defensive  or 
deterrent action, to satisfy a states legal obligations internally, and to justify a 
states  responses  externally.  However,  the  level  of  certainty  a  state  requires 
internally  may  be  different  than  the  level  of  certainty  needed  to  justify 
responses externally. 

A separate but related problem is the uncertainty of causation, or how to 
ascribe harms of cyber-attacks. For example, if state A disrupts the information 
network  of  state  Bs  stock  market,  resulting  in  a  massive  decline  in  investor 
confidence  with  unpredictable  ripple  effects  throughout  Bs  economy,  what 
portion of the ensuing harm ought to be legally attributed to As actions for jus 
ad bellum purposes? As discussed earlier, modern societys heavy reliance on 
interconnected  information  systems  means  that  the  indirect  and  secondary 
effects of cyber-attacks may be much more consequential than the direct and 
immediate  ones.113  Once  state  B  takes  defensive  and  perhaps  offensive 
countermeasures  in  cyberspace,  it  may  be  especially  difficult  to  untangle  the 
strands of fact, associate them with specific effects, and assign them clear legal 
significance.  Consider 
the  United  States 
electronically  disrupted  Irans  banking  system,  which  harms  that  followed
perhaps  days  or  weeks  latercould  be  ascribed  legally  to  those  actions, 
especially in the context of other overt efforts to weaken Irans economy with 
economic sanctions and Irans own responsive actions? 

the  opening  hypothetical: 

if 

Again, though, these are not entirely new problems for Article 2(4); the 
issues  of  attribution  and  causality  arose  many  times  in  Cold  War  era  Article 
2(4) debates. As Franck explained, The small-scale and diffuse but significant 
and  frequent  new  wars  of  insurgency  have,  by  their  nature,  made  clear-cut 
distinctions between  aggression  and  self-defense,  which  are  better  adapted  to 
 
 
111.  See  MARTIN  C.  LIBICKI,  CYBERDETERRENCE  AND  CYBERWAR  41-52  (2009);  NRC 
COMMITTEE  REPORT,  supra  note  4,  at  303  (arguing  that  a  credible  threat  to  impose  costs  requires 
knowledge of the party on which the costs should be imposed but attribution of a cyberattack is a very 
difficult  and  time-consumingand  perhaps  insolubleproblem);  John  Markoff,  David  E.  Sanger  & 
Thom Shanker, In Digital Combat, U.S. Finds No Easy Deterrent, N.Y. TIMES, Jan. 26, 2010, at A1 
(discussing difficulties of determining source of cyber-attacks and challenges for deterrence). 
 
Vulnerability, NEW REPUBLIC, June 24, 2010, at 21, 23. 
113.  See supra note 74 and accompanying text. 
 
 

112.  See  NRC  COMMITTEE  REPORT,  supra  note  4,  at  252-53;  Jack  Goldsmith,  The  New 

 

 

446 

THE YALE JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 

[Vol. 36: 421 

conventional military warfare, exceedingly difficult.114 Moreover: 

While it was not always possible even in classical combat to determine which 
army  had  started  marching  first,  the  scale,  formations  and  strategy  of 
conventional warfare did make the identification of aggression relatively easy. 
It stretched everyones credulity to be told that Poland had attacked Germany or 
South Korea the North, when the armies of these self-proclaimed victims were, 
right at the very beginning, to be seen as overrunning their opponents. . . . With 
the  hit-and-run  tactics  of  wars  of  national  liberation,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is 
often  difficult  even  to  establish  convincingly,  from  a  pattern  of  isolated, 
gradually cumulative events, when or where the first round began, let alone at 
whose instigation, or who won it.115 

Whereas  conventional  wars  or  attacks  of  the  past  were  usually  easily  visible 
and measurable, unconventional or low-intensity conflict featured inconclusive 
evidence of foreign involvement or hostile action, and foreign state antagonists 
worked  to  mask,  conceal,  or  obscure  their  participation  and  responses.116  In 
other  words,  once  conflict  was  waged  through  proxies,  it  was  difficult  to 
develop international consensus about the relevant facts on such basic issues as 
what occurred and on whose behalf, let alone consensus about jus ad bellum 
responsibility or justification.117 

119.  Military and Paramilitary Activities in and Against Nicaragua (Nicar. v. U.S.), 1986 I.C.J. 

Such  legal-factual  murkiness  helps  explain  why  Article  2(4)  seemed 
unable to address that form of conflict and why that mode of conflict offered an 
appealing option to the Cold War antagonists.118 Perhaps to try to bring greater 
legal clarity and predictability to this situation, the ICJ in Nicaragua v. United 
States,119  in  holding  that  the  United  States  had  violated  international  law  in 
supporting  Contra  guerrillas  and  mining  Nicaraguas  harbors,  imposed  high 
bars on the level of violence necessary to constitute an armed attack and the 
level  of  state  control  over  foreign  agents  necessary  to  warrant  attribution  of 
their  illicit  actions.120  In  so  doing,  the  ICJ  rejected  the  United  Statess  claim 
that  it  had  acted  in  collective  self-defense  of  El  Salvador,  responding  to 
Nicaraguas  alleged  support  for  rebels  there.  But,  while  these  doctrinal 
 
114.  Franck, supra note 87, at 820; see also Coll, supra note 98, at 16 (Whereas conventional 
 
military attacks are susceptible to fairly straightforward processes of inquiry, and hence to authoritative 
determinations that armed aggression has taken place, unconventional warfare is not.). 
 
 
trails as possible. Conclusive, incontrovertible evidence of a partys guilt is hard to come by.). 
 
117.  Louis Henkin similarly noted in the context of self-defense authority that justifications for 
armed responses should be limited to armed attacks, which [are] clear, unambiguous, subject to proof, 
and  not  easily  open  to  misinterpretation  or  fabrication.  Louis  Henkin,  The  United  Nations  and  Its 
Supporters: A Self-Examination, 78 POL. SCI. Q. 504, 532 (1963). 
 
118.  See  Coll,  supra  note  98,  at  4  (The  covert  nature  and  elusive  instrumentalities  of 
unconventional warfare make it difficult for societies under attack to identify the source of the threat and 
to  rally  domestic  and  international  opinion  .  .  .  .  Unconventional  warfare  places  its  victims  in  the 
awkward legal, moral, and political dilemma of choosing an appropriate response.); see also Franck, 
supra note 87, at 817 (In the absence of some universally credible fact-determination procedures, the 
effort to establish whether a use of force is illegal under Article 2(4) or legal under Article 51 is stymied 
by contradictory allegations of fact by the parties to the dispute and their allies.). 
 
14 (June 27). 
 
reflecting the Courts effort to impose high thresholds of violence necessary to justify self-defense). 
 

115.  Franck, supra note 87, at 820. 
116.  See Coll, supra note 98, at 15 (By its very nature, unconventional warfare leaves as few 

120.  See  Reisman,  supra  note  101,  at  83-84  (describing  the  ICJs  decision  in  Nicaragua  as 

 

2011] 

Cyber-Attacks and the Use of Force 

447 

approaches may have made sense to a court trying to articulate standards that 
would constrict opportunities for states to militarily escalate conflict, they did 
little  to  address  the  underlying  challenges  of  contemporary  interstate  conflict 
being waged through surrogates and unconventional means, and may have even 
contributed to them.121 

Like  these  prior  proxy  wars,  cyber-conflict  is  likely  to  feature  disputed 
facts  about  what  exactly  occurred,  including  who  committed  the  electronic 
disruption and on whose behalf they did it.122 In some respects, those problems 
will likely be vastly exacerbated in the cyber-context because of participants 
greater  ability  to  mask  or  anonymize  their  identity  and  because  the 
movements  and  terrain  of  cyber-warfare  can  be  dispersed  across  global 
information networks and will often be carried out on private infrastructure.123 
While in most conflicts, both sides claim that they are acting in self-defense, 
cyber-conflicts are a particularly messy domain in which to air and judge such 
claims.124 

Consider  again  the  case  of  Estonia,  referenced  earlier,125  in  which 
information  about  the  source  of  attacks  on  Estonian  computer  networks  took 
months to compile, and many key factsincluding ultimate responsibility for 
directing or encouraging the attacksremain subject to dispute.126 Evidence of 
Russian government involvement was mostly circumstantial, the compromised 
computers that were harnessed remotely for the attack were located on several 
different continents, and Russian officials denied involvement.127 There is also 
evidence  suggesting  that  the  Russian  government  may  have  encouraged 
nongovernmental  patriotic  hackers128  to  conduct  attacks,  and  that  China  is 
similarly relying on unofficial, semi-private hackers to maintain deniability.129 
Utilizing loosely or ambiguously affiliated actors resembles the way Cold 
War  superpowers  relied  on  surrogate  forces,  though  this  time  arrayed  across 
cyberspace rather than third-party territories.130 Like proxy warfare, the factual 
 
 
121.  See  John  Lawrence  Hargrove,  The  Nicaragua  Judgment  and  the  Future  of  the  Law  of 
Force  and  Self-Defense,  81  AM.  J.  INTL  L.  135,  141-43  (1987);  John Norton  Moore, The  Nicaragua 
Case and the Deterioration of World Order, 81 AM. J. INTL L. 151, 152 (1987) (arguing that the ICJ 
announced contrary to the Charter, a restrictive interpretation of the right of defense that could deny 
individual or collective defense against secret warfare, the most serious contemporary threat to world 
order); see also Military and Paramilitary Activities in and Against Nicaragua (Nicar. v. U.S.), 1986 
I.C.J. 14, 350 (June 27) (Schwebel, J., dissenting) (arguing that the Courts decision could encourage 
predatory  subversion);  id.  at  543-44  (Jennings,  J.,  dissenting)  (arguing  that  the  Courts  decision 
dangerously restricts self-defense against support for rebels). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
11, 2009, at 8. 
 
129.  See Anne Applebaum, For Estonia and NATO, a New Kind of War, WASH. POST, May 22, 
2007, at A15; David E. Sanger, John Markoff & Thom Shanker, U.S. Plans Attack and Defense in Web 
Warfare, N.Y. TIMES, Apr. 28, 2009, at A1. 
 
 

122.  See Hollis, supra note 45, at 1031-32. 
123.  See Kanuck, supra note 61, at 286-88. 
124.  See NRC COMMITTEE REPORT, supra note 4, at 315. 
125.  See supra notes 8-9 and accompanying text. 
126.  See NRC COMMITTEE REPORT, supra note 4, at 173. 
127.  See id. 
128.  See Charles Clover, Kremlin-Backed Group Behind Estonia Cyber Blitz, FIN. TIMES, Mar. 

130.  With some obvious parallels to this problem, Franck worried in 1970: 
Insofar as one state  merely encourages guerrilla  movements within another, an armed 

 

 

*     *     * 

 

 

448 

THE YALE JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 

[Vol. 36: 421 

haziness  surrounding  cyber-attacksand  therefore  the  difficulty  in  reaching 
agreement on legal appraisalmay make cyber-attacks an appealing weapon to 
some states.131 

To an even greater degree than the proxy warfare of the Cold War, cyber-
warfare may lack clearly discernable starting points and readily observable or 
provable  actions  and  counter-actions.132  This  does  not  mean  that  legal  line 
drawing  through  U.N.  Charter  interpretation  or  new  international  legal 
agreements is impossible with respect to issues of prohibited attacks and self-
defense. It does mean, however, that while information technology continues to 
evolve  at  faster  and  faster  rates,  the  processes  of  claims  and  counterclaims 
moving  toward  a  predictable,  stable  outcome,  or  the  accretion of  interpretive 
practice commanding broad consensus, will likely be slow and uncertain. 

IV.  THE LAW OF CYBER-WARFARE AND THE DISTRIBUTION OF POWER 

Besides  the  specific  challenges  of  regulating  certain  types  of  conflict, 
Cold  War  experience  with  U.N.  Charter  interpretation  illustrates  important 
principles about the relationship between law and power that are applicable to a 
discussion of cyber-capabilities. Competing interpretations of Articles 2(4) and 
51 have always reflected distributions of power. As a corollary, efforts to revise 
legal  boundaries  and  thresholds  may  have  re-allocative  effects  on  power  by 
raising  or  lowering  the  costs  of  using  resources  and  capabilities  that  are 
unequally apportioned.133 

The United States appears to be placing its legal bets on a future world in 
which it can continue to rely partly on its comparative military edge to deter 
 

attack, at least in the conventional sense, cannot be said to have taken place. The more 
subtle  and  indirect  the  encouragement,  the  more  tenuous  becomes  the  analogy  to  an 
armed attack. Article 51 does not, however, on its face, recognize the existence of these 
newer modes of aggression, or attempt to deal with the new problems of characterization 
which they create for international law. 

Franck, supra note 87, at 812. This issue was also a subject of the ICJ Nicaragua litigation, and more 
recently international tribunals have tried to clarify when aggressive actions by nonstate actors may be 
attributed to a state sponsor. See, e.g., Prosecutor v. Tadic, Case No. IT-94-1-A, Judgment on Appeal,  
115-62 (Intl Crim. Trib. for the Former Yugoslavia July 15, 1999) (holding that a foreign states overall 
control,  rather  than  effective  control,  of  a  nonstate  military  organization  may  render  that  state 
responsible  for  acts  of  the  organization  and  may  make  applicable  international  law  governing 
international armed conflicts). 
 
131.  Alberto  Coll  argues  that  unconventional  warfare  favored  authoritarian  state  sponsors, 
because of their adeptness at deception and manipulation of information, which in turn is facilitated by 
the  closed  and  secretive  nature  of  their  societies.  Coll,  supra  note  98,  at  17.  The  same  strategic 
asymmetry might apply to cyber-warfare, due to those same factors as well as some states strict control 
of information networks themselves. 
 
132.  Unconventional warfare during the Cold War was often used as an instrument of coercive 
pressure, so while the supporting superpowers wanted to maintain some deniability, they did not want to 
shield their sponsorship entirely. 
 
133.  For a discussion of how power politics influences international legal strategy, see Paul B. 
Stephan, Symmetry and Selectivity: What Happens in International Law When the World Changes, 10 
CHI. J. INTL L. 91 (2009). 
 

 

2011] 

Cyber-Attacks and the Use of Force 

449 

cyber-attacks  while  supplementing  that  deterrence  with  its  own  offensive, 
defensive,  and  preemptive  cyber-capabilitiesa  bet  that  plays  to  some 
advantages  but  also  carries  risks.  Reaching  legal  consensus  with  other  major 
powers on these issues will be difficult in part because they perceive a different 
combination of strategic risks and opportunities. Therefore, U.S. policymakers 
should prepare to operate in a highly contested and uncertain international legal 
environment. 

A.  Cold War Power Relations and the U.N. Charter 

As discussed above, a major Cold War legal dispute about Article 2(4)
one  pitting  groupings  of  the  worlds  states  against  each  otherconcerned 
whether Article 2(4) bans aggressive military violence only, or whether it also 
covers other forms of coercion, including economic coercion. Some  states,134 
along with a few notable international law scholars,135 argued that Article 2(4) 
prohibited  a  much  broader  category  of  coercion  than  just  military  force. 
However,  this  broader  position  never  gained  traction  as  a  matter  of 
authoritative  practice;  the  more  restrictive  interpretation  confined  to  military 
means won out. 

From  the  perspective  of  the  United  States,  this  seemed  like  a  good 
bargain:  the  costs  placed  by  international  law  on  states  of  resorting  first  to 
conventional  armed  force  in  a  crisis  were  high,  thereby  generally  helping  to 
preserve  territorial  stability  and  prevent  escalation.136  In  the  meantime,  the 
United  States  could  build  its  defenses,  grow  its  economy,  and  expand  its 
influence, all the while relatively free to use its disproportionate economic and 
diplomatic  muscle  to  pressure  smaller  states  without  the  fear  of  reciprocal 
coercion.137  (This  was  the  case  at  least  until  the  Arab  states  launched  an  oil 
embargo  in  1973,  at  which  moment  that  deal  may  not  have  seemed  so 
favorable.)138 

In  short,  where  one  stands  on  interpreting  Articles  2(4)  and  51  has 
historically depended on ones share of global resources and power, including 
whether one is satisfied or unsatisfied with the status quo.139 Moreover, those 
 
134.  See supra Section II.A. 
 
135.  See, e.g., STONE, supra note 34, at 96-101. 
 
 
136.  See  Tom  J.  Farer  &  Christopher  C.  Joyner,  The  United  States  and  the  Use  of  Force,  1 
TRANSNATL L. & CONTEMP. PROBS. 15, 23 (1991) ([During the] Cold War, Washington, despite its 
still conservative objectives, felt unduly constrained by the Charters apparent limits on the means for 
achieving them. Where we could, we stretched those limits with imaginative interpretation, and when 
we reached the absolute limits of interpretive elasticity, we sometimes evaded them.). 
 
137.  Id. at 22 ([A]t the close of World War II, the United States was the archetypal satisfied 
power.  Acquisition  of  the  atomic  bomb  gave  it  military  preeminence  over  the  Soviet  Union.  In  the 
economic realm it had no rival.). 
 
Weapon: A Threat to International Peace, 68 AM. J. INTL L. 410 (1974). 
 
139.  Compare Rosalyn Higgins, The Attitude of Western States Towards Legal Aspects of the 
Use of Force, in THE CURRENT LEGAL REGULATION OF THE USE OF FORCE, supra note 25, at 435-36 
(discussing Western states desire to keep Charter interpretations on the use of force as the status quo), 
with Milan Sahovic, Non-Aligned Countries and the Current Regulation on the Use of Force, in THE 
CURRENT  LEGAL  REGULATION  OF  THE  USE  OF  FORCE,  supra  note  25,  at  479,  485  (expressing  grave 
concern among non-aligned states with any form of coercion, not just armed force). 
 
 

138.  See STONE, supra note 34, at 115-36; Jordan J. Paust & Albert P. Blaustein, The Arab Oil 

 

450 

THE YALE JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 

[Vol. 36: 421 

with more power have greater ability to impose their preferred interpretation. 
As Julius Stone observed of the U.N. Charter in 1977: 

Against  the  bench-mark  of  existing  international  law,  particular  offered 
definitions  may  tend  to  preserve  the  status  quo  of  distribution.  Or  they  may 
drive  drastically  to  change  or  revolutionise  this  distribution.  From  the 
standpoint of proponents of a particular content, it is likely to favour the status 
quo  as  to  those  resources  in  which  the  proponent  is  affluent;  and  to  support 
change or revolution as to those of which it regards itself as deprived. What an 
offered definition with any substantive content can rarely be, is merely neutral 
about the disposal of world resources.140 

Myres McDougal and Florentino Feliciano, whose policy-oriented approach to 
global  public  order  also  emphasized  a  broader  interpretation  of  legal 
than  did  more  mechanical  or  formalist  accounts,141  also 
prohibitions 
emphasized  the  relationship  between  power  distribution  and  prohibited  force 
line  drawing.  Specifically,  they  stressed  that  difficulties  in  distinguishing 
lawful from unlawful coercion are greatly magnified in the global community 
by gross inequalities in the distribution of effective power.142 

B.  Technology, Power Shifts, and the Strategic Logic of Legal 

Interpretation 

With  these  relationships  between  law  and  power  in  mind,  the  United 
States  has  an  interest  in  regulating  cyber-attacks,  but  it  will  be  difficult  to 
achieve such regulation through international use-of-force law or through new 
international  agreements  to  outlaw  types  of  cyber-attacks.143  That  is  because 
the  distribution  of  emerging  cyber-capabilities  and  vulnerabilities
vulnerabilities defined not only by the defensive capacity to block actions but 
also by the ability to tolerate and withstand attacksis unlikely to correspond 
to  the  status  quo  distribution  of  power  built  on  traditional  measures  like 
military and economic might. 
 
140.  STONE, supra note 34, at 110. 
 
 
141.  MYRES S. MCDOUGAL & FLORENTINO P. FELICIANO, THE INTERNATIONAL LAW OF WAR: 
TRANSNATIONAL COERCION AND WORLD PUBLIC ORDER 259 (1994) (arguing that prohibitions on force 
are most rationally conceived as extending to all coercion, by whatever instrument or combination of 
instruments, military and other, which is directed with requisite intensity against such substantial bases 
of  power  as  the  territorial  integrity  and  political  independence  of  the  target  state);  see  also  W. 
Michael Reisman, Coercion and Self-Determination: Construing Charter Article 2(4), 78 AM. J. INTL 
L.  642,  644  (1984)  (criticizing  the  restrictive  rule  formulation  of  Article  2(4)  as  inappropriately 
tailored to the policy ambitions of international law). 
 
FELICIANO, supra note 141, at xix, xxxiv. 
 
143.  Many policy experts and some legal scholars have advocated new international agreements 
of  this  sort.  See,  e.g.,  KNAKE,  supra  note  45,  at  21-23  (proposing  a  U.S.  strategy  for  negotiating 
international  limits  on  cyberwarfare);  Shackelford,  supra  note  9,  at  197-98  (advocating  a  new 
international accord on cybersecurity); Silver, supra note 23, at 94 ([E]fforts should be made towards 
the adoption of an international convention that would bind the parties not to use [computer network 
attacks]  for  any  military  or  hostile  use  .  .  .  .);  see  also  Tom  Gjelten,  Seeing  the  Internet  as  an 
Information  Weapon,  (NPR  broadcast  Sept.  23,  2010),  available  at  http://www.npr.org/templates/
story/story.php?storyId=130052701 (asking why is there no arms control measure that would apply to 
the use of cyberweapons?). For a view skeptical that such meaningful agreements can be reached, see 
Jack  Goldsmith,  Cybersecurity  Treaties:  A  Skeptical  View,  in  FUTURE  CHALLENGES  IN  NATIONAL 
SECURITY AND LAW, supra note 15. 
 

142.  Myres S. McDougal & Siegfried Wiessner, Introduction to the Reissue of MCDOUGAL & 

 

2011] 

Cyber-Attacks and the Use of Force 

451 

It  is  not  surprising  that  the  United  States  seems  inclined  toward  an 
interpretation of Articles 2(4) and 51 that allows it to classify some offensive 
cyber-attacks as prohibited force or an armed attack but does not otherwise 
move previously drawn lines to encompass economic coercion or other means 
of subversion in that classification. Nor is it surprising to see the United States 
out  in  front  of  other  states  on  this  issue.  The  power  and  vulnerability 
distribution that accompanies reliance on networked information technology is 
not the same as past distributions of military and economic power, and perhaps 
not  to  the  United  Statess  advantage  relative  to  rivals.  Moreover,  some  U.S. 
strengths are heavily built on digital interconnectedness and infrastructure that 
is  global,  mostly  private,  and  rapidly  changing;  these  strengths  are  therefore 
inextricably linked to new and emerging vulnerabilities.144 

Although  some  experts  assess  that  the  United  States  is  currently  strong 
relative to others in terms of offensive capabilities,145 several factors make the 
United States especially vulnerable to cyber-attack, including the informational 
and electronic interconnectedness of its military and public and private sectors, 
and  political  obstacles  to  curing  some  of  these  vulnerabilities  through 
regulation.146 As the Obama administrations 2010 National Security Strategy 
acknowledged: 

The very technologies that empower us to lead and create also empower those 
who would disrupt and destroy. They enable our military superiority . . . . Our 
daily lives and public safety depend on power and electric grids, but potential 
adversaries  could  use  cyber  vulnerabilities  to  disrupt  them  on  a  massive 
scale.147 

In other words, U.S. technological strengths create corresponding exposures to 
threats. 

144.  See  PHILIP  BOBBITT,  THE  SHIELD  OF  ACHILLES:  WAR,  PEACE,  AND  THE  COURSE  OF 

The U.S. government is especially constrained politically and legally in 
securing  its  information  infrastructurewhich  is  largely  privately  held  or 
privately  suppliedagainst  cyber-threats,  and  these  constraints  shape  its 
international strategy. Proposals to improve cyber-security through regulation 
include promulgating industry standards to enhance the security of information 
technology products and protect networks and computers from intrusion, and, 
more invasively, expanding the governments authority to monitor information 
systems  and  communications.148  Such  proposals  invariably  face  powerful 
antiregulatory industry pressures and heightened civil liberties sensitivities.149 
 
 
HISTORY 792-94 (2002). 
 
145.  See Jack Goldsmith, Can We Stop the Global Cyber Arms Race?, WASH. POST, Feb. 1, 
2010,  at  A17  ([T]he  U.S.  government  has  perhaps  the  worlds  most  powerful  and  sophisticated 
offensive cyberattack capability.). 
 
 
.whitehouse.gov/sites/default/files/rss_viewer/national_security_strategy.pdf. 
 
148.  See CLARKE & KNAKE, supra note 50, at 160-62; JACK GOLDSMITH, BROOKINGS INST., 
THE  CYBERTHREAT,  GOVERNMENT  NETWORK  OPERATIONS,  AND  THE  FOURTH  AMENDMENT  (2010), 
available  at  http://www.brookings.edu/~/media/Files/rc/papers/2010/1208_4th_amendment_goldsmith/
1208_4th_amendment_goldsmith.pdf. 
 
 

149.  See Lolita C. Baldor, Internet Security Plan Under Review Would Alert Users to Hacker 
 

146.  See CLARKE & KNAKE, supra note 50, at 226-27. 
147.  THE WHITE HOUSE, NATIONAL SECURITY STRATEGY 27 (2010), available at http://www

 

452 

THE YALE JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 

[Vol. 36: 421 

Information  technology  industry  groups  and  privacy  organizations  have 
together pushed back against moves to impose government security mandates 
and  against  more  intrusive  government  cyber-security  activities,  arguing  that 
they  would  stifle  innovation,  erode  civil  liberties,  and  fail  to  keep  up  with 
rapidly evolving threats amid a globalized economy.150 A reluctance to secure 
information systems domestically through government regulation then elevates 
U.S. government reliance on other elements of a defensive strategy. 

In that light, U.S. legal interpretations and declaratory postures that define 
prohibited  force  in  ways  that  extend  narrow  Charter  interpretations  to  take 
account  of  cyber-warfare  may  be  seen  as  part  of  an  effort  to  sustain  a  legal 
order 
in  which  anticipated  U.S.  military  and  economic  moves  and 
countermoves  against  potential  adversaries  fit  quite  comfortablythat  is,  a 
legal  order  that  preserves  U.S.  comparative  advantages.  In  extending  the 
foundational U.N. Charter prohibition on force to cyber-attacks by emphasizing 
their  comparable  effects  to  conventional  military  attacks,  such  interpretations 
help deny that arsenal to others by raising the costs of its use. At the same time, 
by casting that prohibition and complementary self-defense authority in terms 
that help justify military force in response, this interpretation reduces the costs 
to the United States of using or threatening to use its vast military edge (and it 
helps signal a willingness to do so). 

Put  another  way,  the  United  States  appears  to  be  placing  hedged  bets 
about  what  the  future  strategic  environment  will  look  like  and  how  best  to 
position itself to operate and compete in it. On balance, for example, the United 
States may prefer relatively clear standards with respect to cyber-actions that 
have  immediate  destructive  effectsat  least  clear  enough  to  justify  armed 
response or deterrence to activities or scenarios deemed threateningwhile at 
the same time preferring some permissive haziness with respect to intelligence 
collection and its own countermeasures in cyberspace. Such a posture allows 
the  United  States  to  protect  itself  from  hostile  penetrations  while  also 
preserving  some  latitude  for  those  activities  in  which  it  may  be  relatively 
strong.151  Internally,  that  clarity  facilitates  planning  for  contingencies  and 
deliberation  about  options;152  externally,  it  may  help  articulate  and  deter  the 
crossing of red lines.153 

In  trying  to  explain  what  may  be  driving  the  U.S.  interpretation,  this 

 
Takeover, WASH. POST, Oct. 18, 2010, at A17; Nakashima, supra note 70. For a discussion on the heavy 
U.S. reliance on private information infrastructure, see McConnell, supra note 5. For a discussion of the 
intersection of cyber-security and civil liberties, see Gregory T. Nojeim, Cybersecurity and Freedom on 
the Internet, 4 J. NATL SEC. L. & POLY 119 (2010). 
 
150.  In March 2011, for example, industry and civil liberties groups collaborated and published 
a white paper opposing government-centric regulatory approaches to cyber-security. The white paper 
was published jointly by the Business Software Alliance, Center for Democracy  &  Technology, U.S. 
Chamber of Commerce,  Internet  Security  Alliance, and TechAmerica. BUS. SOFTWARE ALLIANCE  ET 
AL., IMPROVING OUR NATIONS CYBERSECURITY THROUGH THE PUBLIC-PRIVATE PARTNERSHIP (Mar. 
8, 2011), http://www.cdt.org/files/pdfs/20110308_cbyersec_paper.pdf. 
 
 
 
INTL STUDIES, supra note 5, at 23-27; and LIBICKI, supra note 111, at 39-41. 
 

151.  See supra notes 61-62 and accompanying text. 
152.  For a discussion of these roles of law, see CHAYES, supra note 95, at 88-106. 
153.  For  an  overview  of  deterrence  problems  in  cyberspace,  see  CTR.  FOR  STRATEGIC  AND 

 

2011] 

Cyber-Attacks and the Use of Force 

453 

Article is neither affirming nor denying this strategic logic, which is contingent 
on  future  capabilities  and  vulnerabilities  that  are  both  highly  uncertain  and 
shrouded in secrecy. Rather, it is trying to uncover and scrutinize some of the 
underlying assumptions. 

There are several strategic reasons for the United States to be cautious in 
considering  interpretations  that  expand  narrow  definitions  of  force  and 
attack  so  that  they  include  potentially  broad  categories  of  cyber-attacks
risks that are often not acknowledged or addressed in discussions of the U.S. 
interpretive trajectory. For one thing, the United States has generally defeated 
efforts by other states to interpret Articles 2(4) and 51 expansively to include 
economic coercion and other forms of political subversion.154 In thinking about 
the  Charter  regime  as  a  whole,  therefore,  the  United  States  may  not  want  to 
reopen  those  debates.  Cyber-attacks  can  allow  state  and  nonstate  actors  to 
inflict massive harm without resort to arms, but that has long been true of many 
other instruments, including economic and financial means, covert subterfuge, 
and other widely used instruments. In that regard, one advantage of promoting 
legal  regulation  of  cyber-attacks  through  a  new  treaty  or  international 
agreement instead of through Charter interpretation is that such efforts would 
have  little  if  any  effect  on  broader  Charter  law.  An  advantage,  however,  to 
working  through  Charter  interpretation  rather  than  new  agreements  is  that 
Charter  law  can  evolve  incrementally  and  begin  shaping  international  actors 
expectations through unilaterally initiated state practice without having to reach 
consensus (the difficulties of which are discussed in the next Section). 

Depending  on  the  relative  risk  of  different  types  of  future  cyber-attack 
scenarios, it might also be in the United Statess strategic interest to legally de-
link cyber-activities from armed force instead of defining force by reference to 
effects, or at least to impose extremely high legal thresholds for treating cyber-
attacks equivalent to force or armed attack, in order to reduce the chances of 
military  escalation  from  cyber-activities.155  As  capabilities  proliferate  among 
state  and  nonstate  actors  to  conduct  various  sorts  of  malicious,  hostile,  or 
intelligence-gathering  activities  in  cyberspace,  any  normative  constraints  that 
come from treating some cyber-attacks as force prohibited by Article 2(4) and 
any deterrence value of treating them as armed attacks triggering self-defense 
rights under Article 51 might be outweighed by the dangers of lowering legal 
barriers to military force in a wider range of circumstances.156 That is, the value 
 
154.  See supra Section II.A. 
 
 
155.  See LIBICKI, supra note 111, at 69-70. For a discussion of low-intensity cyber-conflict 
from a strategic and legal standpoint, see Sean Watts, Low-Intensity Computer Network Attack and Self-
Defense,  87  INTL  L.  STUD.  (forthcoming  2011),  available  at  http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers
.cfm?abstract_id=1685896&. 
 
156.  Schmitt  argues  that  a  high  threshold  for  self-defense  to  armed  attacks  is  especially 
important in the case of cyber-attacks due to the difficulty states may have in identifying the correct 
source of an attack. Schmitt, supra note 29, at 929; see also NRC COMMITTEE REPORT, supra note 4, at 
256 (discussing costs and benefits to preventing escalation in setting an appropriate threshold for self-
defense). Recall from the discussion of the ICJs Nicaragua case that a drawback of a high threshold for 
self-defense  is  that  it  may  inadequately  deter  low-level  hostile  actions.  See  supra  notes  119-121  and 
accompanying text; see also Lewis, supra note 43 at 16 (The development of mutual understandings 
among  nations  on  thresholds  for  conflict,  including  what  actions  can  be  considered  a  violation  of 
 
 

 

454 

THE YALE JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 

[Vol. 36: 421 

of promoting a right of armed self-defense against cyber-attacks may turn out 
to be quite lowsince, among other things, it may be difficult to sufficiently 
prove ones case publicly in justifying military responseswhile doing so may 
introduce  greater  security  instability  to  the  international  system  by  eroding 
normative constraints on military responses to nonmilitary harms.157 

As the following Section explores, it is very difficult to assess these risk 
balances because the global security environment is shifting dramatically and 
unpredictably.  Moreover,  even  if  the  United  States  could  assess  the  risks 
accurately,  other  states  may  be  operating  under  different  sets  of  strategic 
assumptions about that future. 

C.  Divergent Interests and Implications for Charter Interpretation 

Assuming the United States decides firmly on a legal interpretation going 
forward, the redrawing of legal lines on a map of inequitably distributed power 
and vulnerabilities would create winners and losers and would make it difficult 
to  reach  agreement  on  new  legal  boundaries,  whether  through  interpretive 
evolution  of  the  U.N.  Charter  or  new  conventions.158  In  thinking  about  legal 
interpretations of Articles 2(4) and 51, success therefore depends on the ability 
of proponents to articulate and defend their legal lines using combinations of 
traditional and new forms of power for deterrence, self-defense, enforcement, 
and influence. 

Again,  one  should  not  divorce  analysis  of  any  proposed  content  of 
Articles 2(4) and 51 from the processes by which it is interpreted, reinterpreted, 
enforced,  and  reinforced.159  The  likely  factual  ambiguity  surrounding  cyber-
attacks and the pressures to take aggressive responsive or escalatory measures 
more quickly than those facts can be resolved may sometimes require strategic 
and  military  decisionmaking  amid  legal  gray  zones.  Moreover,  as  involved 
states  marshal  their  arguments  amid  these  moves  and  countermoves,  and  as 
they consider their long-term interests, they may also calculate differently what 
Stone  calls  the  expected  value  .  .  .  of  built-in  [legal]  ambiguities  as  future 
political weapons.160 

That  is,  even  if  states  widely  share  a  common,  minimum  interest  in 
restricting  some  cyber-attacks,  states  may  have  divergent  interests  regarding 
specific substantive content as well as the desired degree of clarity in the law. 
Salient  differences  will  likely  stem  from  asymmetries  of  geostrategic 
ambitions, internal and external commitment to legal norms generally, and the 

 
sovereignty, on what constitutes an act of war, and what actions are seen as escalatory, could reduce the 
potential for cyberwar.). 
 
157.  An alternative is to interpret Article 2(4)s prohibitions of force to include some cyber-
attacks based on their effects but to interpret Article 51s self-defense armed attack trigger narrowly, 
to exclude cyber-attacks. Cf. Schmitt, supra note 29, at 928-29 (arguing that if Article 2(4) is interpreted 
to  include  cyber-attacks  it  would  be  prudent  to  narrowly  interpret  states  right  to  armed  self-defense 
against them). 
 
 
 
 

158.  See Goldsmith, supra note 112, at 26. 
159.  See supra Section III.B. 
160.  STONE, supra note 34, at 242. 

 

2011] 

Cyber-Attacks and the Use of Force 

455 

nature and extent of public-private institutional relationships.161 

In contrast to the United States, some states that are developing offensive 
cyber-warfare  capabilities  (such  as  North  Korea,  according  to  many  experts) 
are non-status-quo powers or aspiring regional powers,162 and they may prefer 
legal ambiguity as to cyber-attacks or narrow interpretations of Article 51 that 
would  allow  themif  they  resort  to  cyber-attacksto  portray  themselves  as 
victims of any responsive military strikes.163 Offensive cyber-capabilities have 
the  potential  to  shift  or  upset  international  balances  of  power,  because  some 
states are more vulnerable than others to cyber-attack (in terms of capacity to 
block actions as well as to tolerate or withstand them), and attacks could have a 
disproportionately  large  impact  on  countries  or  militaries  that  have  a  higher 
reliance on networked information systems.164 Developing an offensive cyber-
warfare  capability  is  likely  to  be  less  expensive  in  resources  and  diplomatic 
costs  than  competing  economically  or  militarily  with  much  stronger  states, 
though legal flexibility or constraints could alter that calculus.165 On the other 
hand, some small states that are unlikely to develop sophisticated offensive or 
defensive  systems  may  advocate  international  legal  interpretations  or  new 
agreements that are very restrictive of cyber-attacks and define attacks broadly, 
 
 
161.  See  generally  DANIEL  L.  BYMAN  &  MATTHEW  C.  WAXMAN,  THE  DYNAMICS  OF 
COERCION:  AMERICAN  FOREIGN  POLICY  AND  THE  LIMITS  OF  MILITARY  MIGHT  (2002)  (arguing  that 
power relations shape constraints, including legal and diplomatic, under which states can use or threaten 
force).  Internally,  some  U.S.  government  officials  bristle  at  what  they  see  as  overly  restrictive  legal 
constraints. See Nakashima, supra note 59. 
 
162.  See  Choe  Sang-Hun  &  John  Markoff,  Cyberattacks  Jam  Government  and  Commercial 
Web Sites in U.S. and South Korea, N.Y. TIMES, July 9, 2009, at A4. Admiral Mike McConnell, the 
former Director of National Intelligence and Director of the NSA, stated: 

If I were an attacker and I wanted to do strategic damage to the United States, I would 
either take the cold of winter or the heat of summer, I probably would sack electric power 
on the U.S. East Coast, maybe the West Coast, and attempt to cause a cascading effect. 
All of those things are in the art of the possible from a sophisticated attacker. 

163.  Consider,  by  way  of  analogy,  the  Oil  Platforms  case,  discussed  supra  notes  77-79  and 

Quoted  in  Cyber  War:  Sabotaging  the  System,  CBS  NEWS  (Nov.  8,  2009),  http://www.cbsnews.com/
stories/2009/11/06/60minutes/main5555565.shtml. 
 
accompanying text. 
 
164.  See CLARKE & KNAKE, supra note 50, at 259 (The asymmetry of what it costs to counter 
our conventional military versus the minimal investment required for a cyber war capability will tempt 
other nations, and perhaps criminal cartels and terrorist groups as well.); Lynn, supra note 5, at 108 
(Cyberattacks offer a means for potential adversaries to overcome overwhelming U.S. advantages in 
conventional military power and to do so in ways that are instantaneous and exceedingly hard to trace 
. . .  .);  Peter  Apps,  Iran  Attack  Points  to  Rising  Cyber  Warfare  Risk,  REUTERS  (Sept.  24,  2010), 
http://www.reuters.com/article/idUSTRE68N45Q20100924  ([C]yber  warfare  is  seen  as  a  particularly 
appealing option for countries that remain far outmatched by the conventional military might of the U.S. 
North  Korea  is  seen  as  having  particular  advantages  in  any  cyber  confrontationits  own  national 
computer  infrastructure  is  so  outdated  that  there  would  be  little  if  anything  for  South  Korea  or  U.S. 
cyber warfare experts to counter-attack against.); see also U.N. Secretary-General, Developments in the 
Field  of  Information  and  Telecommunications  in  the  Context  of  International  Security:  Rep.  of  the 
Secretary-General, at 5, U.N. Doc. A/64/129 (July 8, 2009) (statement of Kazakhstan) (arguing that the 
lack  of  consensus  on  international  approaches  to  regulating  cyber-warfare  can  be  explained  by  the 
technological  gap  between  the  most  and  the  least  develop  countries,  latent  political  differences  and 
conflicting ways of assessing developments and events in cyberspace). For views more skeptical that 
cyber-capabilities will radically alter power balances, see generally MARTIN C. LIBICKI, CONQUEST IN 
CYBERSPACE (2007); and GREGORY J. RATTRAY, STRATEGIC WARFARE IN CYBERSPACE (2001). 
165.  See  STEWART  BAKER,  SKATING  ON  STILTS  218-20  (2010);  see  also  U.N.  Secretary-
 
General, supra note 164, at 3 (statement of Brazil) (The efficiency of this form of warfare is increased 
by the fact that relatively small investments are required to develop many of those capabilities.). 
 
 

 

456 

THE YALE JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 

[Vol. 36: 421 

seeing  themselves  as  highly  reliant  on  protective  norms.166  Individually, 
though, they will have little power to promote those principles. 

Like the United States, other major actors may have much to lose from 
cyber-attacks. However, they may calculate their short- and long-term strategic 
interests  with  respect  to  cyber-warfare  and  its  regulation  differently  than  the 
United  States,  in  light  of  their  own  matrix  of  offensive  and  defensive 
capabilities,  public-private  institutional  relationships,  and  asymmetries  in  the 
ways international law constrains different actors.167 Russia, for example, has 
proposed  to  the  United  Nations  a  draft  statement  of  principles  that  would 
prohibit the development, creation, and use of cyber-attack tools. Meanwhile, 
though, Russia is engaged in developing cyber-attack capabilities,168 and some 
analysts  are  skeptical  of  Russias  sincerity  in  proposing  cyber-arms  control 
agreements, especially given the difficulties of verifying them.169 China likely 
sees cyber-warfare capabilities as a way of equalizing the conventional military 
superiority  of  the  United  States,170  so  it  may  be  reluctant  to  concede  legally 
disarming  interpretations,  at  least  without  some  reciprocal  benefit  or  legal 
concession.  Russia  and  China,  which,  as  mentioned  earlier,  both  reportedly 
exploit  informal  relationships  with  private  actors  (i.e.,  citizen  hackers)  to 
conduct attacks and collect intelligence in cyberspace, may also incline toward 
legal  doctrine  that  makes  it  difficult  to  impute  private  cyber-actions  to 
governments.171 Meanwhile, some European states have approached the legal 
relationship  between  cyber-attacks  and  force  cautiously,  perhaps  because  of 
general  concerns  about  military  escalation  of  crises  and  divergent  strategic 
assessments among themselves.172 

Differences  in  internal  politics,  ideology,  and  government  control  over 
information  will  also  shape  state  interests  in  competing  interpretations  of 

168.  See  NRC  COMMITTEE  REPORT,  supra  note  4,  at  329-32;  John  Markoff  &  Andrew  E. 

167.  For  discussion  of  such  legal  jockeying  among  states,  see  Sean  Kanuck,  Sovereign 

 
 
166.  See,  e.g.,  U.N.  Secretary-General,  Developments  in  the  Field  of  Information  and 
Telecommunications in the Context of International Security: Rep. of the Secretary-General, Addendum, 
at 8, U.N. Doc. A/64/129/Add.1 (Sept. 9, 2009) (statement of Mali) (The use of an information weapon 
could be interpreted as an act of aggression if the victim State has reasons to believe that the attack was 
carried out by the armed forces of another State and was aimed at disrupting the operation of military 
facilities,  destroying  defensive  and  economic  capacity,  or  violating  the  States  sovereignty  over  a 
particular territory.). 
 
Discourse on Cyber Conflict Under International Law, 88 TEX. L. REV. 1571, 1585-87 (2010). 
 
Kramer, U.S. and Russia Differ on Treaty for Cyberspace, N.Y. TIMES, June 28, 2009, at A1. 
169.  See BAKER, supra note 165, at 230-31. 
 
 
170.  See NRC COMMITTEE REPORT, supra note 4, at 332-33; OFFICE  OF  THE SECY  OF DEF., 
ANNUAL REPORT TO CONGRESS: MILITARY POWER OF THE PEOPLES REPUBLIC OF CHINA 27-28 (2009). 
 
171.  See supra notes 128-129 and accompanying text. For a discussion of doctrine regarding 
imputing nonstate actors attacks to a state, see Roscini, supra note 29, at 99-102. In more conventional 
contexts of military attacks, for example, such doctrine sometimes turns on the type and degree of state 
control or influence over a nonstate actors actions, but that doctrine is difficult to apply in the cyber-
context because conventional military operations usually involve stricter hierarchical control and other 
indicia (like provision of military materiel) than one might expect here. See id. 
 
172.  See  supra  note  57  (discussing  NATOs  tentativeness).  In  light  of  Estonias  experience, 
however, some European states may take a more aggressive view, closer to that of the United States, and 
place  a  greater  value  on  deterrence.  See  Kodar,  supra  note  49,  at  139  (discussing  the  Estonian 
perspective). 
 

 

2011] 

Cyber-Attacks and the Use of Force 

457 

Charter  norms.  With  echoes  of  debates  from  prior  eras,173  various  types  of 
states are likely to view cyber-threats differently and to distinguish offensive 
attacks  from  defensive  measures  differently.  For  instance,  some  states  that 
tightly control information, including major powers like China, are especially 
concerned about internal political dissent and might therefore define what the 
United States sees as Internet freedom as a threat to vital security interests. 
Efforts to crack down on what they (or other states that exercise strong state 
control over Internet content) may view as defensive measures against hostile 
subversion may be viewed by the United States (or other states that value and 
promote free speech) as hostile, offensive measures.174 It is hard to envision a 
state in Chinas position strongly endorsing or standing behind U.S. visions for 
international 
legal  regulation  of  cyber-attacks  without  some  unlikely 
concessions by the United States.175 

From a policy standpoint, this should sound another cautionary note about 
efforts to build international legal consensus about cyber-attacks and the use of 
force,  whether  through  Charter  interpretation  or  new  agreements.  Emergent 
U.S.  government  inclinations  toward  effects-based  interpretations  of  the 
Charter may be legally reasonable and protective of some core U.S. interests, as 
well as widely shared foreign interests. But even if they help in the short term 
to manage competing risks of too much or too little authority to employ cyber-
attacks,  or  too  much  or  too  little  leeway  to  resort  to  armed  self-defense  in 
response, a coherent legal strategy can only be forged and advanced in the long 
term if it is integrated effectively with broader diplomacy and security strategy, 
including  efforts  to  build  and  sustain  offensive,  defensive,  deterrent,  and 
intelligence capabilitieswhile others do the same based on a different set of 
objectives, capabilities, vulnerabilities, and constraints. 

 

*     *     * 

 
 
173.  As  an  example  of  such  echoes,  a  Russian  representative  to  a  2008  U.N.  disarmament 
conference revived old Soviet arguments about ideological aggression, arguing that efforts to promote 
ideas on the Internet in order to subvert another countrys government should qualify as aggression. See 
Gjelten,  supra  note  143;  cf.  Franck,  supra  note  87,  at  814  ([O]ne  has  only  to  have  experienced  a 
revolution in Africa or the Middle East to know that an effective, radio transmitter may be worth more 
than its weight in grenades and pistols.). 
 
174.  In the same address quoted earlier in which Secretary of State Clinton spoke of defending 
against  attacks  on  U.S.  networks  or  information  flow,  she  went  on  to  discuss  U.S.  efforts  to  help 
political dissidents evade state Internet censorship and to promote political change via Internet freedom 
in repressive states, including technical support. See Clinton, supra note 55; see also Goldsmith, supra 
note 143 (discussing this policy tension). 
 
A  set  of  2010  incidents  involving  Google  and  China  is  illustrative.  Google  alleged  that  its 
systems  had  been  penetrated,  resulting  in  the  surveillance  of  and  crackdown  on  Chinese  political 
activists. The United States responded diplomatically in ways suggesting that the Chinese government 
had launched this hostile assault on Googles systems. See Michael Wines, China Issues Sharp Rebuke 
to U.S. Calls for an Investigation on Google Attacks, N.Y. TIMES, Jan. 26, 2010, at A6. Although China 
denied  involvement,  it  likely  viewed  any  such  actions  as  defensive  against  subversive  efforts  being 
waged  over  those  systems.  Id.;  see  also  Eric  Schmidt  &  Jared  Cohen,  The  Digital  Disruption: 
Connectivity and the Diffusion of Power, FOREIGN AFF., Nov./Dec. 2010, at 75, 76 (There will be a 
constant  struggle between  those  striving  to  promote  what  U.S.  Secretary  of  State  Hillary  Clinton has 
called  the  freedom  to  connect  and  those  who  view  that  freedom  as  inimical  to  their  political 
survival.). 
 
 

175.  See Goldsmith, supra note 143, at 7-9. 

 

 

458 

THE YALE JOURNAL OF INTERNATIONAL LAW 

[Vol. 36: 421 

 

As  the  opening  U.S.-Iran  hypothetical  as  well  as  early  Cold  War  legal 
debates demonstrate, the policy imperative to align legal moves with broader 
strategy has long existed with respect to other inequitably distributed forms of 
strength  and  vulnerability,  including  military  might,  economic  prowess,  and 
surreptitious political influence. Since the Charters creation, the United States, 
like  its  partners  and  rivals,  has  pursued  an  international  legal  strategy  in  the 
context of grand geopolitics, resulting in a dynamic interplay of law and power: 
states instruments for exerting power and their vulnerabilities to them shape 
their approaches to legal interpretation, while legal constraints in turn affect the 
instruments of statecraft and vulnerabilities. 

The  same  policy  imperatives  hold  with  respect  to  the  United  Statess 
ability to compete in an emergent cyber-security environment likely to include 
powerful actors with divergent interests and those who would violate whatever 
legal  lines  begin  to  emerge,176  and  a  world  in  which  rapidly  developing 
technology  will  reshape  the  nature  and  distribution  of  power.177  The 
prescription  is  not  to  abandon  interpretive  or  multilateral  legal  efforts  to 
regulate cyber-attacks, but to recognize their likely limits and to consider the 
implications  of  legal  proposals  or  negotiations  in  the  context  of  a  future 
security environment that is shifting radically and fraught with uncertainties. 

V.  CONCLUSION 

Cyber-attacks  pose  difficult  line-drawing  problems,  but  we  must  avoid 
missing the strategic forest in thinking about the legal trees. Some problems of 
cyber-warfare  for  regulating  force  are  at  the  same  time  unique  yet  familiar. 
Viewing  these  questions  in  the  context  of  Cold  War  debates  about  the  U.N. 
Charter and its prohibition of force highlights that although the technology of 
conflictboth  in  terms  of  capabilities  and  probable  vulnerabilitiesis 
changing  in  revolutionary  ways,  many  of  the  interrelated  strategic  and  legal 
challenges that arise are not new. 

Legal  line  drawing  with  respect  to  the  U.N.  Charter  and  use  of  force 
norms  creates  geostrategic  winners  and  losers,  so  debates  about  Charter 
interpretation  have  always  reflected  distributions  of  power  and  vulnerability. 
That lesson helps to explain what appears to be the emergentthough not yet 
formalized and publicizedU.S. legal orientation on cyber-attacks, as well as 
some of the nascent re-posturing from the standard American stance on the use 
of force through much of the Charters history. 

Even  if  the  U.S.  governments  assumptions  about  threats  and  conflict 
bear out in an uncertain future, other major state actors in this area are likely to 
have different views on legal line drawing because they perceive a different set 
 
176.  See NRC COMMITTEE REPORT, supra note 4, at 69-70. 
 
 
177.  See Anne-Marie Slaughter, Americas Edge: Power in the Networked Century, FOREIGN 
AFF., Jan./Feb. 2009, at 94; see also Schmidt & Cohen, supra note 174, at 75 (For the worlds most 
powerful  states,  the  rise  of  the  interconnected  estate  will  create  new  opportunities  for  growth  and 
development. . . . States will vie to control the impact of technologies on their political and economic 
power.). 
 

 

2011] 

Cyber-Attacks and the Use of Force 

459 

of  strategic  risks  and  opportunities.  It  will  therefore  be  difficult  to  reach 
interpretive agreement. Moreover, particular characteristics of cyber-attacks
including the low visibility of attacks and counter-actions, likely disputes about 
key facts, and difficulties in establishing attribution and causationwill make 
it especially difficult to build legal consensus around the U.S. position. For the 
foreseeable  future,  the  United  States  will  have  to  pursue  its  offensive  and 
defensive strategy on an uncertain and unstable international legal terrain. 

 

 

 

