INTEGRATIVE NEUROSCIENCE
Neural synchrony in cortical networks: history, concept and 
current status

ORIGINAL RESEARCH ARTICLE
published: 30 July 2009
doi: 10.3389/neuro.07.017.2009

Peter J. Uhlhaas1,2, Gordon Pipa1,3, Bruss Lima1, Lucia Melloni 1, Sergio Neuenschwander 1, Danko Nikolic  1,3 
and Wolf Singer 1,3*

1  Department of Neurophysiology, Max Planck Institute for Brain Research, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
2  Laboratory for Neurophysiology and Neuroimaging, Department of Psychiatry, Johann Wolfgang Goethe Universitat, Frankfurt am Main, Germany
3  Frankfurt Institute for Advanced Studies, Johann Wolfgang Goethe Universitat, Frankfurt am Main, Germany

Edited by:
Rui M. Costa, Champalimaud 
Neuroscience Programme, Instituto 
Gulbenkian de Ciencia, Portugal
Reviewed by:
Miles A. Whittington, Newcastle 
University, UK
Shih-Chieh Lin, Duke University 
Medical Center, USA
*Correspondence:
Wolf Singer, Department of 
Neurophysiology, Max Planck Institute 
for Brain Research, Deutschordenstr. 
46, Frankfurt am Main 60528, 
Germany. 
e-mail: singer@mpih-frankfurt.mpg.de

Following the discovery of context-dependent synchronization of oscillatory neuronal responses 
in the visual system, the role of neural synchrony in cortical networks has been expanded to 
provide a general mechanism for the coordination of distributed neural activity patterns. In the 
current paper, we present an update of the status of this hypothesis through summarizing recent 
results from our laboratory that suggest important new insights regarding the mechanisms, 
function and relevance of this phenomenon. In the fi rst part, we present recent results derived 
from animal experiments and mathematical simulations that provide novel explanations and 
mechanisms for zero and nero-zero phase lag synchronization. In the second part, we shall 
discuss the role of neural synchrony for expectancy during perceptual organization and its role 
in conscious experience. This will be followed by evidence that indicates that in addition to 
supporting conscious cognition, neural synchrony is abnormal in major brain disorders, such 
as schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorders. We conclude this paper with suggestions for 
further research as well as with critical issues that need to be addressed in future studies.

Keywords: synchrony, oscillations, gamma, cortex, cognition

INTRODUCTION
NEURAL SYNCHRONY IN CORTICAL NETWORKS
The cerebral cortex is a highly distributed system in which  numerous 
areas operate in parallel, exchange their results via reciprocal reen-
trant  connections  and  through  self-organizing  dynamics  create 
coherent states that are equivalent with representations of sensory 
objects, decisions and programs for motor acts. The topology of the 
connectivity shares properties with small world networks which 
implies that there are certain areas which sustain more connections 
than others (hubs) but that there is no singular center where all 
information converges and which would be in a position to serve as 
a supraordinate coordinating center. This raises a number of impor-
tant questions: i) how are the numerous computations occurring 
simultaneously in spatially segregated processing areas coordinated 
and bound together to give rise to coherent percepts and actions, 
ii) how are input signals selected for further processing and how are 
the results of sensory processes routed selectively across the densely 
connected network to executive structures and fi nally, iii) how are 
the  often  graded  relations  between  simultaneously  represented 
contents encoded. In principle, there are two different solutions 
to these problems. First, devoted architectures of connections that 
assume coordinating and binding functions through convergence 
and divergence of labelled lines, and second, dynamics that allow 
for the self-organization of ever changing  spatio-temporal activity 
patterns on the backbone of fi xed anatomical connections. These 
two strategies are not mutually exclusive but can coexist and com-
plement one another. In the review we shall concentrate on the 
second strategy and here, in particular, on coordinating mecha-
nisms that rely on the temporal patterning of neuronal activity and 

comprise phenomena such as self-generated network oscillations, 
synchronization and phase locking.

An important link between temporal patterning of neuronal 
activity and cortical computations was the discovery that oscillatory 
rhythms in the beta/gamma range (2080 Hz) serve to establish 
precise and context dependent temporal relations  in this case 
 synchrony    between  distributed  neural  discharges.  Gray  et al. 
(1989)  showed  that  action  potentials  generated  by  cortical  cells 
align with the oscillatory rhythm which has the consequence that 
neurons  phase  locked  to  synchronized  oscillations,  synchronize 
their discharges with high precision. More recent evidence indicates 
that these oscillations are not only instrumental for the synchroni-
zation of neuronal discharges but can support also other consistent 
temporal relations by establishing systematic phase lags between 
the discharges of distributed neurons. In-vitro studies (Volgushev 
et al., 1998) and multi-site recordings in the visual cortex of cats 
(Fries  et al.,  2001b)  provided  evidence,  that  the  oscillatory  pat-
terning of neuronal activity is an effi cient mechanism to adjust the 
precise timing of spikes and is potentially a versatile mechanism 
to convert rate coded input to cells into a temporal code defi ned 
by the time of occurrence of spikes relative to the oscillation cycle 
(see also Fries et al., 2007).

Following the initial descriptions of context dependent synchro-
nization in the visual cortex, numerous studies have been initiated 
in  order  to  investigate  the  functional  role  of  this  phenomenon. 
These have demonstrated that response synchronization is a ubiqui-
tous phenomenon in cortical networks and likely to serve a variety 
of different functions in addition to feature binding at early levels 
of sensory processing.

Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 

www.frontiersin.org 

July 2009  |  Volume 3  |  Article 17  |  1

Uhlhaas et al. 

Neural synchrony in cortical networks

Studies  in  the  motion  sensitive  area  MT  of  the  visual  cortex 
of  awake  monkeys  (Kreiter  and  Singer,  1996),  the  optic  tectum 
of pigeons (Neuenschwander et al., 1996), other cortical areas in 
the cat (Engel et al., 1991) and the retina (Neuenschwander and 
Singer, 1996) provided evidence that the oscillatory patterning of 
neuronal responses and the synchronization of these oscillations 
is  highly  sensitive  to  context.  Combining  multi-site  recordings 
with the sectioning of the corpus callosum (Engel et al., 1991) and 
with developmental studies (Konig et al., 1993; Lowel and Singer, 
1992) indicated that the long distance synchronization of oscilla-
tory responses is mediated to a substantial extent by the network 
of  reciprocal  cortico-cortical  connections.  Multi-site  recordings 
also provided evidence that synchronization occurs between widely 
distributed structures, such as the primary visual cortex, the optic 
tectum and the suprasylvian cortex (Brecht et al., 1998) and that 
it plays a role in the coordination of widely distributed functions 
as is required e.g. in sensory-motor processing (Roelfsema et al., 
1997). This latter study indicated further that synchronized oscil-
latory activity is not only stimulus driven but also generated in 
anticipation of a visual discrimination task requiring fast motor 
responses. This observation led to the hypothesis that self- generated 
oscillatory activity in the beta- and gamma frequency range could 
be a correlate of focused attention and serve both modality specifi c 
selection of stimuli and the coordination of sensory and execu-
tive subsystems required for the execution of the anticipated task. 
A close relation between synchronization and input selection has 
also been found in experiments on binocular rivalry (Fries et al., 
2001a).

The notion of an involvement of synchronized beta- and gamma 
oscillations in attention dependent processes agrees also with the 
evidence that there is a close relation between arousal, activated 
cortical states and the occurrence of high frequency oscillations. 
Gamma oscillations occur only with activated cortical states and 
require for their expression activation of muscarinic receptors in 
the cortex (Herculano-Houzel et al., 1999; Munk et al., 1996).

Taken  together,  the  results  suggested  that  synchronization 
enhances the saliency of the synchronized responses which can in 
turn be used for a variety of different operations. Joint increases 
of saliency favour joint selection and processing of signals which 
can in principle support attention dependent stimulus selection 
and feature binding.

The notion that the saliency of responses can be enhanced in 
a complementary way either by increases of discharge rate or by 
synchronization has later received direct support from experiments 
on apparent brightness perception (Biederlack et al., 2006).

THE GENERATION OF NEURAL SYNCHRONY
The discovery of synchronized oscillations has motivated a large 
number of in-vitro studies searching for the mechanisms that would 
generate these oscillations and this led to a re-evaluation of the 
functional role of inhibitory interneurons. Classically, inhibition 
has  been  considered  as  a  mechanism  for  gain  control,  contrast 
enhancement and improvement of signal to noise ratios. In-vitro 
investigations of oscillating networks demonstrated, however, that 
the network of inhibitory interneurons plays a crucial role in the 
rhythmic pacing of neuronal activity. Through this additional func-
tion they assume a pivotal role in the temporal structuring and 

coordination of neuronal responses (Cardin et al., 2009; Sohal et al., 
2009; for a review see Bartos et al., 2007).

These  experimental  results  on  oscillatory  neuronal  networks 
have motivated a large number of theoretical studies investigat-
ing the functional properties of networks capable of engaging in 
oscillations  and  stimulus  dependent  synchronization  patterns. 
These studies provided deep insights into both the mechanisms 
that sustain oscillations and their synchronization as well as the 
putative functions of the temporal coding strategies that can be 
implemented in networks of coupled oscillators with essentially 
non-linear dynamics (Traub et al., 2004).

STUDIES IN HUMAN SUBJECTS
Non invasive electrophysiological methods such as EEG and MEG 
recordings register preferentially if not exclusively synchronized 
neuronal activity because they average over large populations of 
neurons. Thus, non-synchronized sources of activity tend to cancel 
out and synchronized signals are enhanced. This, together with the 
ease to perform demanding psychophysical experiments, is one of 
the reasons why investigations on synchronized oscillations and 
their putative function have been particularly rewarding in human 
subjects. These studies provided rapidly growing evidence for a 
close relation between synchronous oscillatory activity in the beta- 
and gamma frequency range and a variety of cognitive functions 
such as perceptual grouping, focused attention, maintenance of 
contents in short term memory, poly-sensory integration, forma-
tion of associative memories and sensory motor coordination (for 
review see Singer, 2004; Tallon-Baudry, 2009).

THE SCOPE OF THE PRESENT REVIEW
Despite  the  abundant  evidence  for  close  correlations  between 
 oscillatory activity and a wide range of physiological and psycho-
logical  phenomena,  we  are  still  far  from  understanding  the  full 
implications of the complex dynamics expressed in networks capa-
ble of engaging in oscillatory activity in various frequency bands. 
Numerous observations support the hypothesis that oscillations 
and synchrony are the backbone of temporal coding strategies but 
most of the evidence is still correlative in nature. Therefore, search 
for the functional implications of self-organized temporal pattern-
ing  of  neuronal  activity  is  pursued  by  an  increasing  number  of 
laboratories both at the experimental and theoretical level.

In the present review, we provide an update of results obtained 
in our lab that suggest novel mechanisms for the temporal coor-
dination of distributed neuronal-responses and extend the scope 
of functions subserved by synchronized oscillatory activity. In this 
context we present results derived from animal experiments and 
mathematical simulations that provide explanations for the conun-
drum that nerve nets with fi nite conduction delays can synchronize 
with zero-phase lag (see Theoretical Approach by Pipa). In addi-
tion, we discuss evidence that suggests that small delays between 
spikes occurring in synchrony with gamma oscillations contain 
stimulus  related  information  (see Novel  Empirical  Results  on 
Temporal Coding by Nikolic ). Next we present novel data on the 
relationship between attention, expectancy and gamma oscillations 
(see Building Expectations: New Vistas for Gamma Oscillations by 
Lima and Neuenschwander) and the relation between phase lock-
ing of high frequency oscillations and  consciousness (see Neural 

Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 

www.frontiersin.org 

July 2009  |  Volume 3  |  Article 17  |  2

Uhlhaas et al. 

Neural synchrony in cortical networks

Synchrony as a Mechanism for Conscious Perception? by Melloni). 
Finally, we investigate the relevance of synchronous oscillations in 
the context of psychiatric syndromes and report recent data which 
indicate that neural synchrony is abnormal in major psychiatric 
diseases  such  as  schizophrenia  and  autism  spectrum  disorders 
that are associated with altered states of consciousness and dys-
functional cognition (see Neural Synchrony in Schizophrenia and 
Autism Spectrum Disorders by Uhlhaas).

In the fi nal part of the paper, we provide a perspective on open 
questions and challenges regarding the role of oscillations and syn-
chrony and propose some empirical and theoretical strategies to 
cope with these questions.

MECHANISM AND CODING PROPERTIES OF 
SYNCHRONIZATION
One  of  the  central  problems  regarding  neural  synchrony  is  the 
questions of how neurons can synchronise their responses with zero 
or near-zero phase lag synchrony. Early studies showed that zero-
phase lag synchronization can occur even between distant neuronal 
assemblies, raising the question of the mechanistic implementation 
of such phenomena. This is particularly relevant as the conduction 
delays in cortex make the occurrence of zero-phase lag synchrony 
diffi cult to accomplish.

In the following two sections, we will summarise recent work that 
has used computer simulations and mathematical approaches as well 
as multi-unit recordings to reveal novel mechanisms of zero lag and 
near-zero phase synchronization. We begin this section with what is 
known today about the low-level mechanisms responsible for genera-
tion of neuronal synchrony and for coding information by synchro-
nized groups of neurons. The fi rst section Theoretical Approach is 
mostly an overview of the theoretical work, which revealed a number 
of counterintuitive phenomena that could not be detected without 
the efforts based on mathematical analyses and computer simulations. 
The second section Novel Empirical Results on Temporal Coding 
describes empirical work that helped elucidate the fundamentals of 
the synchrony-related operations within the neocortex.

THEORETICAL APPROACH
Mechanisms for zero lag synchrony
A special and challenging case of synchronization is zero time lag or 
zero phase synchronization in which the activity is modulated syn-
chronously and either without any temporal delay or delay much 
smaller than the conduction delays (near zero time lag or near 
zero phase). Remarkably, most neuronal synchrony was found to 
occur with such small phase lags between periodic or quasi peri-
odic dynamics (Roelfsema et al., 1997). For simplicity, the fi rst part 
focuses on zero time lag synchronization exclusively. Near time zero 
lag sychronization is covered in later sections. However, so far only 
very few and highly specialized models have been able to account 
for zero lag synchrony in networks coupled with delay. Especially in 
neuronal networks these delays can be substantial due to conduc-
tion times, synaptic delays and electrotonic propagation.

Maybe the simplest mechanism to induce zero phase synchro-
nization is entrainment via common drive from a single source, i.e. 
from other cortical and sub-cortical areas (Steriade et al., 1993), 
that  synchronizes  the  respective  target  cells.  In  local  networks, 
pacemaker cells with intrinsic oscillatory activity can entrain the 

network activity in certain frequency range, i.e. chattering cells that 
have been discussed to be involved in generating stimulus driven 
gamma oscillations (Gray and McCormick, 1996). It is important 
to note that entrainment determines both the rhythm and the syn-
chronization among the target cells. To study the limits of this sim-
ple mechanism in complex networks we modelled common drive 
and entrainment by an unidirectional coupling with an auxiliary 
hub (Huang and Pipa, 2007). The remarkable and generalizable 
fi nding was that entrainment via an auxiliary hub can always syn-
chronize activity, and this occurs for any arbitrary coupling, e.g. 
linear or non-linear, for any network topology, and for a wide range 
of intrinsic properties of the neurons of the network. In addition, a 
lower bound was identifi ed for the minimal coupling strength nec-
essary for synchronization by entrainment. This minimal coupling 
strength was a function of the type of coupling between the hub 
and the network, but also of the properties of the network itself. 
Thus, the occurrence of synchronization can be controlled either 
by modifying the coupling of the auxiliary hub and therefore the 
strength of the entrainment and/or by modifi cations of the intrin-
sic properties of the neurons in the synchronized network or the 
coupling within this network. This suggests that even for a simple 
mechanism such as entrainment, the synchronization can be very 
dynamic, depending both on the strength of the entrainment and 
on numerous parameters of the complete system.

Another class of mechanisms for zero phase synchrony is emerg-
ing synchronization by network effects. This mechanism is very 
different from entrainment, since emerging properties are arising 
by the interaction of the elements in the network and cannot be 
explained by a single element or a subset of isolated elements alone. 
For zero phase synchronization based on such network effects sev-
eral mechanisms have been proposed. Among these are recurrent 
inhibition, mutual excitation, mutual inhibition, gap junction cou-
pling and synaptic spike doublet based coupling (Kopell et al., 2000; 
Ritz and Sejnowski, 1997; Van Vreeswijk et al., 1994). Especially for 
the biologically relevant case of non-instantaneous coupling and 
heterogeneous networks, the recurrent inhibition between excita-
tory and inhibitory sub networks was found to stabilize and induce 
zero phase synchronization reliably and quickly (Kopell et al., 2000; 
Van Vreeswijk et al., 1994). In addition, synchronization via recur-
rent inhibition can synchronize neuronal activity without changing 
the overall fi ring rate of the neurons (Tiesinga and Sejnowski, 2004; 
Buia and Tiesinga, 2006), as it was reported by many experimental 
studies. In contrast, instantaneous excitatory coupling was shown 
to favor desynchronization rather than synchrony for a broad class 
of  models  and  parameter  regimes  (Kopell  et al.,  2000;  Ritz  and 
Sejnowski, 1997).

Compared to chemical coupling, the gap junction coupling is 
electrical and almost instantaneous. Its importance for generating 
oscillatory and synchronous activity was highlighted in experimen-
tal studies that demonstrated that fast oscillations can be observed 
even  if  chemical  synaptic  transmission  is  blocked  (Buzsaki  and 
Draguhn, 2004). The nature of gap junction coupling is diffusive 
and essentially homogenizes the membrane potential fl uctuations 
in the network. This homogenization was shown to lead to comple-
mentary effects of electrical and chemical coupling for networks that 
comprises both types at the same time. It was shown that electrical 
and chemical coupling act similarly and add up linearly when the 

Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 

www.frontiersin.org 

July 2009  |  Volume 3  |  Article 17  |  3

Uhlhaas et al. 

Neural synchrony in cortical networks

coupling of both types is weak. However, due to  homogenization 
of fl uctuations of the membrane potential, even weak gap junction 
coupling can boost the effect of the much stronger chemical cou-
pling (Kopell and Ermentrout, 2004). This suggests that more than 
a single mechanism may contribute to zero phase synchronization 
and demonstrates that modifi cations of individual mechanisms can 
substantially alter the synchronization patterns.

Another class of mechanisms that support zero phase synchrony 
is based on spikes in rapid succession, e.g. doublets of spikes (Kopell 
et al., 2000). The model was confi rmed by experimental fi ndings in 
rat hippocampus slices, which linked the fi ring of spike doublets 
by interneurons to gamma oscillations that are synchronized over 
several millimeters (Traub et al., 1996). However, for long range 
synchronization  across  different  regions  and  especially  across 
hemispheres, none of the above mentioned local mechanisms is 
general enough. Synchronization via spike doublets breaks down 
for gamma frequencies when conduction delays become large and 
recurrent inhibition with or without gap junction coupling is only 
plausible for local networks due to the topology that is dominated 
by local neuronal coupling.

In addition, the topology of complex networks turns out to be 
another very important parameter for the establishment of local 
and long-range synchronization. Entrainment via an auxiliary hub 
can be seen as an extreme case (Huang and Pipa, 2007) but topolo-
gies also play an essential role in cases of emergent synchrony. Thus, 
hubs  in  the  network  were  proposed  to  shorten  the  path  length 
between elements and therefore to foster fast and stable synchrony 
(Arecchi et al., 1999; Grinstein and Linsker, 2005). An alternative 
approach to study dynamical properties and to infer functionality 
of the topology of complex networks is the decomposition of a net-
work in principle building blocks, i.e. motifs that are repeated con-
nectivity patterns within the network (Milo et al., 2002; Sporns and 
Kotter, 2004). However, a generalizing framework that describes 
synchrony in complex networks has not been found yet.

Finally,  several  authors  have  suggested  that  the  reciprocal 
coupling of cortical areas with the different thalamic nuclei may 
 support the coordination of distributed cortical processing (Llinas 
and Pare, 1998; Sherman and Guillery, 2002). The thalamus with its 
bidirectional and radial connectivity to the neo-cortex represents 
a simple network motif. It consists of a V-shaped confi guration 
composed of three populations, two of which are bidirectionally 
coupled with the third. The special role of this third central popu-
lation  is  that  it  redistributes  common  activity  to  the  two  other 
populations in a symmetrical way (Fischer et al., 2006). We could 
recently  demonstrate  that  the  dynamics  in  this  network  motif 
can naturally induce and stabilize zero phase lag synchronization 
between the outer populations for any conduction delay between 
the populations (Vicente et al., 2008).

The principle behind this mechanism is that relaying the activity 
of the outer two neuronal populations via a central mediator redis-
tributes identical information to both outer elements and therefore 
allows for self-organized lag-free synchronization among the outer 
pools (see Figure 1). It is important to emphasize that the central 
element is the key for the communication among the populations, 
but does not dictate the dynamics as in the case of a master-slave 
system. Therefore, zero phase synchronization via relaying is an 
emergent property of all three populations. Remarkably, dynamical 

relaying has also been demonstrated to be an effective mechanism 
for inducing and stabilizing zero time lag synchronization between 
chaotic elements (Fischer et al., 2006). Regarding the temporal pre-
cision and the time the system needs to synchronize, the mechanism 
proved to be compatible with experimentally observed millisecond 
precise synchronization that is established within tens of millisec-
onds or very few oscillation cycles. The mechanism also overcomes 
the problems posed by long axonal delays and high frequencies that 
cannot be coped with by other synchronizing mechanisms. Thus, 
dynamical relaying based synchronization might provide a general 
solution for the establishment of long range neuronal synchrony, 
irrespective of whether the V-motif is implemented via cortico-
thalamic or purely cortico-cortical connections.

Near zero-phase synchronization
In addition to zero-phase synchronization, oscillations also display 
synchronization with consistent phase differences of fractions of an 
oscillation cycle (see below). A special case of near zero phase syn-
chrony are delays that are additive. In this case the relative phase differ-
ence between pairs of neurons can also be expressed as a relative delay 
compared to a single global synchronized dynamics of the network.
One possibility to explain near zero phase synchrony is detun-
ing. In heterogeneous networks individual elements can have dif-
ferent intrinsic properties such as the resonant frequencies. When 
coupling of the intrinsically different elements leads to globally 
synchronized activity, the activity of each individual element needs 
to be adjusted to match global dynamics. For systems that are com-
posed of oscillatory or excitable elements with different resonant 
frequencies it is well known that the adaptation to a single and glo-
bal rhythm requires individual adjustments of phase advances and 
lags (Pikovsky et al., 2001; Schuster and Wagner, 1989). Therefore, 
detuning naturally leads to phase differences among the elements 
of  the  network.  For  oscillatory  activity  and  global  synchroniza-
tion  detuning  even  leads  to  additive  phase  differences,  that  can 
be expressed for each individual as a phase difference to a single 
global dynamics. Additive phase relations were also discussed to be 
caused by small differences in conduction delays from a common 
drive. Regarding the encoding of information (see Novel Empirical 
Results on Temporal Coding), both the detuning but also the com-
mon drive hypothesis open the possibility to encode information in 
the relative timing of the discharges of individual neurons through 
a temporal code that is based on phase relations.

NOVEL EMPIRICAL RESULTS ON TEMPORAL CODING
Function of near zero phase lags in synchrony
The early work on synchronized cortical events indicated that many 
of these phenomena do not result from stimulus locked synchroni-
zation but from internally generated temporal patterning based on 
gamma and beta oscillatory activity. Meanwhile, it became apparent 
that systematic phase-lags occurring with sub-millisecond preci-
sion may enable the cortex to exploit temporal relationship between 
action potentials for information coding in sensory systems.

A coding mechanism based on phase lags has been already dis-
covered  in  the  hippocampus  and  is  supported  by  the  internally 
generated oscillations in the theta range (58 Hz) (OKeefe and 
Recce, 1993) and in the neo-cortex for oscillations in the gamma 
range (>40 Hz). These oscillations are not locked to the stimuli but 

Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 

www.frontiersin.org 

July 2009  |  Volume 3  |  Article 17  |  4

Uhlhaas et al. 

Neural synchrony in cortical networks

FIGURE 1 | Dynamics of three networks of excitatory and inhibitory 
neurons interacting through dynamical relaying. (A) Topology of the 
relaying motif. Here, three networks 1, 2, 3 each composed of 20 inhibitory 
(red) and 80 excitatory (blue) neurons. To control the activity level of each 
population external Poisson input is used (grey spikes). The conductions 
delays are 12 ms and therefore signifi cant compared to the period of the 
oscillation. (B) Raster plot of the activity of each neuron of population 1 
(neurons 1100), population 2 (neurons 101200) and population 3 (neurons 
201300). Blue spikes are from the excitatory and red spike from the 
inhibitory neurons. At coupling ton at 100 ms the coupling between the 

populations was activated. After 90 ms of activated coupling P1 and P3 start 
being zero-phase synchronized. The whole synchronization period lasts 
about 130 ms. Note that the activity of the relaying population P2, gets less 
synchronized due to individual phase adaptations of P2 neurons during the 
synchronization period between 160 and 230 ms. This indicates that the 
relaying population P2 is not acting as a master that entrains P1 and P3, but 
that synchronization is established between P1 and P3 via relaying of activity 
through P2. (C) Average cross-correlation between population P1 or P3 and 
the relaying population P2. (D) Average cross correlation between the outer 
populations P1 and P3.

are generated by internal mechanisms independently of stimulus 
timing. The neurons discharge during particular phases of the oscil-
lation cycle whereby the relative phase of spike generation varies in 
a context dependent way. In the hippocampus cells fi re progressively 
earlier in the theta-cycle as the animal traverses the cells place fi eld, 
a phenomenon called phase precession (Buzsaki, 2002; OKeefe and 
Recce, 1993). Consequently, neurons that follow the same rhythm 
generate also action potentials in precise temporal relationships 
relative to each other. Oscillations in the theta frequency range are 
also observed in the neocortex where they coexist with much faster 
oscillations in the beta and gamma bands, i.e. >20 Hz.

These high frequency oscillations are important for the gen-
eration  of  precise  temporal  relations  and  neuronal  synchrony. 
Two  neurons  are  said  to  synchronize  their  discharges  when  the 
likelihood that they will both fi re action potentials within a small 
time  window  (up  to  several  milliseconds  wide)  is  much  higher 
than what is expected by chance. The chance level is determined 
from the overall fi ring rates of the neurons. For a pair of  neurons, 

 synchronization is commonly assessed from the narrow  centre-peaks 
in cross- correlation histograms (CCH) (see example in Figure 2A) 
but  recently  also  methods  have  been  developed  that  can  detect 
synchrony simultaneously across a large number of neurons (Pipa 
et al.,  2007,  2008).  These  methods  overcome  certain  limitations 
of pair-wise CCH analysis and permit rate corrected detection of 
higher order correlations.

There are two ways how neuronal synchrony may support the 
encoding of information about stimuli. The fi rst and the most exten-
sively investigated is the modulation of the strength of synchroni-
zation. The degree to which neurons synchronize their discharges 
can vary and depends on many variables, such as the similarity of 
the feature preferences of neurons and the spatial distance between 
them. Neurons in the visual cortex are more likely to synchronize 
their responses the more their orientation preferences are similar 
and the closer their receptive fi elds are in space (Betsch et al., 2004). 
These and other results (Gray et al., 1989) have led to the hypothesis 
that the strength of neuronal synchrony serves to signal  information 

Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 

www.frontiersin.org 

July 2009  |  Volume 3  |  Article 17  |  5

Uhlhaas et al. 

Neural synchrony in cortical networks

B

A

F

C

D

E

FIGURE 2 | Detection and comparison of neuronal fi ring sequences and the 
relationship between psychophysical measurements and strength of 
synchrony. (A) An example cross-correlogram (CCH) that indicates a shifted 
centre peak. The magnitude of shift is estimated by fi tting a Gabor function. 
(B) An apparently complex network of the directions (arrows) and the magnitudes 
of phase offsets (in milliseconds) extracted from all possible pair-wise CCHs as in 
(A). The arrangements of the units within the 4  4 matrices refl ect the spatial 
positions of the recording sites on the 16-channel recording probes. The delays are 
segregated into two panels because otherwise the representation would be 

overcrowded. The upper panel indicates only the delays between the pairs of units 
that preferred similar stimulus orientations and the lower panel between the pairs 
that preferred different stimulus orientations. The orientations of the 
corresponding receptive fi elds are schematized on the far left and the bar stimulus 
illustrated on the top. (C) Excerpt from (B) indicating a case of additivity across 
three units precise to two-tenths of a millisecond. (D) For the example in (C), the 
extraction of the relative fi ring sequence is illustrated. (E) Graphical presentation 
of the results in (D). (F) Examples four-unit networks with transitive (black) and 
non-transitive (red) directions of delays in CCHs. Adapted from Nikolic  (2007).

about the relatedness between the visual  features that activate those 
neurons (Singer, 1999).

The second principle for coding information by neuronal syn-
chrony is similar to that in hippocampus and utilizes the delays 
or phase-offsets among the discharges of neurons that are partici-
pating in synchronized assemblies. In the neocortex, neurons are 
rarely  synchronized  with  exact  zero  delays.  Instead,  CCHs  usu-
ally reveal small but highly stable and signifi cant delays (Havenith 
et al.,  2009;  Konig  et al.,  1995;  Nikolic ,  2007;  Roelfsema  et al., 
1997; Schneider and Nikolic , 2006). These delays may extend up 
to 15 ms (Schneider and Nikolic , 2006) and do not refl ect con-
duction delays as they change as a function of stimulus properties. 
They also vary systematically for different pairs of simultaneously 
recorded  units,  which  allows  one  to  extract  a  one-dimensional 
representation of the relative fi ring times for all coupled, i.e. syn-
chronized neurons (Figures 2BE). Thus, cortical neurons exhibit 
systematic differences in their fi ring times relative to some internal 
reference. Systematicity can be formally conceived as additivity of 
phase delays (e.g., Figure 2C), which allows parametric analysis 
based on ANOVA (Schneider et al., 2006). Alternatively, the direc-
tions of phase offsets can be investigated without considering their 
magnitudes in which case they are treated as mathematical transi-
tivity and can be subjected to non-parametric analysis (Figure 2F) 
(Nikolic , 2007).

Unpublished observations support the notion that the internal 
reference signal for the rank ordering of phase offsets are theoften 
stimulus inducedoscillations in the high frequency range (beta 
and  gamma).  Most  importantly,  these  delays,  and  thus  also  the 
relative fi ring times, change dynamically as a function of stimu-
lus properties (Konig et al., 1995; Nikolic , 2007; Schneider et al., 
2006). This led to the hypothesis that the relative time at which 
a  neuron  sends  action  potentials  could  be  exploited  to  encode 
stimulus-related information (Nikolic  et al., 2004). One possible 
encoding principle is a conversion of an amplitude code to a tem-
poral code, such that more strongly depolarized neurons generate 
action potentials earlier than the less optimally stimulated ones 
(Fries et al., 2007).

In Figure 3A we show a fi ring sequence determined from the 
spike-trains obtained from 14 units in area 17 of a cat. Figure 3B 
indicates that this sequence is reliable when the same stimuli are 
presented twice and Figure 3C that the sequence changes if stimu-
lus properties are changed. The extent to which this putative code 
can be used for computations in the brain and the accuracy with 
which it can carry information are yet to be investigated. Our results 
suggest that the trial-to-trial variability of fi ring sequences can be 
comparable to that of neurons fi ring rates, the pre-condition for 
such a remarkable coding precision being the presence of strong 
beta/gamma oscillations (Havenith et al., 2007).

Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 

www.frontiersin.org 

July 2009  |  Volume 3  |  Article 17  |  6

Uhlhaas et al. 

Neural synchrony in cortical networks

a fundamental mechanism by which the nervous system achieves 
its  function.  Likewise,  beta/gamma  oscillations  could  serve  not 
only to adjust the timing of action potentials but they could also 
provide an internal temporal reference for the extraction of this 
information.

Complementary rate and temporal code
In addition to studying putative principles of temporal coding, it 
is necessary to collect evidence for a functional role of synchrony. 
One indication comes from a study in which we related changes in 
synchrony to a perceptual phenomenon called apparent brightness 
(Biederlack et al., 2006). With multisite recordings in the cat visual 
cortex we compared directly the changes in discharge rate and syn-
chrony with stimulus modifi cations that lead to changes in apparent 
brightness. This revealed a close match between a psychophysical 
function describing the magnitude of the visual illusion on the one 
hand, and the change in the strength of synchronization between the 
neurons responding to the stimulus, on the other (Figures 4A,B). 
Moreover, by comparing changes in discharge rate and synchrony 
for different stimulus confi gurations the study  indicated that an 

In future, the spatial extent to which neurons can engage into 
this distributed code and its possible specifi city for certain cortical 
layers or for given cortical areas will need to be determined. There 
are several options how this information can be read out by indi-
vidual neurons. Simple integrate-and-fi re neurons with suffi ciently 
short integration time constants have been shown to be sensitive 
to information encoded in the precise stimulus-induced temporal 
relations of neuronal discharges (Nikolic  et al., 2007). It remains to 
be seen how these properties and the implementation of additional 
computational capabilities through active dendritic mechanisms 
improve the readout of the rich temporal relations resulting from 
internal patterning of response timing. The available evidence sug-
gests that the biophysical properties of the dendritic processes are 
well suited for such readout of coincident events (Williams and 
Atkinson, 2008) and temporally ordered information. The exqui-
site sensitivity of spike timing dependent plasticity (STDP) for the 
sequence  order  of  pre-  and  post-synaptic  activity  indicates  that 
precise temporal relations matter in neuronal processing and can 
be read out effi ciently (Markram et al., 1997).

The main motivation for the present studies is that the fi ring 
sequences driven by beta/gamma activity and defi ned within a sin-
gle oscillation cycle may constitute a mechanism for the encoding 
and exchange of information in the cortex. Thus, in addition to the 
fi ring rates, precise timing of individual discharges may be used to 
gate transmission and synaptic plasticity, to selectively route activity 
across the densely interconnected cortical network and to defi ne 
particular relations in distributed activity patterns. This hypothesis 
is directly related to the present research and needs to be pursued. 
If supported by further data it will have profound implications for 
our understanding of brain function. Temporal sequences may be 

A

B

Time [ms]

C

FIGURE 3 | (A) A fi ring sequence extracted for a network of 14 units. The 
dots denote the estimated positions of the units, the number their identities, 
and the black curves indicate the localization errors. (B) The relative fi ring 
sequence in (A) estimated for two repetitions of the same stimuli. Gray lines 
parallel to the diagonal indicate error limits of two standard deviations. Unit 
identities are indicated on the right side of the panel. (C) Changes in fi ring 
sequences as a function of a change in stimulus properties. Stimuli are 
sketched in the corners of the graph. Units outside the error lines change 
signifi cantly their preferred fi ring times. Adapted from Schneider et al. (2006).

FIGURE 4 | The role of synchrony for perception of brightness. (A) In the 
two centre-surround stimuli, the gratings in the centre are physical identical. 
Nevertheless, most observers report seeing stronger contrast on the right 
where the centre is offset for 180 relative to the surround. (B) Experimental 
results obtained with stimuli shown in (A). Red: Human psychophysical 
judgments of changes in perceived contrast as a function of phase offset 
between the centre and surround. Blue: Changes in the strength of 
synchronization between neurons in cat area 17 whose receptive fi elds were 
covered by the centre stimuli and whose orientation preferences matched the 
orientation of the grating. Adapted from Biederlack et al. (2006).

Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 

www.frontiersin.org 

July 2009  |  Volume 3  |  Article 17  |  7

Uhlhaas et al. 

Neural synchrony in cortical networks

increase in synchrony produces a perceptual effect that is equivalent 
to an increase in fi ring rates. That is, if neurons synchronize more 
strongly, the stimulus is perceived more intensively. The signifi cance 
of this study is that conclusions are based on a close match between 
complete physiological and psychological functions, which were 
determined for the entire spectrum of stimulus properties, exceed-
ing thus the usual correlative evidence based only on extreme values 
(e.g., minimum and maximum stimulus intensities).

This type of analysis allows one to falsify theories even when the 
analyses of extreme values support them and are correlated per-
fectly. In our case, this allowed us to falsify an alternative hypothesis 
that synchrony accounted for fi gure-ground segregation, which, 
besides the extremes, showed otherwise completely uncorrelated 
measures (Biederlack et al., 2006). At the same time, by showing 
a close match between increased perceived brightness and either 
increased synchrony or increased discharge rate, the results showed 
the perceptual equivalence of raising the saliency of responses either 
by increasing discharge rate or synchrony.

CONCLUDING REMARKS
In conclusion, in this section we have fi rst presented a theoretical 
framework for synchronization among neurons with delays smaller 
than the conduction delays. Next, we have reviewed empirical evi-
dence for the existence of such delays and for their functional role 
in brain computations. These studies are at the very beginning of 
the search for temporal codes and we expect the research in this 
direction to expand. It will be a great challenge to provide direct 
causal proof that changes in fi ring sequences affect behavior or 
psychological experience (e.g., perception). However, this applies 
equally to all other codes that have been investigated in the attempt 
to bridge the brain-mind gap.

BUILDING EXPECTATIONS: NEW VISTAS FOR GAMMA 
OSCILLATIONS
As argued above, a critical step in understanding perceptual organi-
zation is to fi nd out how the brain builds stable relationships among 
sensory inputs. For this, however, it is not only important to know 
about  encoding  principles,  but  also  to  probe  ongoing  states  of 
expectancy and attention. Beyond a purely  sensory-driven approach 
to perception, this view focuses on topdown mechanisms which 
are related to large-scale dynamics at multiple scales. The mecha-
nisms  underlying  these  processes  are  still  largely  unknown.  As 
discussed before, an attractive hypothesis is that precise temporal 
patterning of neuronal activity provides a framework for contextual 
links (Engel et al., 2001; Singer, 1999). In this model, sensory inputs 
interact  with  internally  generated  signals  necessary  for  building 
predictions about the world.

Evidence in support of the neuronal synchronization hypothesis 
was initially obtained in anesthetized animals, and later extended to 
waking and conscious states, as described in cats (Gray and Viana 
Di Prisco, 1997; Roelfsema et al., 1997; von Stein et al., 2000), non-
human (Eckhorn et al., 1993; Frien and Eckhorn, 2000; Gail et al., 
2000; Kreiter and Singer, 1992, 1996; Maldonado et al., 2000) and 
human  primates  (Palva  and  Palva,  2007;  Rodriguez  et al.,  1999; 
Tallon-Baudry et al., 1997). Notwithstanding these fi ndings, after 
two  decades  of  research,  the  role  of  gamma  in  feature  binding 
remains a matter of dispute and controversy (Ghose and Maunsell, 

1999; Roelfsema, 2006; Shadlen and Movshon, 1999; Singer, 1999). 
In monkeys, several studies designed to test for perceptual group-
ing failed to support the synchronization hypothesis (Dong et al., 
2008; Lamme and Spekreijse, 1998; Palanca and DeAngelis, 2005; 
Roelfsema et al., 2004; Thiele and Stoner, 2003).

More recently, however, evidence became available that synchro-
nization of gamma oscillatory responses are closely linked to more 
general cognitive functions such as selective attention (Doesburg 
et al., 2008; Dong et al., 2008; Fan et al., 2007; Fries et al., 2001a; 
Lakatos et al., 2008; Roy et al., 2007; Steinmetz et al., 2000; Taylor 
et al., 2005; Womelsdorf and Fries, 2006; Womelsdorf et al., 2007), 
short-  and  long-term  memory  (Herrmann  et al.,  2004;  Pesaran 
et al., 2002; Wu et al., 2008) and multisensory integration (Lakatos 
et al., 2007), suggesting that gamma-oscillations may have a much 
wider relevance in cortical networks for behavioral and cognitive 
phenomena.

In this section, we present new experimental evidence support-
ing this hypothesis by showing that, in addition to selective atten-
tion, preparation to respond or perceptual readiness also leads to 
a selective increase in the gamma components of the responses. 
Since the modulation in gamma power associated with readiness 
exhibits very fast dynamics, it may play a particularly important 
role in perceptual organization, as briefl y discussed below.

It is well established that arousal and attention are of general rel-
evance for visual processing (Posner, 1980). Studies in monkeys and 
humans have shown that attention can selectively enhance process-
ing of image features (Desimone and Duncan, 1995; Reynolds and 
Desimone,  2000;  Sheinberg  and  Logothetis,  2001;  Spitzer  et al., 
1988). Directing attention to a stimulus at a particular location leads 
to an increase in its effective contrast (Carrasco et al., 2004; Reynolds 
and Chelazzi, 2004) and can modulate tuning properties (Roberts 
et al., 2007; Spitzer et al., 1988). Given the central role of attention in 
perception, Fries and collaborators, decided to investigate whether 
gamma oscillations could also serve as a selection mechanism. In 
recordings  from  area V4,  they  have  found  strong  phase-locking 
between  spiking  activity  and  ongoing  LFP  oscillations  confi ned 
to the gamma band (Fries et al., 2001a, 2008; Womelsdorf et al., 
2006, 2007). Based on these fi ndings, a mechanism was proposed 
in which effective communication within distributed neuronal net-
works relies essentially on the precise temporal relationships (Fries, 
2005; Fries et al., 2007, 2008). According to this hypothesis, atten-
tional enhancement of neuronal synchronization would facilitate 
selectively  the  communication  among  synchronized  assemblies, 
which is thought to be important for a large number of operations 
underlying cortical processing (Azouz and Gray, 2003; Salinas and 
Sejnowski, 2000; Sejnowski and Paulsen, 2006).

In order to investigate the dependency of gamma oscillations 
on attentional preparation, or readiness, we have trained macaque 
monkeys to respond to a variety of stimuli, such as gratings, plaids 
and Gabor patches (Lima et al., 2006, 2007; Neuenschwander et al., 
2008). In all these paradigms the monkeys were required to detect 
a stimulus change at fi xed time points within the trial. Here we 
present results obtained for responses to Gestalt fi gures embed-
ded  in  2D-arrays  of  Gabor  patch  elements  (Neuenschwander 
et al., 2008). During this task, the Gabor elements changed their 
 orientation randomly every 400 ms. At a fi xed time point (3200 ms), 
a  subset  of  neighboring  Gabors  were  aligned  to  form  a  closed 

Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 

www.frontiersin.org 

July 2009  |  Volume 3  |  Article 17  |  8

Uhlhaas et al. 

Neural synchrony in cortical networks

fi gure. The appearance of the fi gure required a motor response, 
and  therefore, implicitly carried a behavioral relevance. Thus, in 
anticipation of the stimulus, the monkeys were likely to build up 
expectancy, or response readiness along the course of the trial.

Neuronal responses were recorded at multiple sites in area V1. 
The embedded fi gures were constructed as a function of the posi-
tion and properties of the receptive fi elds of the neurons. In this 
way,  a  unique  fi gure  was  designed  for  every  new  set  of  record-
ing  sites. Within  the  trial,  the  changes  in  the  orientation  of  the 
Gabor elements were set to match the preference of the cells at fi xed 
epochs, coinciding or not with the appearance of the fi gure. Thus, 
we could study the same local responses in two contexts: in one 
case associated with a global percept (Figure 5), and in the other 
not.  Figure 5A  shows  the  average  peri-stimulus  time  histogram 
(PSTH) obtained for a single cell. Robust responses to the matching 

FIGURE 5 | Perceptual readiness modulates gamma power in V1 of the 
monkey. (A) Average response histogram for a single cell to a Gabor element 
centered over its receptive fi eld. The orientation of the Gabor element 
changes at 400 ms steps. Notice the strong responses for the epochs of 
orientation match. Analysis windows are indicated by the shadowed 
rectangles on the plot. Direction tuning is shown on the left. Spontaneous 
activity is represented by the central circle, maximum average rate is indicated 
at the bottom right of the plot. (B) Sliding window autocorrelation for the 
responses shown above. Plots are aligned in time. Autocorrelation functions 
were computed for 200 ms windows at steps of 50 ms. (C) Corresponding 
power spectra obtained for the local fi eld potential (LFP) and spiking activity 
recorded from the same electrode. Thin line: window of match in the middle 
of the trial. Thick line: window of match prior to the behavioral response (in this 
example, coincides with the appearance of the embedded fi gure). 
Multitaper spectral analysis was obtained using the Chronux analysis 
software. Power was normalized by the fi ring rate. Thin lines around the mean 
indicate 95% confi dence intervals.

orientation of the Gabor element are readily visible in the histogram 
as brief transient peaks followed by a sustained component. The 
last epoch of orientation match was the one associated with the 
fi gure. At this very moment the monkey was required to respond 
within 500 ms with a lever release. Notice that response levels were 
similar for all epochs in which the stimulus orientation matched 
the orientation preference of the neurons.

A dramatic difference, however, was revealed in the temporal 
structure of the responses. As shown by the sliding autocorrelation 
analysis of the spiking activity (Figure 5B), there was a marked 
increase of gamma oscillatory components developed prior to the 
behavioral response. Accordingly, the spectral analysis of the LFP 
and  single  cell  spiking  activity  showed  a  peak  at  around  50 Hz, 
which was more pronounced for the window associated with the 
behavioral  response  (Figure 5C).  Controls  were  also  made  for 
behavioral  responses  without  the  appearance  of  an  embedded 
 fi gure  (not  shown).  In  those  cases  the  monkey  had  to  report  a 
color change of the fi xation point. Surprisingly, we have found no 
signifi cant differences in gamma modulation between the condi-
tions with and without the embedded fi gure, indicating that the 
stimulus per se was not responsible for the enhancement. Thus, 
there was no simple relation between gamma synchronization and 
the binding of elements into a fi gure.

Taken together, our results suggest that gamma activity is strongly 
modulated by central states, probably related to perceptual readi-
ness or readiness to act. A potential explanation could be higher 
levels  of  arousal  associated  with  the  anticipation  of  behavioral 
responses. States of central activation are associated with cholin-
ergic facilitation of gamma activity (Herculano-Houzel et al., 1999; 
Rodriguez et al., 2004). It remains to be clarifi ed, however, whether 
there is a direct link between the motor response preparation per se 
and the modulation of gamma activity in V1. The fast modulation 
of gamma power in the present experiments could be mediated by 
topdown infl uences or ascending cholinergic mechanisms con-
trolling the intrinsic dynamics of the cortical networks. In either 
case, the anticipatory entrainment of the visual cortex in highly 
synchronous gamma oscillations is likely to be instrumental for 
the expected processing of sensory signals and their propagation 
towards executive structures. Recently it has been shown that coher-
ence between motor cortex and spinal motor neurons increases as 
function of readiness to respond (Schoffelen et al., 2005), similar 
to our results in V1. These corticospinal interactions haven been 
interpreted as evidence for a role of gamma synchronization in 
neuronal communication (Fries, 2005). It would be interesting to 
see, whether more anterior cortical regions also engage in anticipa-
tory gamma activity and whether there are any consistent temporal 
relationships.

NEURAL SYNCHRONY AS A MECHANISM FOR CONSCIOUS 
PERCEPTION?
The distributed organization of the primate brain poses particular 
challenges for understanding the integrative aspect of cognition, of 
which consciousness is the utmost example. The intentional feature 
of consciousness, the fact that our experience always refers to some-
thing, suggests that understanding how the content of cognition is 
represented in the brain, and how unifi ed experience can emerge 
out of distributed brain activity might be particularly informative 

Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 

www.frontiersin.org 

July 2009  |  Volume 3  |  Article 17  |  9

Uhlhaas et al. 

Neural synchrony in cortical networks

in the quest for the neuronal correlates of  consciousness (NCC)1. 
Thus, theories of binding and large-scale integration have recently 
come into the focus of the research on consciousness (Engel and 
Singer, 2001; Thompson and Varela, 2001).

One candidate mechanism for dynamic sub-system integration 
is the precise synchronization between the participating neuronal 
assemblies (Varela et al., 2001). Several properties make neuronal 
synchrony worth considering in the context of the NCC. Besides 
offering a mechanism to link elementary features together and thus 
allowing  for  the  representation  of  composite  perceptual  objects, 
binding by neuronal synchrony could confer the brain with a vast 
and economical representational space (Singer, 2002).Considered 
at  a  large  scale,  synchronization  of  distant  neuronal  assemblies 
could allow for subsystem integration and thus account for the uni-
fi ed  aspect  of  conscious  experience  (e.g.,  where  different  sources 
of  information  are  bound  in  an  integrative  cognitive  moment). 
However, processes explaining how the unity of conscious experi-
ence is achieved do not suffi ce alone as a potential mechanism for 
consciousness. Any  given  theory  of  the  NCC  should  also  at  least 
explain how different percepts dynamically map into different states, 
and how the system dynamically selects subsets of neuronal responses 
for conscious representation. Importantly, given that a considerable 
amount  of  cognitive  and  executive  operations  can  be  performed 
without being aware of them (Dehaene et al., 1998, 2001; Sergent 
et al., 2005), it is also necessary to distinguish between these two 
types of processing (conscious and non-conscious) at the neural level. 
Evidence suggests that changes in neuronal synchrony could account 
for these two processing modes. First, regular changes in the content 
of consciousness can be represented when considering that groups of 
neurons can take part or drop off from the dynamically linked net-
work. The formation of assemblies would be only limited by the time 
needed to establish stable states between them. This property could 
then account for the transitoriness and temporal fl ow of experience 
(Varela, 1999). Second, due to the coincidence sensitivity of cortical 
neurons synchronized inputs enhance the probability of response in 
target neurons (Salinas and Sejnowski, 2001), and this in turn would 
allow for the amplifi cation of neuronal responses and selection of 
subpopulations of responses based on the strength and propaga-
tion of their activity (Jensen et al., 2007). Third, the required switch 
between conscious and unconscious processing could be achieved 
by  varying  the spatial scale of the synchronized neuronal assem-
blies. Conscious cognition would involve long- distance coordination 
between distributed neuronal groups, whereas unconscious cogni-
tion  would  be  instantiated  by  local  coordination  (Dehaene  et al., 
2006; Thompson and Varela, 2001). Small world networks, of which 
the brain seems to be one example (Yu et al., 2008), combine these 
two processing modes: local modularity and long-range connectivity. 
Thus, depending on dynamic shifts in coupling, the same anatomical 
network can support both local and global  or subconscious and 
conscious  operations (Buzsaki, 2007).

1In the context of this review consciousness will be understood as the subjects ability 
to  detect  (report  the  presence  or  absence)  or  identity  (discrimination)  a  particu-
lar stimulus. In contrast, failure to detect or to identify will be taken as indication 
of unawareness. Thus, awareness refers to the representation of internal or sensory 
changes that are accessible to introspection or direct report. An NCC will be defi ned 
as the minimal set of neuronal events that are necessary and/or suffi cient for percep-
tual awareness (Chalmers, 2000; Kanwisher, 2001).

Long range synchronization in the beta and gamma range has 
been observed with scalp as well as with intracranial recordings 
when a coherent and unifi ed percept emerges in response to a given 
stimulus (Lutz et al., 2002; Rodriguez et al., 1999; Sehatpour et al., 
2008).  For  instance,  Sehatpour  et al.  (2008),  using  intracraneal 
electrodes, reported robust coherence in the beta-band between 
the hippocampal formation, occipitotemporal cortex, and lateral 
prefrontal cortex when participants recognized fragmented images. 
In  contrast,  when  scrambled  versions  of  the  same  images  were 
presented signifi cantly lower coherence was observed. These results 
suggest that transient oscillatory coupling between distributed cor-
tical regions may underlie effective communication during visual 
object processing. Furthermore, in conditions of competition such 
as in binocular rivalry selection of responses for further processing 
appears to be achieved via increases in neuronal synchronization of 
groups of neurons in the primary visual cortex of the cat (Fries et al., 
1997, 2002), while discharge rate of neurons does not distinguish 
between the dominant (perceived) and non-dominant (suppressed) 
pattern. Studies employing MEG and EEG in humans yielded simi-
lar results (Cosmelli et al., 2004; Doesburg et al., 2005; Srinivasan 
et al., 1999; Tononi et al., 1998): Perceived stimuli correlate with 
increased synchronization in the gamma range between distal cer-
ebral areas (occipital and frontal regions) (Cosmelli et al., 2004). 
Similar results have been obtained in the attentional blink para-
digm. Successful detection of stimuli was accompanied by increased 
synchronization in the beta range. Source analysis revealed, as in 
the case of binocular rivalry, dynamical coordination in the beta 
range between frontal, parietal, and temporal regions for detected 
targets (Gross et al., 2004).

Recently, in order to directly explore the relation between neuro-
nal synchrony and conscious perception, we designed a paradigm in 
which the electrophysiological signatures related to conscious and 
unconscious processing of visual stimuli were directly compared 
(Melloni et al., 2007). Subjects had to detect and identify a briefl y 
exposed  word  (33 ms)  presented  between  masking  stimuli.  The 
strength of the masks was adjusted such that in half of the trials 
subjects had no conscious recollection of having seen the word. 
After a delay of 500 ms a second word was presented, always vis-
ible, and the subject had to decide whether the two words were the 
same or different. Importantly, in an attempt to study the processes 
related to conscious perception dissociated from other cognitive 
processes such as decision making and motor response, the fi rst 
stimulus over which visibility was manipulated was separated in 
time from a second stimuli over which subject had to respond.

To study the neuronal signatures related to conscious processing 
and how they evolve over time we simultaneously recorded electro-
encephalographic activity (EEG) and subsequently analyzed differ-
ent measures of neuronal responses: time resolved power changes of 
local signals, the precision of phase synchronization across record-
ing sites over a wide frequency range, and event-related potentials. 
The fi rst electrophysiological event that distinguished seen from 
unseen words was an early and transient burst of long-distance 
synchronization observed in the gamma frequency. Regional dis-
tributions of gamma spectral power and phase revealed that the 
amplitude and patterns of gamma oscillations were spatially homo-
geneous and similar for the two conditions, while the patterns of 
phase synchrony were markedly different (Figure 6). Signifi cant 

Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 

www.frontiersin.org 

July 2009  |  Volume 3  |  Article 17  |  10

Uhlhaas et al. 

Neural synchrony in cortical networks

A

]
z
H

[
 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

]
z
H

[
 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

80

60

40

20

80

60

40

20

Visible Condition

0

200

400

600

800

Invisible Condition

0

200

400
Time [ms]

600

800

20

15

10

5

)

(
 
r
e
w
o
P

 
l

20

a
r
t
c
e
p
S

15

10

5

B

]
z
H

[
 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

]
z
H

[
 
y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

80

60

40

20

80

60

40

20

Visible Condition

0

200

400

600

800

Invisible Condition

0

200

400

600

800

Time [ms]

6

5

4

3

6

5

4

3

)

(
 
y
n
o
r
h
c
n
y
S
e
s
a
h
P

 

 

FIGURE 6 | Spectral power and phase synchrony to visible and invisible 
words. Words were fl ashed for 33 ms and surrounded by masks that depending 
on their luminance rendered the stimuli either visible or invisible. After around 
500 ms a second word was presented and subjects had to determine 
whether it was the same or different from the previously presented word. 
(A) Time-frequency plot and (B) Phase synchrony plot shows the grand average for 

all the electrode pairs. White lines depict the time when the fi rst and second word 
were presented. Color scale corresponds to amplitude expressed in SD, calculated 
over a 500-ms baseline. (A) Time-frequency plot: Two increments in gamma 
oscillations are visible. The fi rst, only present in the visible condition, the second in 
both conditions. (B) Phase locked synchrony: The fi rst peak is only present during 
the visible condition, whereas the second one is observed for both conditions.

phase locking within and across hemispheres, between occipital, 
parietal and frontal site was observed only for the visible condition 
and was absent in the invisible condition.

After this transient period of synchronization, an increase in 
amplitude of the P300 component was observed, which has been 
interpreted as a correlate of the transfer of information into work-
ing memory. Furthermore, we observed increases in amplitude of 
theta  oscillations  over  frontal  electrodes  during  the  interval  in 
which visible words had to be kept in memory, in accordance with 
the assigned role of frontal theta oscillations in the maintenance of 
short term memories (Jensen and Tesche, 2002; Schack et al., 2005). 
The specifi city of long-distance synchronization for conscious per-
ception was further supported in an additional experiment control-
ling for the depth of processing (Melloni and Rodriguez, 2007). 
Altogether our results show that the precise phase locking across 
a widely distributed cortical network, and not the power of the 
local stimulus induced gamma oscillation, is the earliest signature 
of conscious processing. This suggests that conscious processing 
requires a particular dynamical state of the cortical network. We 
propose that this transient synchronization might enhance the sali-
ency of the activation patterns not only allowing for contents to get 
access to consciousness but also triggering a cascade of processes 
such as perceptual stabilization, maintenance in working memory, 
and generation of expectations, all aspects intimately related with 
conscious awareness. It is at present unknown whether the early 
large-scale synchronization is already the neuronal correlate of phe-
nomenal awareness or whether awareness emerges only from the 
entirety of the processes following this coordinated state. In addi-
tion, it remains to be clarifi ed whether the large scale synchroniza-
tion transfers contents into awareness and/or maintains them. The 
transient nature of the effect argues in favour of the fi rst possibility. 

The subsequent theta oscillations might then support maintenance. 
The  rapid  update  of  new  contents  might  be  instantiated  by  the 
short periods of long-distance synchronization in the gamma band, 
while the slower pace of theta oscillations might relate to sustained 
integration and maintenance of local results. The interplay between 
these  two  frequency  bands  might  underlie  the  phenomenon  of 
continuous but ever changing conscious experience.

NEURAL SYNCHRONY IN SCHIZOPHRENIA AND AUTISM 
SPECTRUM DISORDERS
In addition to the putative role of neural synchrony in temporal 
coding, topdown modulation of sensory signals and large-scale 
integration of distributed neural assemblies, there is increasing evi-
dence suggesting that abnormal neural synchrony is a pathophysi-
ological mechanism in neuropsychiatric disorders. Accordingly, in 
the following section, we will examine the evidence for a relationship 
between alterations in neural synchrony and the pathophysiology of 
schizophrenia and autism spectrum disorders (ASD)2. These results 
suggest  that  there  are  fundamental  changes  in  neural  synchrony 
that may underlie the cognitive dysfunctions associated with these 
disorders as well as certain symptoms.

Testing this hypothesis may have important implications both for 
the potential understanding and treatment of the disorders as these 
belong to the most costly public health problems. Furthermore, 
research into brain disorders also holds the potential to gain novel 
insights into the functional relevance of neural synchrony during 
normal brain functioning by establishing close correlations between 

2Alterations in neural synchrony are not confi ned to these disorders (see Uhlhaas 
and Singer, 2006, for a review). Alterations in neural synchrony are also involved in 
Epilepsy, Parkinsons Disease and Alzheimers Disease, for example.

Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 

www.frontiersin.org 

July 2009  |  Volume 3  |  Article 17  |  11

Uhlhaas et al. 

Neural synchrony in cortical networks

abnormal synchronization and specifi c cognitive defi cits in a variety 
of neuropsychiatric disorders.

gamma-band  oscillations  across  a  wide  frequency  range  during 
perceptual organization in schizophrenia.

SCHIZOPHRENIA
From its earliest beginnings, the pathophysiology of schizophrenia 
has been described as a disorder involving a defi cit in the integration 
and coordination of neural activity that leads to dysfunctions in 
cognition. Thus, Bleuler (1911) chose the word schizophrenia to 
highlight the fragmentation of mental functions. Given the fun-
damental role of neural synchrony in establishing coherent mental 
contents (see Neural Synchrony as a Mechanism for Conscious 
Perception? by Melloni), it can therefore be proposed that impaired 
neural synchrony underlies the fragmentation of mental functions 
in schizophrenia.

Indeed, current theories of schizophrenia (Friston, 1999; Phillips 
and Silverstein, 2003) converge on the notion that core aspects of 
the pathophysiology are due to defi cits in the coordination of dis-
tributed neural processes that involve multiple cortical areas. This 
perspective contrasts with earlier views that emphasized a region-
ally specifi c pathophysiological process as the underlying cause for 
the signs and symptoms of schizophrenia. Some of the  cognitive 
 defi cits  in   schizophrenia  concern  functions,  such  as   working 
memory,  attention, and perceptual organization, have been pro-
posed to involve synchronization of oscillatory activity in the beta- 
and  gamma-band  band  (see  Phillips  and  Silverstein,  2003,  for  a 
review).

A  substantial  body  of  EEG3/MEG-studies  now  support  the 
hypothesis that cognitive defi cits are related to impaired neural syn-
chrony. Examination of auditory and visual steady-state responses 
to repetitive stimulation in patients with schizophrenia has revealed 
a specifi c reduction in the power of the stimulus-locked response 
in  the  beta-  and  gamma-frequency  range,  but  not  in  the  lower 
frequencies (Krishnan et al., 2005; Kwon et al., 1999). Reductions 
in evoked oscillatory activity have been reported for tasks involving 
visual binding (Spencer et al., 2003, 2004), for backward- masking 
(Wynn  et al.,  2005),  in  auditory  oddball-paradigms  (Gallinat 
et al., 2004) and during TMS-evoked activity over frontal regions 
(Ferrarelli et al., 2008). These results suggest selective defi ciencies 
in the ability of cortical networks or cortico-thalamo-cortical loops 
to engage in precisely synchronized high-frequency oscillations.

Recently,  we  have  tested  the  involvement  of  high-frequency 
oscillations with MEG in chronic-schizophrenia patients during the 
perception of Mooney faces (Tillmann et al., 2008) (see Figure 7). 
Mooney faces consist of degraded pictures of human faces where 
all shades of gray are removed, thus leaving only black and white 
contours. MEG signals were analysed for spectral changes in oscil-
latory activity in the frequency range of 25200 Hz. Compared to 
healthy controls, schizophrenia patients showed a highly signifi cant 
reduction  in  high-frequency  gamma-band  activity  (60120 Hz) 
over parieto-occipital sensors which was accompanied by a sig-
nifi cant defi cit in the ability to detect upright Mooney faces. Thus, 
these fi ndings suggest a comprehensive defi cit in the regulation of 

3Recently,  it  has  been  proposed  that  scalp  recorded  gamma-band  oscillations  in 
EEG-data  refl ect  miniature  saccades  instead  of  cognitive  or  neuronal  processes 
(Yuval-Greenberg et al., 2008). For a critical evaluation of this claim see Melloni 
et al. (2009).

In addition to analyses of spectral power, several studies have also 
examined phase synchrony between distributed neuronal popu-
lations  while  patients  performed  cognitive  tasks  (Slewa-Younan 
et al., 2004; Spencer et al., 2003; Uhlhaas et al., 2006). Overall, these 
studies conclude that patients with schizophrenia are characterised 
by  reduced  phase-locking  of  oscillations  in  the  beta-  and  lower 
gamma-band range highlighting that in addition to abnormalities 
in local circuits, large-scale integration of neural activity is impaired. 
It is currently, unclear, however to what extent impairments in local 
circuits contribute to long-range synchronization impairments or 
whether these represent two independent phenomena.

Correlations between cognitive dysfunctions and alterations in 
neural synchrony are furthermore accompanied by relationships 
between the positive symptoms of schizophrenia and changes in 
the amplitude of beta- and gamma-band oscillations. Specifi cally, 
patients with auditory hallucinations are characterised by an increase 
in oscillatory activity in temporal regions relative to patients with-
out hallucinations (Lee et al., 2006; Spencer et al., 2008), suggest-
ing that the abnormal generation of internal experiences is related 
to increased beta- and gamma-band activity. These observations 
are also corroborated by the fi nding that auditory hallucinations 
in schizophrenia are associated with enhanced white matter con-
nectivity in temporal regions as disclosed by recent DTI-studies 
(Hubl et al., 2004), indicating a possible link between pathological 
oscillatory activity and anatomical hyperconnectivity.

The observed defi cits in neural synchrony in schizophrenia are 
consistent with impairments in neurotransmitter systems as well as 
altered anatomical parameters that are fundamental to establishing 
sychronised oscillations at high frequencies in cortical networks. 
One prominent candidate mechanism for the changes in neural 
synchrony are dysfunctions in GABAergic interneurons (see Lewis 
et al., 2005, for a review). For example, there is consistent evidence 
for reduced GABA (-aminobutyric acid) synthesis in the parvalbu-
min-(PV) containing subpopulation of inhibitory GABA neurons 
in schizophrenia which are critically involved in the generation of 
cortical and hippocampal oscillatory activity (see The Generation 
of Neural Synchrony).

In  addition,  impairments  in  long-range  synchronization  in 
schizophrenia can be related to changes in white matter volume 
and organisation as long distance synchronization of oscillatory 
responses is mediated by reciprocal cortico-cortical connections 
(Konig  et al.,  1993;  Lowel  and  Singer,  1992).  This  possibility  is 
 supported  by  in-vivo  anatomical  examinations  with  diffusion 
tensor imaging (DTI) that have revealed white matter anomalies 
throughout cortical and subcortical structures (for a review see 
Kubicki et al., 2007).

AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDERS (ASDs)
ASDs constitute a heterogeneous neurodevelopmental syndrome 
that is characterized by a triad of impairments that affect social 
 interaction,  verbal  and  nonverbal  communication,  and  the 
 repertoire of interests and activities (APA, 2000). Similar to recent 
work in schizophrenia, theories that account for the pervasive cog-
nitive dysfunctions associated with ASDs converge on the notion 
that the pathophysiological mechanisms in ASDs involve a defi cit in 

Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 

www.frontiersin.org 

July 2009  |  Volume 3  |  Article 17  |  12

Uhlhaas et al. 

Neural synchrony in cortical networks

A

C

B

D

FIGURE 7 | (A) An upright image of a Mooney face and an inverted version 
of the same image. (B) Behavioral data for chronic patients with 
schizophrenia (N = 17) and matched healthy controls (N = 17); detection 
rates in percent (left) and reactions times (right). (C) Normalized 
evoked and induced spectral power for correct responses to upright 

Mooney faces in the frequency range 25200 Hz over parietal sensors; 
Top: normal controls, Bottom: patients with schizophrenia. (D) Time 
course for gamma-power (60-120 Hz) for parietal sensors during the 
perception of upright Mooney faces (red: schizophrenia patients; black: 
controls).

the temporal coordination of distributed neural activity (Uhlhaas 
and Singer, 2007).

Parallels  between  the  pathophysiology  of  schizophrenia  and 
ASDs  extent  to  cognitive  impairments  and  certain  symptoms. 
Thus,  both  disorders  are  characterised  by  abnormal  perceptual 
integration  during  auditory  and  visual  perception  (Happe  and 
Frith, 2006; Uhlhaas and Silverstein, 2005), for example, suggest-
ing similar mechanisms that account for cognitive dysfunctions. 
Furthermore,  clinical  symptoms,  such  as  the  disorganization  of 
thought and language as well as negative symptoms can be found 
in both disorders (Konstantareas and Hewitt, 2001), suggesting an 
overlap in the clinical phenotype.

Recent fMRI and EEG/MEG studies have supported the poten-
tial role of dysfunctional temporal coordination of neural responses 
in ASDs.  Just  et al.  (2004)  examined  functional  connectivity  by 
measuring the covariance of BOLD signals during sentence com-
prehension  in  high-functioning  individuals  with  autism.  The 
study showed systematic differences between groups with respect 
to the distribution of brain activation and functional connectivity. 
Compared  to  controls,  subjects  with  autism  were  characterized 
by a marked reduction in functional connectivity throughout the 

cortical language system that was most pronounced during com-
prehension of sentences. A number of additional fMRI studies have 
supported the concept of reduced functional connectivity in ASDs 
(Castelli et al., 2002; Koshino et al., 2005; Villalobos et al., 2005).

In  analogy  to  the  fi ndings  in  schizophrenia  patients,  these 
data predict that autism should be associated with reduced neu-
ral  synchrony.  Similar  to  patients  with  schizophrenia, ASDs  are 
characterised by impaired auditory steady-state (ASS) potentials 
to stimulation in the 40 Hz range. Wilson et al. (2007) examined 
entrainment to 40 Hz stimulation in MEG-data in healthy controls 
and children and adolescent participants with ASDs. Participants 
with ASDs showed a marked reduction in gamma-band power that 
was particularly pronounced in the left hemisphere. Impairments 
in gamma-band activity elicited by auditory stimulation were also 
observed in fi rst-degree relatives of proband with ASDs (Rojas et al., 
2008), suggesting that dysfunctions in gamma-band activity are a 
potential endophenotype.

In  addition,  there  is  also  evidence  for  impairments  in  task-
related oscillations in ASDs. Milne et al. (2009) investigated visuo-
 perceptual integration in 20 individuals with ASD and 20 control 
subjects  with  EEG.  Visual  evoked  potentials  elicited  by  Gabor 

Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 

www.frontiersin.org 

July 2009  |  Volume 3  |  Article 17  |  13

Uhlhaas et al. 

Neural synchrony in cortical networks

patches  were  compared  in  participants  with  and  without  ASD 
and a source-localisation algorithm was employed to identify the 
 generators of oscillatory activity. In those components located near 
the striate or extrastriate cortex, variations in the spatial frequency 
of stimuli exerted a smaller effect on induced increases in alpha- and 
gamma-band power in participants with ASD, suggesting abnormal 
modulation and recruitment of alpha- and gamma-band oscilla-
tions during perception integration in ASDs.

Finally, resting state EEG-data suggest a relationship between 
neural synchrony and aberrant brain development in ASDs. Thus, 
an excess of gamma-band activity has been reported in children 
with ASDs (Orekhova et al., 2007). In contrast, in adult partici-
pants reduced long-range coherence in resting-state EEG has been 
observed (Murias et al., 2007), suggesting that during later devel-
opmental stages, there is faulty maturation of cortico-cortical con-
nections that leads to a disconnection syndrome (Geschwind and 
Levitt, 2007). This evidence is in agreement with anatomical data 
that indicate that during early development, white matter increases 
signifi cantly more in ASDs than in normal children (Herbert et al., 
2003). Evidence for a transient hypertrophy of white matter has 
also been found in previous studies (Courchesne et al., 2001) and 
later complemented by results suggesting exaggerated pruning to 
subnormal levels consistent with evidence for anatomical hypo-
connectivity (Just et al., 2004; McCaffery and Deutsch, 2005).

Anatomical  abnormalities  are  accompanied  by  alterations  in 
neurotransmitter systems that may lead to an imbalance between 
excitation  and  inhibition,  and  in  turn  to  hyperexcitability  and 
unstable  cortical  networks  (Hussman,  2001;  Rubenstein  and 
Merzenich, 2003). This hypothesis is consistent with abnormali-
ties in GABAergic and glutamatergic transmitter systems in ASDs 
(for a review see DiCicco-Bloom et al., 2006).

NEURAL SYNCHRONY IN BRAIN DISORDERS
In summary, the potential role of neural synchrony in schizophrenia 
and ASDs is supported by close correlations between alterations 
in neural synchrony and cognitive impairments as well as through 
dysfunctions  in  transmitter-systems  and  anatomical  parameters 
that are critical for neural synchrony to occur in cortical networks. 
Accordingly,  we  believe  that  further  investigations  into  the  role 
of neural synchrony in schizophrenia and ASDs are likely to be 
crucial for establishing valid pathophysiological models of these 
disorders.

This perspective is based on the fact that efforts to identify spe-
cifi c cortical regions that can account for the diverse impairments 
in cognition and explain the heterogeneous symptoms have so far 
been fruitless. Instead, the more plausible assumption is that differ-
ent syndromes are related to distinct but overlapping pathologies 
in the coordination of distributed neuronal activity patterns that 
are revealed by the systematic investigation of the temporal and 
spatial organisation of neural synchrony across different frequency 
bands. This is undoubtedly a challenging task but such a research 
program will ultimately lead to better diagnostic tools for early 
diagnosis and intervention.

CONCLUDING REMARKS
In this paper, we have attempted to give an overview on the history 
and current status of concepts about the role of oscillations and 

synchrony in neuronal networks. Initially discovered in the visual 
system and conceptualized as a possible mechanism for dynamically 
binding perceptual elements into coherent object representations, 
it is becoming more and more evident that this discovery has wider 
implications for the understanding of neural codes and integrated 
brain functions than originally assumed. However, we also wish to 
emphasize that many open questions remain that are fundamental 
to our understanding of this phenomenon and need to be addressed 
by future research.

THE BINDING BY SYNCHRONY HYPOTHESIS
A  still  much  debated  issue  is  the  role  of  neural  synchrony  in 
 perceptual grouping and feature binding. Evidence regarding the 
binding hypothesis is heterogeneous. Numerous studies support the 
initial interpretation while others report negative evidence. Most 
studies agree that synchronization in the retina or early visual cortex 
refl ects well some of the Gestalt criteria for perceptual grouping 
such as continuity of contours, similarity in feature space (colinear-
ity, similar orientation) and common fate. However, it is clear that 
synchronization at early stages of processing tends to be restricted 
to closely spaced (a few millimetres at most) groups of neurons 
and does not generalize to all neurons engaged in the encoding 
of an extended object (for citations see main text). Because mul-
tisite recordings in higher visual areas are rare, little is known as 
to whether cells in inferotemporal cortex participating in the dis-
tributed representation of an object exhibit signs of object specifi c 
synchronization. The one study that has specifi cally addressed that 
issue indicates that this might indeed be the case (Hirabayashi and 
Miyashita, 2005). When monkeys recognize that component fea-
tures of a face (mouth, nose, eyes etc.) actually form a face rather 
than  a  scrambled  collection  of  features,  neurons  responding  to 
the features transiently synchronize their responses. Thus, when 
investigating relations between perceptual grouping and synchro-
nization,  it  is  important  to  make  educated  guesses  as  to  which 
binding functions are expected to occur at which level of process-
ing. We consider it as likely that binding functions are realized at 
many different scales, whereby early processing stages can support 
only very local grouping operations while global, object specifi c 
grouping takes place only in the late, non-retinotopically organized 
areas. It may be that some of the negative fi ndings are the result 
of the probably inappropriate assumption that all binding should 
be achieved at once already at low processing levels. Another dif-
fi culty in the testing of the binding by synchrony hypothesis is the 
transitory nature of synchronization. Numerous studies indicate, 
especially when performed in awake behaving animals, that epochs 
of synchronous fi ring may be very short (in the range of tens of 
milliseconds). This is in perfect agreement with the evidence that 
scene segmentation, perceptual grouping and object recognition 
can be achieved in less than 200 ms which leaves only a few tens 
of milliseconds per processing stage to accomplish its operations. 
Short episodes of synchronous fi ring may, however, not be detect-
able with conventional cross correlation techniques, especially if 
discharge rates are low as is the case under natural viewing condi-
tions. In this case other methods such as the unitary event analysis 
(Gruen et al., 2002a,b) or its refi ned version Neuroxidence (Pipa 
et al., 2008) need to be applied. These methods can detect individual 
events  of  coincident  fi ring  and  distinguish  them  from  spurious 

Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 

www.frontiersin.org 

July 2009  |  Volume 3  |  Article 17  |  14

Uhlhaas et al. 

Neural synchrony in cortical networks

coincidences  even  if  the  discharge  rates  of  the  neurons  are  not 
stationary. If  grouping operations are based on brief episodes of 
synchronous fi ring, they would have passed undetected because 
so far all experiments on feature binding have relied on conven-
tional cross correlation analysis. Since these novel methods have 
been tested successfully on experimental and simulated data, they 
can now be applied to clarify the question whether synchroniza-
tion serves to tag responses to groupable features as related and to 
thereby support perceptual grouping and scene segmentation.

In designing these future studies it will have to be considered that 
synchronization is state and attention dependent and that different 
binding functions are likely to be accomplished at different levels 
of the processing hierarchy. Thus, the challenge is to design tests 
that are appropriate for the investigated processing stage.

FURTHER CHALLENGES
Ideally, in all investigations of the functional role of synchronized 
oscillations,  one  would  of  course  like  to  obtain  causal  evidence. 
This would require manipulations of oscillations and synchrony 
without  interfering  with  other  response  variables.  First  attempts 
to  achieve  this  with  pharmacological  and  genetic  manipulations 
of  synchronizing  mechanisms  have  been  made  but  much  more 
work is needed. So far, the large majority of studies have provided 
only correlative evidence for the involvement of neural synchrony 
in cognitive and executive functions. Although the same problem 
exists for the relation between changes in fi ring rates and behav-
ioural functions, the possibility needs to be considered that changes 
in neural synchrony are in part an epiphenomenon of neuronal 
dynamics and are not exploited further. At present we consider this 
as highly unlikely because of the numerous fi ndings from normal 
and abnormal brains that demonstrated close relationships between 
alterations in behaviour and cognition and associated modulations 
in the synchronization and amplitude of oscillatory activity in a wide 
range of frequencies. Also, there is abundant evidence from studies 
on synaptic plasticity and memory formation that emphasizes the 
importance of precise timing relations between the discharges of 
interconnected neurons for use dependent synaptic modifi cations 
(Markram et al., 1997). As timing relations are crucial in this context 
for the defi nition of relations, it follows that they must be of similar 
importance in signal processing because signatures of relatedness 
must be the same in signal processing and learning. As the timing 
relations relevant for determining the polarity of use dependent 
synaptic plasticity are defi ned on the scale of milliseconds, similarly 
precise temporal relations must be realized in signal processing in 
order to defi ne the relatedness of neuronal responses.

Another important and unresolved question is related to the 
coexistence  of  oscillations  in  different  frequency  bands.  We  are 
only at the beginning of understanding their mutual interactions 
and spatial organization. Neuronal synchrony is found on differ-
ent temporal and spatial scales. The spatial scale of synchrony can 
range  from  local  synchronization  of  small  numbers  of  neurons 
within  a  single  cortical  column  to  the  synchronization  of  large 
populations that are distributed across different cortical regions and 
even across both hemispheres (Singer, 1999). The temporal scales 
of neuronal synchrony range from very precise sub-millisecond 
spike-spike synchronization to the synchronization of slow oscil-
latory activity as low as < 0.1 Hz. Remarkably, synchronization is 

not  confi ned to oscillations of the same frequency band but occurs 
across  different frequencies as n:m synchrony (Palva et al., 2005; 
Tognoli  and  Kelso,  2009).  This  allows  for  the  concatenation  of 
rhythms and for the establishment of partial correlations (Roopun 
et al., 2008). An attractive hypothesis is that this could serve as a 
mechanism to encode nested relations  an indispensable function 
for the neuronal representation of composite objects and move-
ments. Yet, so far there is no evidence that the observed concatena-
tion of rhythms is used for the encoding of graded, hierarchically 
organized relations.

Yet another conundrum of neural synchrony is that it can be 
stable and long lasting, e.g. in sleep or drowsiness, but also very 
dynamic  and  transient  in  awake  and  attentive  brains,  as  it  was 
reported for perceptual grouping and the control of focused atten-
tion (Fries et al., 2001a; Taylor et al., 2005). While stable synchrony 
can be explained by fi xed coupling based on the connectivity of 
the network, the very transient switches between synchronized and 
unsynchronized dynamics are much more challenging properties 
regarding the underlying mechanism.

To explain the fast dynamical modulation of synchrony remains 
a theoretical challenge. The fast time scale of switches between syn-
chronized and de-synchronized states observed in the data seems to 
be incompatible with the speed of changes in the functional topology 
or the coupling strength that can be achieved with conventional 
mechanisms  of  synaptic  plasticity.  The  same  holds  for  putative 
mechanisms  that  could  cause  changes  in  transmission  delays. 
Thus, the most likely option for the modulation of synchrony is to 
change the dynamical states of the coupled neuronal populations, 
such as the balance between excitation and inhibition (Brunel, 2000; 
Destexhe et al., 1999). Such state changes can achieve fast and fl exible 
modulations of effective coupling among populations of neurons 
or areas of the brain. They can be induced by rate changes of sub 
populations, by changes in the balance of excitation and inhibition, 
and also by changes of the level of noise (Melloni et al., 2007; Ullner 
et al., 2009). To distinguish between these mechanisms will require 
close cooperation between theoreticians and experimentalists for 
the formulation of predictions and their testing.

Thus, much further work is required for the exploration of the 
various functions of oscillations and neural synchrony. Since the 
discovery of stimulus and context dependent synchronization of 
gamma oscillations some 20 years ago, we keep being intrigued by 
the growing variety of cognitive and executive functions that seem 
to exploit this mechanism. As far as prognoses are possible in basic 
research, we predict that application of massively parallel multisite 
recordings techniques  electrical or optical  and evaluation of 
temporal relations among distributed neuronal responses will con-
tinue to provide us with data that we consider indispensable for a 
deeper understanding of integrated cerebral functions.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported by the Max Planck Society, the Hertie 
Foundation,  an  EU  grant  Project  Global  Approach  to  Brain 
Activity: From Cognition to Disease (GABA) Contract No. 043309, 
a  grant  from  Deutsche  Forschungsgemeinschaft  (NI  708/2-1), 
and by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research 
(BMBF) within the Bernstein Focus: Neurotechnology through 
research grant 01GQ0840.

Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 

www.frontiersin.org 

July 2009  |  Volume 3  |  Article 17  |  15

Uhlhaas et al. 

Neural synchrony in cortical networks

REFERENCES
American Psychiatric, and Association 
(2000).  Diagnostic  and  Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth 
Edn, Text Revision. Washington, DC, 
American Psychiatric Association.

Arecchi, F. T., Boccaletti, S., and Ramazza, P. 
(1999).  Pattern   formation  and 
 competition in nonlinear optics. Phys. 
Rep. Rev. Sect. Phys. Lett. 318, 183.

Azouz,  R.,  and  Gray,  C.  M.  (2003). 
Adaptive coincidence detection and 
dynamic gain control in visual cortical 
neurons in vivo. Neuron 37, 513523.
Bartos, M., Vida, I., and Jonas, P. (2007). 
Synaptic  mechanisms  of  synchro-
nized gamma oscillations in inhibi-
tory interneuron networks. Nat. Rev. 
Neurosci. 8, 4556.

Betsch, B. Y., Einhauser, W., Kording, K. P., 
and Konig, P. (2004). The world from a 
cats perspective  statistics of natural 
videos. Biol. Cybern. 90, 4150.

Biederlack,  J.,  Castelo-Branco, M., 
N e u e n s c h w a n d e r ,  
S . , 
Wheeler, D. W., Singer,  W.,  and 
Nikolic , D. (2006). Brightness induc-
tion: rate  enhancement and neuronal 
synchronization as complementary 
codes. Neuron 52, 10731083.

Bleuler, E. (1950). Dementia Praecox or 
the Group of Schizophrenias. New 
York, International University Press. 
(Original work published in 1911).

Brecht, M., Singer, W., and Engel, A. K. 
(1998). Correlation analysis of cortico-
tectal interactions in the cat visual sys-
tem. J. Neurophysiol. 79, 23942407.

Brunel, N. (2000). Dynamics of sparsely 
connected networks of excitatory and 
inhibitory spiking neurons. J. Comput. 
Neurosci. 8, 183208.

Buia,  C.,  and  Tsienga,  P.  H.  (2006). 
Attentional  modulation  of  firing 
rate and synchrony in a model corti-
cal network. J. Comput. Neurosci. 20, 
247264.

Buzsaki, G. (2002). Theta oscillations in the 

hippocampus. Neuron 33, 325340.

Buzsaki, G. (2007). The structure of con-

sciousness. Nature 446, 267.

Buzsaki,  G.,  and  Draguhn, A.  (2004). 
Neuronal oscillations in cortical net-
works. Science 304, 19261929.

Cardin,  J.  A.,  Carlen,  M.,  Meletis,  K., 
Knoblich, U., Zhang, F., Deisseroth, K., 
Tsai, L. H., and Moore, C. I. (2009). 
Driving  fast-spiking  cells  induces 
gamma rhythm and controls sensory 
responses. Nature 459, 663667.

Carrasco, M., Ling, S., and Read, S. (2004). 
Adaptive coincidence detection and 
dynamic gain control in visual corti-
cal neurons in vivo. Nat. Neurosci. 7, 
308313.

Castelli,  F.,  Frith,  C.,  Happe,  F.,  and 
Frith, U. (2002). Autism, Asperger syn-
drome and brain mechanisms for the 

 attribution of mental states to  animated 
shapes. Brain 125, 18391849.

Chalmers, D. J. (2000). What is a neural 
correlate of consciousness? In Neural 
Correlates of Consciousness: Empirical 
and  Conceptual  Questions, T. 
Metzinger, ed. (Cambridge, MA, MIT 
Press), pp. 1740.

Cosmelli, D., David, O., Lachaux, J. P., 
Martinerie, J., Garnero, L., Renault, B., 
and Varela, F. (2004). Waves of con-
sciousness: ongoing cortical patterns 
during binocular rivalry. Neuroimage 
23, 128140.

Courchesne, E., Karns, C. M., Davis, H. R., 
Ziccardi, R., Carper, R. A., Tigue, Z. D., 
Chisum, H.  J.,  Moses, P.,  Pierce, K., 
Lord, C.,  Lincoln,  A. J.,  Pizzo, S., 
S c h re i b m a n ,  L . , Ha a s , R . H . , 
A k s h o o m o f f ,  N .  A . ,  
a n d 
Courchesne, R. Y.  (2001).  Unusual 
brain growth patterns in early life in 
patients with autistic disorder: an MRI 
study. Neurology 57, 245254.

Dehaene, S., Changeux, J. P., Naccache, L., 
Sackur,  J.,  and  Sergent,  C.  (2006). 
Conscious, preconscious, and sublimi-
nal processing: a testable taxonomy. 
Trends Cogn. Sci. 10, 204211.

Dehaene,  S.,  Naccache,  L.,  Cohen,  L., 
Bihan, D. L., Mangin, J. F., Poline, J. B., 
and  Riviere,  D.  (2001).  Cerebral 
mechanisms of word masking and 
unconscious repetition priming. Nat. 
Neurosci. 4, 752758.

Dehaene, S., Naccache, L., Le Clec, H. G., 
Koechlin, E., Mueller, M., Dehaene-
Lambertz, G., van de Moortele, P. F., 
and  Le  Bihan,  D.  (1998).  Imaging 
unconscious  semantic  priming. 
Nature 395, 597600.

Desimone, R., and Duncan, J. (1995). 
Neural mechanisms of selective vis-
ual attention. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 18, 
193222.

Destexhe, A., Contreras, D., and Steriade, M. 
(1999). Cortically-induced coherence 
of a thalamic-generated oscillation. 
Neuroscience 92, 427443.

DiCicco-Bloom,  E.,  Lord,  C., 
Zwaigenbaum,  L.,  Courchesne,  E., 
Dager, S. R., Schmitz, C., Schultz, R. T., 
Crawley, J., and Young, L. J. (2006). 
The developmental neurobiology of 
autism spectrum disorder. J. Neurosci. 
26, 68976906.

Doesburg, S. M., Kitajo, K., and Ward, L. M. 
(2005). Increased gamma-band syn-
chrony precedes switching of conscious 
perceptual objects in binocular rivalry. 
Neuroreport 16, 11391142.

Doesburg,  S.  M.,  Roggeveen,  A.  B., 
Kitajo, K., and Ward, L. M. (2008). 
Large-scale gamma-band phase syn-
chronization and selective attention. 
Cereb. Cortex 18, 386396.

Dong, Y., Mihalas, S., Qiu, F., von der 
Heydt,  R.,  and  Niebur,  E.  (2008). 

Synchrony and the binding problem in 
macaque visual cortex. J. Vis. 8, 116.
Eckhorn,  R.,  Frien,  A.,  Bauer,  R., 
Woelbern, T., and Kehr, H. (1993). 
High frequency (6090 Hz) oscilla-
tions in primary visual cortex of awake 
monkey. Neuroreport 4, 243246.

Engel, A. K., Fries, P., and Singer, W. (2001). 
Dynamic predictions: oscillations and 
synchrony in topdown processing. 
Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 2, 704716.

Engel, A. K., Konig, P., Kreiter, A. K., and 
Singer, W. (1991). Stimulus- dependent 
neuronal  oscillations  in  cat  visual 
cortex: inter-columnar interactions 
as determined by cross-correlation 
analysis. Eur. J. Neurosci. 2, 588606.
Engel,  A.  K.,  and  Singer,  W.  (2001). 
Temporal  binding  and  the  neural 
correlates of sensory awareness. Trends 
Cogn. Sci. 5, 1625.

Fan, J., Byrne, J., Worden, M. S., Guise, K. G., 
McCandliss,  B.  D.,  Fossella,  J.,  and 
Posner, M. I. (2007). The relation of 
brain oscillations to attentional net-
works. J. Neurosci. 27, 61976206.

Ferrarelli, F., Massimini, M., Peterson, M. J., 
Riedner, B. A., Lazar, M., Murphy, M. J., 
Huber, R., Rosanova, M., Alexander, A. L., 
Kalin,  N.,  and  Tononi,  G.  (2008). 
Reduced evoked gamma oscillations 
in the frontal cortex in schizophrenia 
patients:  a  TMS/EEG  study.  Am.  J. 
Psychiatry. 165, 9961005.

Fischer,  I.,  Vicente,  R.,  Buldu,  J.  M., 
Peil, M., Mirasso, C. R., Torrent, M. C., 
and Garcia-Ojalvo, J. (2006). Zero-
lag long-range synchronization via 
dynamical relaying. Phys. Rev. Lett. 
97, 123902.

Frien,  A.,  and  Eckhorn,  R.  (2000). 
Functional coupling shows stronger 
stimulus dependency for fast oscilla-
tions than for low-frequency compo-
nents in striate cortex of awake monkey. 
Eur. J. Neurosci. 12, 14661478.

Fries, P. (2005). A mechanism for cogni-
tive dynamics: neuronal communi-
cation through neuronal coherence. 
Trends Cogn. Sci. 9, 474480.

Fries, P., Reynolds, J. H., Rorie, A. E., and 
Desimone, R. (2001a). Modulation of 
oscillatory neuronal synchronization 
by selective visual attention. Science 
291, 15601563.

Fries, P., Neuenschwander, S., Engel, A. K., 
Goebel, R., and Singer, W. (2001b). 
Rapid  feature  selective  neuronal 
synchronization through correlated 
latency shifting. Nature Neurosci. 4, 
194200.

Fries, P., Nikolic , D., and Singer, W. (2007). 
The gamma cycle. Trends Neurosci. 30, 
309316.

Fries, P., Roelfsema, P. R., Engel, A. K., 
Konig,  P.,  and  Singer,  W.  (1997). 
Synchronization  of  oscillatory 
responses in visual cortex  correlates 

with  perception  in  interocular 
rivalry. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
94, 1269912704.

Fries, P., Schroder, J. H., Roelfsema, P. R., 
Singer, W., and Engel, A. K. (2002). 
Oscillatory neuronal synchronization 
in primary visual cortex as a correlate 
of stimulus selection. J. Neurosci. 22, 
37393754.

Fries, P., Womelsdorf, T., Oostenveld, R., 
and Desimone, R. (2008). The effects 
of  visual  stimulation  and  selective 
visual attention on rhythmic neuronal 
synchronization in macaque area V4. 
J. Neurosci. 28, 48234835.

Friston,  K.  J.  (1999).  The  disconnec-
tion hypothesis. Schizophr. Res. 30, 
115125.

Gail,  A.,  Brinksmeyer,  H.  J.,  and 
Eckhorn, R. (2000). Contour decou-
ples gamma activity across texture rep-
resentation in monkey striate cortex. 
Cereb. Cortex 10, 840850.

Gallinat, J., Winterer, G., Herrmann, C. S., 
and Senkowski, D. (2004). Reduced 
oscillatory gamma-band responses in 
unmedicated schizophrenic patients 
indicate  impaired  frontal  network 
processing. Clin. Neurophysiol. 115, 
18631874.

Geschwind, D. H., and Levitt, P. (2007). 
Autism spectrum disorders: devel-
opmental disconnection syndromes. 
Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 17, 103111.

Ghose, G. M., and Maunsell, J. (1999). 
Specialized representations in visual 
cortex: a role for binding? Neuron 24, 
7985, 111125.

Gray,  C.  M.,  Koenig,  P.,  Engel,  A.  K., 
and  Singer,W.  (1989).  Oscillatory 
responses in cat visual cortex exhibit 
inter-columnar  synchronization 
which refl ects global stimulus prop-
erties. Nature 23, 334337.

Gray, C. M., and Mc Cormick, D. A. (1996). 
Chattering cells: superfi cial pyramidal 
neurons contributing to the generation 
of  synchronous  oscillations  in  the 
visual cortex. Science 274, 109113.

Gray,  C.  M.,  and Viana  Di  Prisco,  G. 
(1997). Stimulus-dependent neuro-
nal oscillations and local synchroni-
zation in striate cortex of the alert cat. 
J. Neurosci. 17, 32393253.

Grinstein,  G.,  and  Linsker,  R.  (2005). 
Synchronous neural activity in scale 
free network models versus random 
network models. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
U.S.A. 102, 99489953.

Gross,  J.,  Schmitz,  F.,  Schnitzler,  I., 
Kessler, K., Shapiro, K., Hommel, B., 
and Schnitzler, A. (2004). Modulation 
of  long-range  neural  synchrony 
refl ects temporal limitations of visual 
attention in humans. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. U.S.A. 101, 1305013055.

Gruen,  S.,  Diesmann,  M.,  and 
Aertsen, A. M. H. J. (2002a). Unitary 

Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 

www.frontiersin.org 

July 2009  |  Volume 3  |  Article 17  |  16

Uhlhaas et al. 

Neural synchrony in cortical networks

events  in  multiple  single-neuron 
spiking  activity:  I.  Detection  and 
significance.  Neural  Comput.  14, 
4380.

Gruen,  S.,  Diesmann,  M.,  and 
Aertsen, A. M. H. J. (2002b). Unitary 
events in multiple single-neuron spik-
ing activity: II. Nonstationary data. 
Neural Comput. 14, 81119.

Happe, F., and Frith, U. (2006). The weak 
coherence  account:  detail-focused 
cognitive style in autism spectrum dis-
orders. J. Autism. Dev. Dis. 36, 525.

Havenith,  M.  N.,  Yu,  S.,  Chen,  N., 
Biederlack,  J.,  Singer,  W.,  and 
Nikolic, D. (2007). Millisecond delays 
in  neuronal  spiking  activity  carry 
information as accurately as firing 
rates. Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 615.7 2007: 
Society for Neuroscience 37th Annual 
Meeting, San Diego, USA.

Havenith,  M.  N.,  Zemmar,  A., Yu,  S., 
Baudrexel,  S.  M.,  Singer,  W.,  and 
Nikolic , D. (2009). Measuring sub-
millisecond delays in spiking activity 
with millisecond time-bins. Neurosci. 
Lett. 450, 296300.

Herbert,  M.  R.,  Ziegler,  D.  A., 
Deutsch, C. K.,  OBrien,  L.  M., 
Lange, N., Bakardjiev, A., Hodgson, J., 
Adrien, K. T., Steele, S., Makris, N., 
Kennedy,  D.,  Harris,  G.  J.,  and 
Caviness, V. S. (2003). Dissociations 
of cerebral cortex, subcortical and cer-
ebral white matter volumes in autistic 
boys. Brain 126, 11821192.

Herculano-Houzel,  S.,  Munk,  M.  H., 
Neuenschwander, S., and Singer, W. 
(1999). Precisely synchronized oscilla-
tory fi ring patterns require electroen-
cephalographic activation. J. Neurosci. 
19, 39924010.

Herrmann, C. S., Munk, M. H. J., and 
Engel, A. K. (2004). Cognitive func-
tions  of  gamma-band  activity: 
 memory match and utilization. Trends 
Cogn. Sci. 8, 347355.

Hirabayashi, T., and Miyashita, Y. (2005). 
Dynamically modulated spike cor-
relation in monkey inferior tempo-
ral cortex depending on the feature 
confi guration within a whole object. 
J. Neurosci. 25, 1029910307.

Huang, D., and Pipa, G. (2007). Achieving 
synchronization of networks by an 
auxiliary  hub.  Europhys.  Lett.  77, 
50010.

Hubl,  D.,  Koenig,  T.,  Strik,  W., 
Federspiel, A., Kreis, R., Boesch, C., 
Maier, S. E., Schroth, G., Lovblad, K., 
and Dierks, T. (2004). Pathways that 
make voices: white matter changes in 
auditory hallucinations. Arch. Gen. 
Psychiatry 61, 658668.

Hussman,  J.  P.  (2001).  Suppressed 
GABAergic inhibition as a common 
factor in suspected etiologies of autism. 
J. Autism Dev. Disord. 31, 247248.

Jensen, O., Kaiser, J., and Lachaux, J. P. 
(2007).  Human  gamma-frequency 
oscillations associated with attention 
and  memory.  Trends  Neurosci.  30, 
317324.

Jensen,  O.,  and  Tesche,  C.  D.  (2002). 
Frontal  theta  activity  in  humans 
increases with memory load in a work-
ing memory task. Eur. J. Neurosci. 15, 
13951399.

Just, M. A., Cherkassky, V. L., Keller, T. A., 
and Minshew, N. J. (2004). Cortical 
activation  and  synchronization 
during sentence comprehension in 
high- functioning  autism:  evidence 
of  underconnectivity.  Brain  127, 
18111821.

Kanwisher, N. (2001). Neural events and 
perceptual awareness. Cognition 79, 
89113.

Konig, P., Engel, A. K., Lowel, S., and 
Singer, W. (1993). Squint affects syn-
chronization of oscillatory responses 
in cat visual cortex. Eur. J. Neurosci. 
5, 501508.

Konig, P., Engel, A. K., Roelfsema, P. R., 
and Singer, W. (1995). How precise 
is neuronal synchronization? Neural 
Comput. 7, 469485.

Konstantareas,  M.  M.,  and  Hewitt,  T. 
(2001). Autistic disorder and schizo-
phrenia: diagnostic overlaps. J. Autism 
Dev. Disord. 31, 1928.

Kopell, N., and Ermentrout, B. (2004). 
Chemical  and  electrical  synapses 
perform complementary roles in the 
synchronization  of  interneuronal 
 networks. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 
101, 1548215487.

Kopell,  N.,  Ermentrout,  G.  B., 
Whittington, M. A., and Traub, R. D. 
(2000).  Gamma  rhythms  and  beta 
rhythms have different synchroniza-
tion properties. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 
U.S.A. 97, 18671872.

Koshino,  H.,  Carpenter,  P.  A., 
Minshew, N. J.,  Cherkassky,  V.  L., 
Keller, T. A., and Just, M. A. (2005). 
Functional connectivity in an fMRI 
working  memory  task  in  high-
 functioning autism. NeuroImage 24, 
810821.

Kreiter,  A.  K.,  and  Singer,  W.  (1992). 
Oscillatory neuronal responses in the 
visual cortex of the awake macaque 
monkey. Eur. J. Neurosci. 4, 369375.
Kreiter,  A.  K.,  and  Singer,  W.  (1996). 
Stimulus-dependent synchronization 
of neuronal responses in the visual 
cortex of the awake macaque monkey. 
J. Neurosci. 16, 23812396.

Kr ishnan,  G.  P.,  Vohs,  J.  L., 
Hetrick, W. P.,  Carroll,  C.  A., 
Shekhar, A., Bockbrader, M. A., and 
ODonnell, B. F. (2005). Steady state 
visual evoked potential abnormalities 
in schizophrenia. Clin. Neurophysiol. 
116, 614624.

Kubicki, M., McCarley, R., Westin, C. F., 
Park,  H.  J.,  Maier,  S.,  Kikinis,  R., 
Jolesz, F. A., and Shenton, M. E. (2007). 
A review of diffusion tensor imaging 
studies in schizophrenia. J. Psychiatr. 
Res. 41, 1530.

Kwon,  J.  S.,  ODonnell,  B.  F., 
Wallenstein, G. V.,  Greene, R. W., 
Hirayasu,  Y.,  Nestor,  P.  G., 
Hasselmo, M. E.,  Potts,  G.  F., 
Shenton, M. E., and McCarley, R. W. 
(1999).  Gamma  frequency-range 
abnormalities to auditory stimulation 
in schizophrenia. Arch. Gen. Psychiatry 
56, 10011005.

Lakatos, P., Chen, C. M., OConnell, M. N., 
Mills, A., and Schroeder, C. E. (2007). 
Neuronal oscillations and multisen-
sory interaction in primary auditory 
cortex. Neuron 53, 279292.

Lakatos, P., Karmos, G., Mehta, A. D., 
Ulbert, I., and Schroeder, C. E. (2008). 
Entrainment of neuronal oscillations 
as a mechanism of attentional selec-
tion. Science 320, 110113.

Lamme, V. A., and Spekreijse, H. (1998). 
Neuronal synchrony does not repre-
sent texture segregation. Nature 396, 
362366.

Lee,  S.  H.,  Wynn,  J.  K.,  Green,  M.  F., 
Kim, H., Lee, K. J., Nam, M., Park, J. K., 
and Chung, Y. C. (2006). Quantitative 
EEG and low resolution electromag-
netic tomography (LORETA) imag-
ing of patients with persistent auditory 
hallucinations.  Schizophr.  Res.  83, 
111119.

Lewis,  D.  A.,  Hashimoto,  T.,  and 
Volk, D. W. (2005). Cortical inhibitory 
neurons and schizophrenia. Nat. Rev. 
Neurosci. 6, 312324.

Lima,  B.,  Chen,  N.,  Singer,  W.,  and 
Neuenschwander, S. (2006). Strength of 
stimulus-induced gamma oscillations 
in monkey V1 depend on attention and 
expectancy. Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 734.5. 
Society for Neuroscience 36th Annual 
Meeting, Washington, DC, USA.

L i m a ,   B . ,   S i n g e r,   W. ,   a n d 
Ne u e n s c hw a n d e r, S .  ( 2 0 0 7 ) . 
Distributed  gamma  oscillations 
induced  by  expectancy  in  monkey 
V1 and V4. Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 338.5. 
Society for Neuroscience 37th Annual 
Meeting, Washington, DC, USA.

Llinas, R., and Pare, D. (1998). Coherent 
oscillations in specifi c and nonspecifi c 
thalamo-cortical networks and their 
role in cognition. In Thalamus, E. G. 
Jones, ed. (Amsterdam, Elsevier), pp. 
501516.

Lowel, S., and Singer, W. (1992). Selection 
of intrinsic horizontal connections in 
the visual cortex by correlated neuro-
nal activity. Science 255, 209212.

Lutz, A., Lachaux, J. P., Martinerie, J., and 
Varela, F. J. (2002). Guiding the study of 
brain dynamics by using fi rst- person 

data:  synchrony  patterns   correlate 
with ongoing conscious states during 
a simple visual task. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. U.S.A. 99, 15861591.

Maldonado, P. E., Friedman-Hill, S., and 
Gray, C. M. (2000). Dynamics of striate 
cortical activity in the alert macaque: II. 
Fast time scale synchronization. Cereb. 
Cortex 10, 11171131.

Markram, H., Lubke, J., Frotscher, M., 
and Sakmann, B. (1997). Regulation 
of synaptic effi cacy by coincidence of 
postsynaptic APs and EPSPs. Science 
275, 213215.

McCaffery, P., and Deutsch, C. K. (2005). 
Macrocephaly and the control of brain 
growth  in  autistic  disorders.  Prog. 
Neurobiol. 77, 3856.

Melloni, L., Molina, C., Pena, M., Torres, D., 
Singer, W., and Rodriguez, E. (2007). 
Synchronization  of  neural  activity 
across cortical areas correlates with 
conscious perception. J. Neurosci. 27, 
28582865.

Melloni, L., and Rodriguez, E. (2007). 
Non-perceived  stimuli  elicit  local 
but not large-scale neural synchrony. 
Perception  36,  (ECVP  Abstract 
Supplement).

Melloni,  L.,  Schwiedrzik,  C.  M., 
Rodriguez, E., and Singer, W. (2009). 
(Micro)Saccades, corollary activity 
and cortical oscillations. Trends Cogn. 
Sci. 3, 239245.

Milne,  E.,  Scope,  A.,  Pascalis,  O., 
Buckley, D., and Makeig, S. (2009). 
Independent  component  analysis 
reveals  atypical  electroencephalo-
graphic activity during visual percep-
tion in individuals with autism. Biol. 
Psychiatry 65, 2230.

Milo,  R.,  Shen-Orr,  S.,  Itzkovitz,  S., 
Kashtan,  N.,  Chklovskii,  D.,  and 
Alon, U.  (2002).  Network  motifs: 
simple building blocks of complex 
networks. Science 298, 824827.

Munk, M. H., Roelfsema, P. R., Konig, P., 
Engel, A. K., and Singer, W. (1996). 
Role  of  reticular  activation  in  the 
modulation of intracortical synchro-
nization. Science 272, 271274.

Murias,  M., Webb,  S.  J.,  Greenson,  J., 
and Dawson, G. (2007). Resting state 
cortical connectivity refl ected in EEG 
coherence in individuals with autism. 
Biol. Psychiatry 62, 270273.

Neuenschwander,  S.,  Engel,  A.  K., 
Konig, P., Singer, W., and Varela, F. J. 
(1996). Synchronization of neuro-
nal  responses  in  the  optic  tectum 
of awake pigeons. Vis. Neurosci. 13, 
575584.

Neuenschwander,  S.,  Lima,  B.,  and 
Singer, W.  (2008).  Stimulus  and 
task-related  gamma  oscillations  in 
monkey V1  induced  by  local  and 
global contours. Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 
2008-S-112007-SfN.  Society  for 

Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 

www.frontiersin.org 

July 2009  |  Volume 3  |  Article 17  |  17

Uhlhaas et al. 

Neural synchrony in cortical networks

Neuroscience 38th Annual Meeting, 
Washington, DC, USA.

Neuenschwander,  S.,  and  Singer,  W. 
(1996). Long-range synchronization 
of oscillatory light responses in the cat 
retina and lateral geniculate nucleus. 
Nature 379, 728732.

Nikolic ,  D.  (2007).  Non-parametric 
detection of temporal order across 
pairwise measurements of time delays. 
J. Comput. Neurosci. 22, 519.

Nikolic , D., Hausler, S., Singer, W., and 
Maass, W. (2007). Temporal dynam-
ics of information content carried by 
neurons in the primary visual cortex. 
Adv. Neural Inf. Process. Syst. 19.

Nikolic , D., Schneider, G., Havenith, M. N., 
and  Singer,  W.  (2004).  Short  time 
delays in neuronal activity depend 
on stimulus properties. Soc. Neurosci. 
Abstr.  490.8.  2004:  Society  for 
Neuroscience 34th Annual Meeting, 
San Diego, USA.

OKeefe, J., and Recce, M. L. (1993). Phase 
relationship between hippocampal 
place units and the EEG theta rhythm. 
Hippocampus 3, 317330.

Orekhova,  E.  V.,  Stroganova,  T. A., 
Nyg ren, G.,  Tsetlin,  M.  M., 
Posikera, I. N.,  Gillberg,  C.,  and 
Elam, M. (2007). Excess of high fre-
quency electroencephalogram oscil-
lations  in  boys  with  autism.  Biol. 
Psychiatry 62, 10221029.

Palanca, B. J., and DeAngelis, G. C. (2005). 
Does neuronal synchrony underlie 
visual feature grouping? Neuron 46, 
333346.

Palva, J. M., Palva, S., and Kaila, K. (2005). 
Phase  synchrony  among  neuronal 
oscillations  in  the  human  cortex. 
J. Neurosci. 25, 39623972.

Palva, S., and Palva, J. M. (2007). New vis-
tas for alpha-frequency band oscilla-
tions. Trends Neurosci. 30, 150158.

Pesaran,  B.,  Pezaris,  J.  S.,  Sahani,  M., 
Mitra,  P.  P.,  and  Andersen,  R.  A. 
(2002). Temporal structure in neuro-
nal activity during working memory 
in  macaque  parietal  cortex.  Nat. 
Neurosci. 5, 805811.

Phillips,  W.  A.,  and  Silverstein,  S.  M. 
(2003). Convergence of biological and 
psychological perspectives on cogni-
tive coordination in schizophrenia. 
Behav. Brain Sci. 26, 65138.

Pikovsky, A., Rosenblum, M., and Kurths, J. 
(2001). Synchronization. Cambridge, 
Cambridge University Press.

Pipa, G., Riehle, A., and Grun, S. (2007). 
Validation  of  task-related  excess 
of  spike  coincidences  based  on 
NeuroXidence. Neurocomputing 70, 
20642068.

Pipa, G., Wheeler, D. W., Singer, W., and 
Nikolic , D. (2008). NeuroXidence: reli-
able and effi cient analysis of an excess 
or deficiency of joint-spike events. 
J. Comput. Neurosci. 25, 6488.

Posner,  M.  I.  (1980).  Orienting  of 
 attention. Q. J. Exp. Psychol. 32, 325.
Reynolds, J. H., and Chelazzi, L. (2004). 
Attentional  modulation  of  visual 
processing. Annu. Rev. Neurosci. 27, 
611647.

Reynolds, J. H., and Desimone, R. (2000). 
The  role  of  neural  mechanisms  of 
attention in solving the binding prob-
lem. Neuron 24, 1929, 111125.

Ritz,  R.,  and  Sejnowski,  T.  J.  (1997). 
Synchronous  oscillatory  activity 
in  sensory  systems:  new  vistas  on 
mechanisms. Curr. Opin. Neurobiol. 
7, 536546.

Roberts, M., Delicato, L. S., Herrero, J., 
Gieselmann,  M. A.,  and  Thiele, A. 
(2007). Attention alters spatial integra-
tion in macaque V1 in an  eccentricity-
dependent manner. Nat. Neurosci. 10, 
14831491.

Rodriguez, E., George, N., Lachaux, J. P., 
Martinerie,  J.,  Renault,  B.,  and 
Varela, F. J.  (1999).  Perceptions 
shadow: long-distance synchroniza-
tion of human brain activity. Nature 
397, 430433.

Rodriguez, R., Kallenbach, U., Singer, W., 
and Munk, M. H. J. (2004). Short- and 
long-term effects of cholinergic mod-
ulation on gamma oscillations and 
response synchronization in the visual 
cortex. J. Neurosci. 24, 1036910378.
Roelfsema, P. R. (2006). Cortical algo-
rithms for perceptual grouping. Annu. 
Rev. Neurosci. 29, 203227.

Roelfsema, P. R., Engel, A. K., Konig, P., 
and Singer, W. (1997). Visuomotor 
integration  is  associated  with  zero 
time-lag synchronization among cor-
tical areas. Nature 385, 157161.

Roelfsema,  P.  R.,  Lamme, V.  A.,  and 
Spekreijse,  H.  (2004).  Synchrony 
and  covariation  of  firing  rates  in 
the  primary  visual  cortex  during 
contour grouping. Nat. Neurosci. 7, 
982991.

Rojas, D. C., Maharajh, K., Teale, P., and 
Rogers, S. J. (2008). Reduced neural 
synchronization  of  gamma-band 
MEG oscillations in fi rst-degree rela-
tives of children with autism. BMC 
Psychiatry 8, 66.

Roopun,  A.  K.,  Kramer,  M.  A., 
Carracedo, L. M.,  Kaiser,  M., 
Dav ies, C. H.,  Tr aub,  R.  D., 
Kopell, N. J., and Whittington, M. A. 
(2008). Period concatenation under-
lies interactions between gamma and 
beta rhythms in neocortex. Front. Cell. 
Neurosci. 2, 1.

Roy, A.,  Steinmetz,  P.  N.,  Hsiao,  S.  S., 
Johnson, K. O., and Niebur, E. (2007). 
Synchrony: a neural correlate of soma-
tosensory attention. J. Neurophysiol. 
98, 16451661.

Rubenstein, J. L., and Merzenich, M. M. 
(2003). Model of autism: increased 
ratio of excitation/inhibition in key 

neural systems. Genes Brain Behav. 2, 
255267.

Salinas, E., and Sejnowski, T. J. (2000). 
Impact of correlated synaptic input 
on output fi ring rate and variability 
in simple neuronal models. J. Neurosci. 
20, 61936209.

Salinas, E., and Sejnowski, T. J. (2001). 
Correlated neuronal activity and the 
fl ow of neural information. Nat. Rev. 
Neurosci. 2, 539550.

Schack, B., Klimesch, W., and Sauseng, P. 
(2005).  Phase  synchronization 
between theta and upper alpha oscil-
lations in a working memory task. Int. 
J. Psychophysiol. 57, 105114.

Schneider,  G.,  Havenith,  M.  N.,  and 
Nikolic , D. (2006). Spatio-temporal 
structure in large neuronal networks 
detected  from  cross-correlation. 
Neural Comput. 18, 23872413.

Schneider, G., and Nikolic , D. (2006). 
Detection and assessment of near-zero 
delays in neuronal spiking activity. 
J. Neurosci. Meth. 152, 97106.

Schoffelen, J. M., Oostenveld, R., and 
Fries, P. (2005). Neuronal coherence 
as a mechanism of effective corti-
cospinal  interaction.  Science  308, 
111113.

Schuster, H. G., and Wagner, P. (1989). 
Mutual entrainment of two limit cycle 
oscillators with time delayed coupling. 
Prog. Theor. Phys. 81, 939945.

Sehatpour, P., Molholm, S., Schwartz, T. H., 
Mahoney,  J.  R.,  Mehta, A.  D., 
Javitt, D. C.,  Stanton,  P.  K.,  and 
Foxe, J. J. (2008). A human intracra-
nial study of long-range oscillatory 
coherence across a frontal-occipital-
hippocampal brain network during 
visual object processing. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 105, 43994404.

Sejnowski, T. J., and Paulsen, O. (2006). 
Network oscillations: emerging com-
putational principles. J. Neurosci. 26, 
16731676.

Sergent, C., Baillet, S., and Dehaene, S. 
(2005). Timing of the brain events 
underlying access to consciousness 
during  the  attentional  blink.  Nat. 
Neurosci. 8, 13911400.

Shadlen, M. N., and Movshon, J. A. (1999). 
Synchrony unbound: a critical evalua-
tion of the temporal binding hypoth-
esis. Neuron 24, 6777, 111125.

Sheinberg, D. L., and Logothetis, N. K. 
(2001). Noticing familiar objects in 
real world scenes: the role of tempo-
ral cortical neurons in natural vision. 
J. Neurosci. 21, 13401350.

Sherman, S. M., and Guillery, R. W. (2002). 
The role of the thalamus in the fl ow 
of information to the cortex. Philos. 
Trans. R. Soc. Lond., B, Biol. Sci. 357, 
16951708.

Singer, W. (1999). Neuronal synchrony: a 
versatile code for the defi nition of rela-
tions? Neuron 24, 4965, 111125.

Singer, W. (2002). Phenomenal  awareness 
and  consciousness  from  a  neuro-
biological  perspective.  In  Neural 
Correlates  of  Consciousness,  T. 
Metzinger, ed. (Cambridge, MA, MIT 
Press), pp. 121137.

Singer, W. (2004). Time as coding space 
in the cerebral cortex. In Functional 
Neuroimaging of Visual Cognition. 
Attention and Performance XX., N. 
Kanwisher and J. Duncan. eds (Oxford, 
Oxford University Press), pp. 99123.
Slewa-Younan,  S.,  Gordon,  E., 
Harris, A. W., Haig, A. R., Brown, K. J., 
Flor-Henry, P., and Williams, L. M. 
(2004). Sex differences in functional 
connectivity  in  first-episode  and 
chronic schizophrenia patients. Am. J. 
Psychiatry 161, 15951602.

Sohal, V. S., Zhang, F., Yizhar, O., and 
Deisseroth, K. (2009). Parvalbumin 
neurons and gamma rhythms enhance 
cortical circuit performance. Nature 
459, 698702.

Spencer,  K.  M.,  Nestor,  P.  G., 
Niznikiewicz, M. A., Salisbury, D. F., 
Shenton, M. E., and McCarley, R. W. 
(2003). Abnormal neural synchrony 
in  schizophrenia.  J.  Neurosci.  23, 
74077411.

Spencer, K. M., Nestor, P. G., Perlmutter, R., 
Niznikiewicz, M. A., Klump, M. C., 
Frumin,  M.,  Shenton,  M.  E.,  and 
McCarley, R. W. (2004). Neural syn-
chrony indexes disordered percep-
tion and cognition in schizophrenia. 
Proc.  Natl.  Acad.  Sci.  U.S.A.  101, 
1728817293.

Spencer,  K.  M.,  Salisbury,  D.  F., 
Shenton, M. E., and McCarley, R. W. 
(2008).  Gamma-band  auditory 
steady-state responses are impaired in 
fi rst episode psychosis. Biol. Psychiatry 
64, 369375.

Spitzer, H., Desimone, R., and Moran, J. 
(1988). Increased attention enhances 
both behavioral and neuronal per-
formance. Science 240, 338340.

Sporns, O., and Kotter, R. (2004). Motifs 
in  brain  networks.  PLOS  Biol.  2, 
19101918.

Srinivasan, R., Russell, D. P., Edelman, G. M., 
and  Tononi,  G.  (1999).  Increased 
synchronization  of  neuromagnetic 
responses during conscious percep-
tion. J. Neurosci. 19, 54355448.

Steinmetz, P. N., Roy, A., Fitzgerald, P. J., 
Hsiao, S. S., Johnson, K. O., and Niebur, E. 
(2000). Attention modulates synchro-
nized neuronal fi ring in primate soma-
tosensory cortex. Nature 404, 187190.
Steriade,  M.,  Mccormick,  D.  A.,  and 
Sejnowski, T. J. (1993). Thalamocortical 
oscillations in the sleeping and aroused 
brain. Science 262, 679685.

Tallon-Baudry, C. (2009). The roles of 
gamma-band oscillatory synchrony in 
human visual cognition. Front. Biosci. 
14, 321332.

Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 

www.frontiersin.org 

July 2009  |  Volume 3  |  Article 17  |  18

Uhlhaas et al. 

Neural synchrony in cortical networks

Tallon-Baudry,  C.,  Bertrand,  O., 
Delpuech, C., and Permier, J. (1997). 
Oscillatory gamma-band (3070 Hz) 
activity induced by a visual search task 
in humans. J. Neurosci. 17, 722734.

Taylor, K., Mandon, S., Freiwald, W. A., 
and Kreiter, A. K. (2005). Coherent 
oscillatory  activity  in  monkey 
area V4 predicts successful alloca-
tion of attention. Cereb. Cortex 15, 
14241437.

Thiele, A., and Stoner, G. (2003). Neuronal 
synchrony  does  not  correlate  with 
motion coherence in cortical area MT. 
Nature 421, 366370.

Thompson, E., and Varela, F. J. (2001). 
Radical embodiment: neural dynam-
ics and consciousness. Trends Cogn. 
Sci. 5, 418425.

Tiesinga, P. H., and Sejnowski, T. J. (2004). 
Rapid temporal modulation of syn-
chrony  by  competition  in  cortical 
interneuron networks. Neural Comput. 
16, 251275.

Tillmann, C., Wibral, M., Leweke, M., 
Kohler,  A.,  Singer,  W.,  Koethe, D., 
Kranaster,  L.,  Maurer,  K.,  and 
Uhlhaas, P. J. (2008). High-frequency 
gamma-band oscillations during per-
ceptual organisation in chronic and 
fi rst-episode schizophrenia patients. 
Soc. Neurosci. Abstr. 54, 2. Society for 
Neuroscience 38th Annual Meeting, 
Washington, D.C., USA.

Tognoli, E., and Kelso, J. A. (2009). Brain 
coordination dynamics: true and false 
faces of phase synchrony and metast-
ability. Prog. Neurobiol. 87, 3140.

Tononi, G., Srinivasan, R., Russell, D. P., 
and  Edelman,  G.  M.  (1998). 
Investigating neural correlates of con-
scious perception by frequency-tagged 
neuromagnetic responses. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 95, 31983203.

Traub, R. D., Bibbig, A., LeBeau, F. E., 
Buhl, E. H., and Whittington, M. A. 
(2004).  Cellular  mechanisms  of 
 neuronal population oscillations in 

the hippocampus in vitro. Annu. Rev. 
Neurosci. 27, 247278.

(Stanford, CA, Stanford University 
Press), pp. 266314.

through  neuronal  synchronization. 
Science 316, 16091612.

Traub,  R.  D.,  Whittington,  M.  A., 
Stanford, I. M., and Jefferys, J. G. R. 
(1996).  A  mechanism  for  genera-
tion of long-range synchronous fast 
oscillations in the cortex. Nature 383, 
621624.

Uhlhaas, P. J., Linden, D. E. J., Singer, W., 
Haenschel,  C.,  Lindner,  M., 
Maurer, K., and Rodriguez, E. (2006). 
Dysfunctional  long-range  coor-
dination  of  neural  activity  during 
Gestalt perception in schizophrenia. 
J. Neurosci. 26, 81688175.

Uhlhaas, P. J., and Silverstein, S. M. (2005). 
Perceptual  organization  in  schizo-
phrenia spectrum disorders: a review 
of empirical research and associated 
theories. Psychol. Bull. 131, 618632.
Uhlhaas,  P.  J.,  and  Singer,  W.  (2006). 
Neural synchrony in brain disorders: 
relevance for cognitive dysfunctions 
and  pathophysiology.  Neuron  52, 
155168.

Uhlhaas, P. J., and Singer, W. (2007). What 
can neural synchrony tell us about 
autism? Biol. Psychiatry 62, 190191.
Ullner,  E.,  Vicente,  R.,  Pipa,  G.,  and 
Garcia-Ojalvo,  J.  (2009).  Contour 
integration and synchronization in 
neuronal networks of the visual cortex. 
Springer Lect. Notes Comput. Sci. Artif. 
Neural Netw. 5164, 703712.

Van  Vreeswijk,  C.,  Abbott,  L.  F.,  and 
Ermentrout, G. B. (1994). When inhibi-
tion not excitation synchronizes neural 
fi ring. J. Comput. Neurosci. 1, 313321.
Varela, F., Lachaux, J. P., Rodriguez, E., and 
Martinerie, J. (2001). The brainweb: 
phase  synchronization  and  large-
scale integration. Nat. Rev. Neurosci. 
2, 229239.

Varela, F. J. (1999). The specious present: 
a  neurophenomenology  of  time 
consciousness.  In  Naturalizing 
Phenomenology,  J.  Petitot,  F.  J. 
Varela, J.-M. Roy, and B. Pachoud, eds. 

Vicente, R., Gollo, L. L., Mirasso, C. R., 
Fischer,  I.,  and  Pipa,  G.  (2008). 
Dynamical relaying can yield zero time 
lag neuronal synchrony despite long 
conduction delays. Proc. Natl. Acad. 
Sci. U.S.A. 105, 1715717162.

Villalobos, M. E., Mizuno, A., Dahl, B. C., 
Kemmotsu,  N.,  and  Muller,  R.  A. 
(2005). Reduced functional connec-
tivity between V1 and inferior frontal 
cortex  associated  with  visuomotor 
performance in autism. NeuroImage 
25, 916925.

Volgushev,  M.,  Chistiakova,  M.,  and 
Singer, W. (1998). Modifi cation of dis-
charge patterns of neocortical neurons 
by induced oscillations of the membrane 
potential. Neuroscience 83, 1525.

von Stein, A., Chiang, C., and Konig, P. 
(2000). Top-down processing mediated 
by interareal synchronization. Proc. Natl. 
Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 97, 1474814753.

Williams, S. R., and Atkinson, S. (2008). 
Dendritic  synaptic  integration  in 
central  neurons.  Curr.  Biol.  22, 
R1045R1047.

Wilson, T. W., Rojas, D. C., Reite, M. L., 
Teale, P. D., and Rogers, S. J. (2007). 
Children and adolescents with autism 
exhibit  reduced  MEG  steady-state 
gamma  responses.  Biol.  Psychiatry 
62, 192197.

Womelsdorf,  T.,  and  Fries,  P.  (2006). 
Neuronal coherence during selective 
attentional processing and sensory-
motor integration. J. Physiol. (Paris) 
100, 182193.

Womelsdorf, T., Fries, P., Mitra, P., and 
Desimone, R. (2006). Gamma-band 
synchronization  in  visual  cortex 
predicts speed of change detection. 
Nature 439, 733736.

Womelsdorf,  T.,  Schoffelen,  J.-M., 
Oostenveld, R., Singer, W., Desimone, R., 
Engel,  A.  K.,  and  Fries,  P.  (2007). 
Modulation of neuronal interactions 

Wu, W., Wheeler, D. W., Staedtler, E. S., 
Munk, M. H., and Pipa, G. (2008). 
Behavioral performance modulates 
spike  field  coherence  in  monkey 
prefrontal  cortex.  Neuroreport  19, 
235238.

Wynn, J. K., Light, G. A., Breitmeyer, B., 
Nuechterlein, K. H., and Green, M. F. 
(2005). Event-related gamma activ-
ity in schizophrenia patients during 
a visual backward-masking task. Am. 
J. Psychiatry 162, 23302336.

Yu, S., Huang, D., Singer, W., and Nikolic, D. 
(2008). A small world of neuronal syn-
chrony. Cereb. Cortex 18, 28912901.

Yuval-Greenberg, S., Tomer, O., Keren, A. S., 
Nelken, I., and Deouell, L. Y. (2008). 
Transient  induced  gamma-band 
response in EEG as a manifestation 
of  miniature  saccades.  Neuron  58, 
429441.

Conflict  of  Interest  Statement:  The 
authors declare that the research was con-
ducted in the absence of any commercial or 
fi nancial relationships that could be con-
strued as a potential confl ict of interest.

Received: 04 March 2009; paper pending 
published: 20 March 2009; accepted: 11 July 
2009; published online: 30 July 2009.
Citation: Uhlhaas PJ, Pipa G, Lima B, 
Melloni L, Neuenschwander S, Nikolic  D 
and Singer W (2009) Neural synchrony 
in cortical networks: history, concept and 
current status. Front. Integr. Neurosci. 3:17. 
doi: 10.3389/neuro.07.017.2009
Copyright  2009 Uhlhaas, Pipa, Lima, 
Melloni, Neuenschwander, Nikolic  and 
Singer. This is an open-access article subject 
to an exclusive license agreement between 
the authors and the Frontiers Research 
Foundation, which permits unrestricted 
use, distribution, and reproduction in any 
medium, provided the original authors and 
source are credited.

Frontiers in Integrative Neuroscience 

www.frontiersin.org 

July 2009  |  Volume 3  |  Article 17  |  19

