Technical white paper  

HP Virtual Application 
Networks SDN Controller 

The building block of HP SDN ecosystem  

 

Table of contents 

Executive summary ...................................................................................................................................................................... 2 
Simplify and transform with SDN .............................................................................................................................................. 2 
The benefits of an open and extensible SDN controller platform ...................................................................................... 3 
A new era of SDN application innovation ................................................................................................................................. 4 
An ecosystem of HP partners to improve your networks .................................................................................................... 5 
Getting started with SDN ......................................................................................................................................................... 6 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 

Technical white paper  |  HP Virtual Application Networks SDN Controller 

 

HP Virtual Application Networks SDN Controller is the central building block of 
HP SDN network and creates a platform for application innovation. 

Executive summary  

The world is moving faster than ever. Transactions must be processed at lightning speed. Mountains of data must be 
transformed into insights. Customers want exceptional service. Employees want access to information and applications 
from any device. Delivering on those expectations requires data centers that are more powerful, agile, and automated  
than ever before, and a campus environment that responds to a dynamic and changing workforce. 

Server and storage architectures have modernized to keep pace with the unyielding expectations of an always-on world,  
but the underlying network has not. The data center network itself, while certainly bigger and faster, has largely been built 
the same way for two decades. Evolution of campus networks has been slow, despite the mobility revolution.  

Whether in the data center or on the campus, when legacy networks are pushed to the limit, they become fragile, difficult to 
manage, vulnerable, and expensive to operate. Manual configuration and operation simply wont scale to the demands of 
todays applications, users, and business requirements. Businesses whose networks are at this breaking point risk missing 
the next wave of opportunity.  

This technical white paper provides an overview of the HP Virtual Application Networks (VAN) SDN Controller and how we are 
fostering the development of a vibrant SDN ecosystem to help enterprises, cloud providers, and developers unleash new 
levels of automation and efficiency in data center and campus networks.  

Simplify and transform with SDN 

At HP Networking, weve been leading the way in simplifying and transforming the network to meet your organizations 
needs for mobility, virtualization, high-definition video, rich-media collaboration tools, and cloud computing. With the  
HP FlexNetwork architecture, your business gains an open and standards-based network solution designed to scale on 
three dimensionssecurity, agility, and consistency.  

By embracing a software-defined network, youll be able to reap the full value of your network investment. SDN, delivered 
through our market-leading solutions, will help your users and organization experience applications as never before. It will 
free your IT administrators from the drudgery of manual network configuration and reconfiguration because the network 
will be automatically tuned to application and business needs. Your IT staff can focus more on the quality of the business 
experience, and spend less time managing the details of the underlying networking infrastructure.  

Our SDN strategy is built on the foundation of our open and scalable HP FlexNetwork architecture, which covers the entire 
path from the end user to the data center, as well as the technology stack from infrastructure to management.  

HP has been leading SDN development since its earliest days. We demonstrated the first commercial, hardware-based 
switch implementation of OpenFlow at ACM SIGCOMM in 2008. We also participated in a public demonstration of OpenFlow 
at InteropNet Lab in May 2011. Our engineers have taken leadership positions in key SDN initiatives including the 
Open Network Foundation, the ETSI Network Function Virtualization committee, the OpenStack initiative, and OpenFlow, 
the standard communications interface defined between the control and forwarding layers of an SDN architecture.  

HP Virtual Application Networks are at the core of our SDN strategy. With HP Virtual Application Networks, you can move  
to service-centric management and orchestration and gain business agility. To help ease your move to an SDN architecture, 
weve enabled OpenFlow in more than 50 of our switch models. And we plan to extend support across the FlexNetwork 
architecture. Were also building a vibrant third-party SDN developer ecosystem to further drive the open and extensible 
nature of the HP Virtual Application Networks SDN Controller. 

 

 

 

2 

Technical white paper  |  HP Virtual Application Networks SDN Controller 

 

The benefits of an open and extensible SDN controller platform 

HP Virtualized Application Networks SDN Controller provides centralized control and automation for your SDN network.  
The HP SDN Controller controls policy and forwarding decisions, which are communicated to the OpenFlow-enabled 
switches in the data center or campus network. A variety of HP and third-party SDN applications can leverage the SDN 
controller to automatically deliver the necessary business and network service levels.  

The SDN architecture separates the network control plane from the forwarding hardware. Controlessentially the brains of 
the networkis centralized, while forwardingremains distributed. By separating the control plane from the forwarding 
plane, SDN makes it possible for the network status and capabilities to be exposed directly to the business service layer, so 
that business systems can request services from the network directly. SDN applications thus provide higher level application 
direction to the SDN controller. And freed from the control function, the forwarding plane can then provide optimized packet 
processing at very high speeds. 

Figure 1. Software-defined Network structure 

Open Networking Foundation standard definition of SDN  

 

You dont need to transition your entire network to SDN or to transform your complete operational model to SDN to begin  
to see tangible benefits. Our switches support hybrid modes of operations, where responsibility for certain labor-intensive 
functions, such as QoS or security provisioning, can be passed to the SDN controller. Other functions, such as traditional 
routing functions, can be handled by the normal distributed control plane. You can migrate incrementally, adapting to SDN 
as your staff and the organization build experience with the new network paradigm. 

The HP SDN controller delivers:  

  Open programmable interfaces. Our SDN controller delivers tight integration between the network and business 

system, with open, programmable interfaces that enable the orchestration of applications and automation of network 
functions. Your developers can use the language of their choice and leverage the extensible RESTful API for the creation 
of SDN applications that will unleash new levels of innovation.  

  Centralized, resilient control. Our controller provides centralized, resilient control of the SDN network, including 

functions such as discovery of the network topology and shortest path forwarding through the network.  

  Highly available and scalable. We designed our SDN controller to meet high availability and scaling requirements 

through a scale-out teaming model. Our SDN controller can be clustered, so that if any one controller in the network fails, 
another in the cluster will take over.  

  Robust security. Security is an important factor of our controller. It uses robust authentication and authorization 
methods so that SDN applications can interact with the controller while preventing unauthorized applications from 
gaining network access. The southbound connections between the OpenFlow switches and the HP SDN controller are  
also secured and encrypted.  

  Full Integration with HP Intelligent Management Center (IMC). Administrators can use the HP Intelligent Management 

Center (IMC) SDN Manager for full fault, configuration, accounting, performance, and security management for the  
HP SDN controller and OpenFlow infrastructure. HP SDN Manager leverages flow monitoring, topology mapping, and 
troubleshooting to provide full SDN management through the same interface as the wired, physical, and virtual network. 
IMC provides full controller application life cycle management and monitoring, enhanced reporting, and SDN network 
visualization.  

 

 

 
 
3 

Technical white paper  |  HP Virtual Application Networks SDN Controller 

 

A new era of SDN application innovation 

With SDN, the network can automatically adapt to meet your business and application performance requirements, whether 
in the data center, cloud, or campus. An ecosystem of HP and third-party SDN applications is emerging rapidly to realize  
this vision.  

SDN applications are analogous to the protocols that run on legacy networks, but SDN applications provide a true  
end-to-end service level for network performance, quality of service, and security, which can be tuned to applications 
needs. For example, SDN applications can provision the network, inspect flows, or perform other network control functions 
via the HP SDN controller.  

SDN applications can be network-service oriented, but also they can accommodate virtually any business service use case. 
For example, for applications that require fast response, such as IP voice or high-frequency trading, an SDN application can 
establish programmatically the precise level of control, and the policy will be enforced across the enterprise network by the 
SDN Controller.  

The fundamental extensibility and open APIs of the HP SDN Controller will allow innovative new applications to be created 
that make requests of the underlying network, without the need to physically uproot or reconfigure the underlying 
infrastructure. 

Figure 2. HP VAN SDN Controller Architecture 

The SDN Controller supports the highly integrated Network Control applications and the SDN Business application. 
Northbound APIs utilize the REST architecture and provide easy access to applications that are integrated directly in the 
controller or off the controller. Native APIs, provided in Java, deliver support to Network Control applications that are 
integrated directly in the controller. 

 

 

 

 

4 

Technical white paper  |  HP Virtual Application Networks SDN Controller 

 

Figure 3. Virtual Application Networks deliver automation, agility 

Programmable network aligned to business applications  

 

Together with our partners weve created several SDN applications, and this ecosystem will continue to grow.  
These applications include: 

  HP Virtual Cloud NetworkThis application provides scalable cloud automation for multitenant data centers  

and supports integration of public and private clouds. HP Virtual Cloud Network uses the OpenStack Neutron RESTful  
APIs to help you achieve the automation benefits of private or public clouds. This solution is available through a  
variety of integrated HP solutions for converged infrastructure, such as HP CloudSystem 8, HP next-generation  
cloud infrastructure. 

  Unified Communications and Collaboration (UC&C) SDN ApplicationThis application aims to improve the  
user experience of products such as Microsoft Lync within campus networks. It automates the deployment of  
quality-of-service policies and dynamically adjusts network priorities to securely support voice, video, and collaboration 
traffic, even in an environment integrating soft phones and BYOD user endpoints. 

  HP Sentinel Security ApplicationThe result of a partnership with enterprise-security specialists HP Tipping Point and 

ArcSight, this application enables real-time threat detection and security policy enforcement at the edge of campus 
networks. Sentinel can be used to secure BYOD. Sentinel security can also be deployed across a campus network to 
protect you from more than one million malware, spyware, and botnet threats. 
Sentinel leverages the Virtual Application Networks SDN Controller and OpenFlow to program the network infrastructure 
with security intelligence from the TippingPoint RepDV Labs database, which has a reputation score for each domain 
name. Sentinel compares the domain name system (DNS) queries from user machines against the reputation scores. If 
the site is legitimate, the query is forwarded to the access layer switch. However, if Sentinel detects a threat, the user is 
prevented from accessing the threat site and the prevention is logged by HP ArcSight logger. 

  Intel and Verizon Dynamic WAN bandwidth provisioningIntel and Verizon are collaborating with the support of  

HP CMS service organization on an SDN application that enables service providers to automate the provisioning of  
cloud data centers to support on-demand scalability and business-continuity requirements. This third-party use case 
demonstrates the flexibility of the SDN architecture in diverse environments. 

These are just a few examples of possible SDN applications that can be developed with the HP SDN Controller  
and ecosystem.  

An ecosystem of HP partners to improve your networks  

Industry experts predict a swift migration to SDN. SDN market will reach $3.7 billion by 2016. Nearly $670 million  
will come from SDN applications.1

  

SDN will unleash a new cycle of network innovation for developers, enterprises, and cloud providers, but the true value of 
SDN can only be realized with broad industry support for SDN standards from all vendors and developers. HP is driving this 
realization with the development of programming standards to create a vibrant SDN ecosystem.  

 

 
1 IDC #240557, Technology Assessment: The Impact of SDN on Datacenter and Enterprise Network Architectures, April 2013. 
 

 
 
5 

Technical white paper  |  HP Virtual Application Networks SDN Controller 

 

HP is actively building an SDN application developer ecosystem to foster the creation of SDN applications. HP is offering  
an SDN developer community, as well as forums, events, and other services, to help developers and go-to-market partners 
build and sell SDN applications. Third-party SDN applications will be available through an HP App Store. And HP is working 
with partners to sell SDN applications as part of a broader effort that encompasses the application, network, and  
services sales.  

Visit hp.com/SDN to learn more about our SDN strategy and our growing ecosystem of SDN partners and applications. 

Getting started with SDN 
SDN promises to bring new levels of automation and efficiency to data center and campus networks. Its important to 
understand the potential of SDN for your business, and to take proactive steps so you can make the move under your own 
terms. Heres how to start: 
1.  Deploy OpenFlow-enabled switches so you can move to SDN when youre ready. 
2.  Understand how SDN applications can enable your organization to deliver the business-service levels that your  

users expect. 

3.  Partner with an SDN vendor that provides open, scalable, and secure SDN solutions and simplifies the development of 

SDN applications.  

4.  Build a proof-of-concept test for SDN in your labs to understand how network virtualization and automation can help 

you deliver higher service levels.  

Learn more at 
hp.com/networking/sdn 
 

 
 

Sign up for updates 
hp.com/go/getupdated 

  

  

  

 

Share with colleagues 

 

Rate this document 

 

 Copyright 2013 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice. The only warranties for 
HP products and services are set forth in the express warranty statements accompanying such products and services. Nothing herein should be construed as 
constituting an additional warranty. HP shall not be liable for technical or editorial errors or omissions contained herein.  

Intel is a trademark of Intel Corporation in the U.S. and other countries. Microsoft and Lync are U.S. registered trademarks of Microsoft Corporation. Java is a 
registered trademark of Oracle and/or its affiliates. 

4AA4-8807ENW, September 2013 

 

 

