Technical white paper 

Realizing the  
power of SDN  
with HP Virtual 
Application 
Networks

Table of contents

  3  Executive summary

  3  Software-defined networks (SDN)

  4  Building a software-defined network

  5  HP Virtual Application Networks

  5  HP Virtual Application Networks SDN Controller:  

centralized network control and automation

  6  HP Virtual Application Networks SDN Applications

  7  Enabling SDN through technology innovation

  9  Why choose HP?

  10  Additional resources

Executive summary
Many enterprises are unable to create business innovation 
because of aging networking environments. Network design and 
architectures have remained largely unchanged for more than a 
decade. While applications and systems have evolved to meet the 
demands of a world where real time rules, the underlying network 
infrastructure has not kept pace.

Software-defined networks (SDN) redefines the way we think about 
the network and removes the barriers to innovation by giving cloud 
providers and enterprises complete programmatic control of a 
dynamic, abstracted view of the network. With software-defined 
networks technologies, IT can become more agile by orchestrating 
network services and automatically controlling the network 
according to high-level policies, rather than low-level network 
device configurations.

This white paper gives an overview of software-defined  
networking and how HP is leveraging SDN to deliver the 
Virtual Application Networks strategy.

Software-defined networks (SDN)
So what is SDN?
SDN represents a new architecture that separates the network 
control plane from the forwarding hardware, allowing a centralized 
controller (or set of controllers) to define forwarding behavior 
through high-level policy.

HP believes that SDN is defined by the ability to apply business  
logic to network behavior in a dynamic fashion. This is achieved in 
three steps:
1.   There must exist an open, standards-based mechanism to  

access the infrastructure.

2.   The control plane and data plane functions of a device should 
be separated; network control is centralized while forwarding 
remains distributed.

3.   The centralized control (or controller) should deliver open 

programmable interfaces to allow the orchestration of 
applications and automation of network functions.

Debunking the myths of SDN
SDN is neither just OpenFlow nor just OpenStack. OpenFlow is a 
protocol and OpenStack is an orchestration tool. These may be used 
to deliver SDN elements, but they are not synonymous with SDN.

SDN is not just a software implementation of a network device. 
HP chooses not to define software routers or virtualized appliances 
as SDN.

SDN is not just providing proprietary programmatic APIs. It is more 
than exposing device configuration APIs and automation.

SDN is definitely not the end of hardware innovation. HP will 
continue to drive hardware innovation in support of SDN.

The benefits of SDN
Networks are increasing in complexity: they are bigger and faster, 
and applications and services are deployed more dynamically. Both 
users and applications require security, resiliency, privacy, traffic 
separation, end-to-end virtualization, and priority treatment. In 
a legacy network there is a 1:1 relationship between servers and 
switch ports. With the adoption of server virtualization, network 
demand has increased dramatically by enabling as many as  
50 servers behind a single port, each requiring their own network 
and security policies. The network cant change or adapt fast enough 
today without deploying complicated and fragile programmatic 
network management systems or employing vast teams of network 
administrators to make thousands of changes per day. 

Legacy inflexible network architecture vs. SDN

Legacy

Orchestration

Complex, 

device-specific
configurations

Control plane Control plane Control plane

Control plane

Infrastructure

SDN

Orchestration

Simple,
one policy

Control plane

Infrastructure

Data plane

Data plane

Data plane

Data plane

Data plane

Data plane

Data plane

Data plane

As you can see from in the figure above, legacy networks are difficult 
to automate as the control plane intelligence is distributed. SDN 
promises an easier, more dynamic interaction with the network 
through the use of a clean interface obtained through abstraction 
of the control plane. This reduces the complexity of managing, 
provisioning, and changing the network. 

3

Traditional networks have also struggled to bridge the gap between 
the systems they support and the services they deliver. Attempts to 
bridge this gap in the past resulted in complex network configuration 
aimed at enabling network devices to monitor application traffic, 
infer application status and need, and then respond according to 
configured policy.

By separating the control plane, and the dynamic state it contains, 
away from the data or forwarding plane, SDN makes it possible 
for the networks status and capabilities to be exposed directly to 
the business service layer, allowing business systems to request 
services from the network directly, rather than trusting the network 
to guess successfully.

By exposing the control plane of the network via open interfaces, 
SDN levels the playing field for network innovation, lowering the 
barriers that have previously kept new entrants from bringing new 
and interesting capabilities to the market, and allowing businesses 
to unleash the true power of the network.

Building a software-defined network
There are three critical components to a building an SDN:
The infrastructure includes the underlying ports and forwarding 
hardware that move data across your network. It is important in 
an SDN environment that the infrastructures supports a means of 
programmatic access to its data and control plane.

The control element of an SDN resides in a central controller. This 
control presents an abstracted view of the infrastructure, allowing 
the network administrator to apply one or more policies across the 
network. The controllers job is to enforce these policies. A controller 
needs to communicate with the infrastructure, but must also be able 
to communicate with applications.

Building a software-defined network

Application layer

Applications in an SDN environment could be compared to the 
protocols that ran our legacy networks for the past 20 years. The 
key difference is that SDN applications are presented a view of the 
entire network, allowing them to focus on optimizing business 
applications and providing a true end-to-end SLA comprising 
performance, quality of service, and security. SDN applications will 
be responsible for tasks such as path computation, loop avoidance, 
and routing, but it doesnt stop there. The promise of SDN is that 
applications can easily be developed to accommodate virtually any 
use case. As applications communicate with the control layer using 
open, standards-based Application Programming Interfaces (APIs), 
it means that applications can be developed in-house.

API directionality in SDN

SDN Applications

North

SDN Controller

West

SDN Controller

East

SDN Controller

South

Infrastructure

The APIs used to communicate between the layers of the SDN stack 
are grouped based on their function in an SDN architecture:
  Northbound APIs 

Communicate between controllers and applications

  Southbound APIs 

Communicate between controller to infrastructure

Business applications

  East/Westbound APIs 

(e.g., OpenStack, CloudStack)

Cloud orchestration

SDN applications

Control layer

Programmable open APIs

SDN controller

Infrastructure layer

Control and data plane programmable
interface (e.g., OpenFlow)

Network device

Network device

Network device

Communicate between groups or federations of controllers to 
synchronize state for high availability

As SDN technologies are still maturing, there will initially be very few 
pure SDN deployments outside of massive provider networks that 
require SDN to solve their scaling problems. Within the enterprise, 
we will see the deployment of hybrid networks that continue 
to operate in a traditional fashion but leverage SDN to provide 
additional features and functionality. 

4

HP Virtual Application Networks
The HP Virtual Application Networks strategy embraces software-
defined networks to deliver on its three key principles:
  Application characterization 

Gaining intelligence and characterizing applications and traffic 
on the network, which is essential to consistently, reliably, and 
repeatedly automating network configuration for delivering 
specific applications 
  Network abstraction 

Enabling multitenant networks with on-demand topologies  
that are device independent
  Automated orchestration 

Automating how the network is configured in response to the 
policy-driven decisions built into network applications

HP FlexNetwork Architecture forms the foundation of the 
HP strategy and delivers an open and standards-based 
infrastructure with scalability on three dimensions: security,  
agility, and consistency.

HP delivered on the promise of application characterization at the 
network edge through the release of the HP Virtual Application 
Networks Manager plugin for the HP Intelligent Management Center.

To deliver on the goals of network abstraction and automated 
orchestration, HP has developed an HP Virtual Application Networks 
SDN Controller. This controller is the platform for a number of  
SDN applications that will deliver Virtual Application Networks.

HP FlexNetwork Architecture with HP Virtual Application Networks

Virtual Application 
Network

Virtual Application 
Network

Virtual Application 
Network

Virtual Application 
Network

Control Plane

FlexFabric

FlexCampus

FlexBranch

FlexManagement

FlexNetwork Architecture

Business
applications

Network
applications

Network control
plane

Network
infrastructure

HP Virtual Application Networks  
SDN Controller: centralized network 
control and automation
The HP Virtual Application Networks SDN Controller, available  
as software or as an appliance, is the centralized control platform 
for the software-defined network. It interfaces with the network 
infrastructure using open-standard interfaces and control protocols 
(or southbound APIs), such as OpenFlow, to expose an abstracted  
and centralized control plane to network applications, which have 
been built and integrated into the controller to provide network 
services such as network virtualization, security, and traffic 
engineering.

HP SDN sample architecture

HP public

HP private

HP software 

HP ESSN/ES

cloud

cloud

apps

apps

Hadoop

Cloud connectors 

Network

virtualization

Security

Flow-based
traffic eng

RESTful API

Partner

third-party 

apps 

Network

app X

Topology

Edge

management

Path

calculation

VM

tracking

HP SDN Controller

Standard interfaces
and control protocols

HP Network Infrastructure

The controller is further extended with robust authentication 
and authorization mechanisms which, in part, allow HP to expose 
varying levels of control and access to SDN applications residing 
within or interfacing with the controller. This mechanism and others 
work together allowing customers to reap the benefits of increased 
network flexibility through SDN while preserving the integrity of the 
network by preventing unauthorized applications from negatively 
impacting network stability or performance.

The HP Virtual Application Networks SDN Controller is ready for 
the cloud and will be integrated with OpenStack and CloudStack to 
provide elastic provisioning of the network alongside storage and 
compute. Finally, the controller provides a RESTful northbound API, 
which is intended to expose network features and functionality 
naturally to off-controller SDN applications, orchestration and 
management systems, and business applications.

The controller has been architected to provide enterprises and 
service providers with a scalable, extensible, and stable solution 
through which they bridge the gap between the services on which 
the business depends and the infrastructure over which those 
services run.

The Virtual Application Networks SDN Controller provides the 
platform for a number of network applications that leverage  
SDN to deliver the promise of Virtual Application Networks and 
increase your business agility.

5

Virtual Cloud Networks application use case

Public cloud

automation at scale

Public cloud

multitenancy at scale

Enterprise public-private

cloud integration

e
r
u
t
c
e
t
i
h
c
r
a
N
D
S

 

Application

layer

Control
layer

Infrastructure

layer

Tenant A

Fixed or floating IPs

Tenant virtual network

VPN

Internet

Customer
network

Tenant B

Fixed or floating IPs

Tenant virtual network

Internet

VPN

Customer
network

Tenant X

Fixed or floating IPs

Tenant virtual network

VPN

Internet

Customer
network

Virtual Application

Networks SDN controller 

On-premise private

cloud network

OpenStack ready

Enables tenant

self-service

Secure enterprise
cloud extensions

HP Virtual Application Networks  
SDN Applications
Virtual Cloud Network
The HP Virtual Cloud Network (VCN) application delivers Virtual 
Application Networks elements, leveraging HP Virtual Application 
Networks SDN Controller and OpenFlow-compliant virtual switches, 
to automatically create overlay virtual networks. 

HP VCN allows cloud service providers to deliver secure multi-
tenant public clouds at the scale necessary to compete in their 
markets. Enterprises can leverage HP VCN to gain the advantages 
of automation within their private clouds, while enabling secure 
integration of public cloud environments into their private estate. 
HP VCN provides the network abstraction necessary for service 
providers and enterprises to take maximum advantage of the  
public and the private cloud.

The HP Virtual Cloud Network application enables public cloud 
providers and enterprises to overcome the challenges facing  
them today.

Public cloud providers require massive scale in order to meet the 
price points that allow them to compete in their marketplace. Yet 
existing network automation and virtualization solutions have 
difficulty scaling to the levels a public cloud provider requires.

The HP Virtual Cloud Network solution enables public cloud 
providers to scale and reduces their risk. First, the HP VCN overlay  
allows providers to scale beyond the constraints of current 
solutions. Second, the HP solution focuses network changes at the 
edge, reducing the risk of each change and making automation at 
scale a reality.

Enterprises are challenged to interconnect their private 
environments with their public cloud presences without 
compromising the integrity of their existing networks. HP VCN 
enables the enterprise to securely connect to the cloud and apply  
its own identity to its cloud environment.

Since the Virtual Cloud Network solution is already integrated 
with OpenStack, public cloud providers can deliver an automated 
self-service solution to their tenants, and enterprises can securely 
connect their private estate to public cloud environments. 

6

Sentinel security application use case

Campus and branch security

Data center security

Cloud security

e
r
u
t
c
e
t
i
h
c
r
a
N
D
S

 

Application

layer

Control
layer

Infrastructure

layer

Sentinel

 Real-time cloud database feed
 Protection from over 700,000 threats

DVLabs
RepDV DB

Virtual Application

Networks SDN controller 

Scales to thousands of

endpoints 

Eliminates need for
dedicated appliances 

Automates threat
protection for BYOD 

Uses standards-based 

OpenFlow

Sentinel security
HPs latest innovation in security is the Sentinel security application 
for HP Virtual Application Networks SDN Controller. Sentinel is  
able to stop threats before they reach your network. Sentinel 
security can be deployed across a campus or data center network  
to protect you from over 700,000 malicious malware, spyware,  
and botnet threats. 

One possible use case for Sentinel is the redirection of Domain Name 
System (DNS) queries from user machines to the Sentinel application 
running on the HP Virtual Application Networks SDN controller.

Take, for example, a corporate user who was to click a link in  
an email:
  First, the users DNS query would be sent to the local  

OpenFlow-enabled HP access switch

  Second, the switch would forward the traffic to the HP Virtual 

Application Networks SDN controller via an OpenFlow rule 
implemented by the Sentinel application targeting DNS queries

  Once the SDN controller receives the query, the Sentinel 

application jumps into action by checking the hostname against 
the HP TippingPoint DVLabs RepDV database of known threats

  Finally, if Sentinel determines that the site is legitimate, the  
query is forwarded across the access layer switch. If Sentinel 
detects a threat, an unresolvable response is sent back to the 
client, the action is logged with HP ArcSight, and the user is 
prevented from accessing the threat

Sentinel can be used in any network environment where security 
is a concern, including the data center and cloud computing 
environments. HP envisions a network where Sentinel security 
can be implemented for unprecedented network visibility, event 
correlation accuracy, and security control.

Enabling SDN through technology 
innovation
HP has made significant investments in developing the technologies 
behind software-defined networks.

OpenFlow: standards-based infrastructure 
programmability
OpenFlow is an emerging open standard protocol that has been  
a key enabling technology for HP Virtual Application Networks. 
OpenFlow development started in 2007 and was led by Stanford 
University and the University of California at Berkeley. In 2011, the 
protocol standardization was taken over by the Open Networking 
Foundation (ONF).

OpenFlow allows applications or SDN controllers to access the data 
plane of the network device. This enhanced level of access allows 
administrators to dynamically change the way traffic flows through 
the network. The OpenFlow protocol uses a standardized instruction 
set, which means that any OpenFlow-enabled controller can send 
a common set of instructions to any OpenFlow-enabled switch, 
regardless of vendor.

HP demonstrated the first commercial, hardware-based switch 
implementation of OpenFlow at ACM SIGCOMM in 2008. HP also 
participated in a public demonstration of OpenFlow at InteropNet 
Lab in May 2011. HP has been an active contributor to the OpenFlow 
standards effort and is a founding member of the Open Networking 
Foundation. HP continues to work closely with partners such as 
Indiana Center for Network Transactional Research and Education 
(InCNTRE) to drive research in SDN and ensure multivendor 
interoperability for OpenFlow-enabled solutions.

7

OpenFlow flow table entry

Rule

Action

Stats

Packet + byte counters

1.  Forward packet to zero or more ports
2.  Encapsulate and forward to controller
3.  Send to normal processing pipeline
4.  Modify fields
5.  Any extensions you add!

Switch
port

VLAN

ID

VLAN
pcp

MAC
src

MAC
dst

Eth
type

IP
src

IP
dst

IP
tos

IP
prot

L4

sport

L4

dport

* Mask what fields to match

How OpenFlow works
Most modern network devices have flow tables that run at line-rate 
for implementing firewalls, NAT, QoS and collecting statistics.  
The OpenFlow protocol provides a means of programming these 
flow-tables from a centralized controller through a Secure Sockets 
Layer (SSL) channel.

OpenFlow uses a well defined set of matching rules to classify 
network traffic into flows. It also defines a set of actions that the 
network architect can use to instruct OpenFlow-enabled network 
devices to manage these flows. These devices may include routers, 
switches, virtual switches, or wireless access points. Traffic moves 
across paths that are predefined by characteristics such as speed, 
fewest hops, or lowest latency, giving network managers the ability 
to tailor network services to meet the needs of different types of 
applications and data.

Coarse- or fine-grained control
The OpenFlow switch flow table is used to give network managers 
both coarse- and fine-grained control over data flows. Network 
managers can use OpenFlows match rule attributes, such as 

ingress port, MAC or IP source and destination address, or VLAN 
ID, to take forwarding actions. These actions could be forwarding 
packets to switch ports or the controller, flooding along Spanning 
Tree, dropping packets, or pushing the packets through the devices 
normal packet pipeline.

HP has extended the OpenFlow protocol with a vendor-specific 
attributes to allow for the enforcement of quality-of-service 
actions, such as queuing to a specific queue or rate limiting using 
a specified meter. OpenFlow can also modify traffic flows, such as 
changing a VLAN setup or VLAN priority, or setting the source and 
destination address for MAC, IP, or TCP/UDP.

The OpenFlow controller maintains all of the network rules and 
distributes the appropriate instructions to the network devices.   
The controller essentially centralizes the network intelligence, 
while the network maintains a distributed forwarding plane through 
OpenFlow-enabled switches and routers. 

8

OpenStack

Your applications

APIs

OpenStack
dashboard

Cloud operating system

Compute

Network

Storage

OpenStack shared services

Standard hardware

OpenStack: massively scalable cloud orchestration
OpenStack is a collection of open source software projects that 
enterprises/service providers can use to set up and run their cloud 
compute and storage infrastructure. Rackspace and NASA were  
the key initial contributors to the project, but since the projects 
inception, the OpenStack foundation has managed to attract more 
than 150 members, with HP being one of the key contributors.

OpenStack provides an open framework for interacting with pools 
of compute, networking, and storage resources and provisioning 
these on demand. Corporations, service providers, VARs, SMBs, 
researchers, and global data centers are implementing OpenStack 
today to deploy large-scale cloud deployments for private or  
public clouds.

HP is a platinum member of the OpenStack Foundation and is 
committed to furthering the development of OpenStack as well as 
providing OpenStack support across our network portfolio.

Why choose HP?
As companies move to cloud and other computing environments, 
manual configuration of legacy networks through command-line 
interface (CLI) coding has proven to be error prone, as well as time- 
and resource-intensive. 

SDN overlay point products offer a centralized control plane, but 
do not automate infrastructure configuration to prime the network 
to run the overlay, so it assumes the manual device-by-device 
configuration. Overlay-only approaches focus on data center 
applications and do not extend the benefits of an SDN to campus  
and branch networks. 

HP is the only tier-1 networking vendor to offer a complete hardware 
and software SDN solution. 

HP Virtual Application Networks delivers:
  Single-pane-of glass management for the automation of 

infrastructure

  Open programmable access to infrastructure with OpenFlow
  Virtual Application Networks SDN Controller for centralized 

control plane

  SDN applications for data center, campus, and branch
  Open APIs for customers and third parties to build applications, 

and allows for business applications to interface directly with the 
controller for network-aware applications

With HP Virtual Application Networks, businesses can realize the 
benefits of simplicity, agility, and automation across the enterprise.

9

Additional resources
HP FlexNetwork Architecture

Open Networking Foundation

OpenStack Foundation

Indiana Center for Network Transactional Research and  
Education (InCNTRE)

HP Virtual Application Networks Blog

Software-Defined Networking: The New Norm for Networks

Get connected 
hp.com/go/getconnected 

Get the insider view on tech trends,  
support alerts, and HP solutions.

 

Share with colleagues

 Copyright 2012 Hewlett-Packard Development Company, L.P. The information contained herein is subject to change without notice.  
The only warranties for HP products and services are set forth in the express warranty statements accompanying such products and  
services. Nothing herein should be construed as constituting an additional warranty. HP shall not be liable for technical or editorial errors  
or omissions contained herein.

4AA4-3871ENW, Created October 2012

