The Energy Efficiency
Strategy:
The Energy Efficiency
Opportunity in the UK

November 2012

The Energy Efficiency
Strategy:
The Energy Efficiency
Opportunity in the UK

November 2012

Department of Energy and Climate Change
3 Whitehall Place
London SW1A 2AW
Telephone: 0300 060 4000
Website: www.decc.gov.uk

© Crown copyright 2012
Copyright in the typographical arrangement and design rests with the Crown.
This publication (excluding logos) may be re-used free of charge in any format or medium provided that it
is re-used accurately and not used in a misleading context.The material must be acknowledged as crown
copyright and the title of the publication specified.
For further information on this document contact:
Energy Efficiency Deployment Office
Department of Energy and Climate Change
3 Whitehall Place
London SW1A 2AW
Email: eedostrategy@decc.gsi.gov.uk
This publication can be found on DECC’s website:
http://www.decc.gov.uk/eedo
Published by the Department of Energy and Climate Change

The Mission
•	 Improving our energy efficiency is a key strategic objective for the Coalition Government.
It is fundamental to decarbonising the UK, maintaining secure energy supplies, and
increasing the productivity of our businesses. We have a proud history of making the very
most of our resources and energy should be no different.
•	 This Coalition Government has a mission to seize the energy efficiency opportunity,
accelerating the deployment of twenty-first century energy saving measures through:
–– connecting energy efficiency knowledge and technologies to finance seeking strong
returns;
–– supporting energy efficiency innovation;
–– harnessing the power of improved energy use information, driving its availability and
disclosure; and
–– encouraging collective action to act on this new and better information.
•	 As set out in this strategy the benefits to energy efficiency can be significant, including:
–– boosting growth and creating jobs in our economy;
–– saving households and businesses money on fuel bills;
–– creating a more sustainable and secure energy system;
–– delivering cost effectively against our climate change goals; and
–– reducing energy imports.
•	 The December 2011 Carbon Plan was clear that, if we are to cut our green house gas
emissions by 80% by 2050, ‘energy efficiency will have to increase dramatically across all
sectors’. It set out four possible scenarios for 2050, relative to 1990, which imply a per
capita demand reduction of between 31% and 54% relative to 2007.
•	 This Government has already made progress through radical initiatives such as the Green
Deal, but this Strategy pinpoints the remaining energy efficiency potential within the UK
economy and summarises the actions we will now take to realise this.

i

Contents

Ministerial Foreword

1

Clarification of scope
The Energy Efficiency Deployment Office (EEDO)
Devolution

3
3
3

The Energy Efficiency Opportunity in the UK

5

Understanding energy efficiency

6

The energy efficiency opportunity

7

Energy efficiency potential in the UK economy

8

The benefits of energy efficiency

8

Our ambition for improving energy efficiency

15

The barriers to deploying energy efficiency

18

Maximising the potential of existing schemes

20

An energy efficient future

22

The annexes to this strategy can be found at http://www.decc.gov.uk/eedo

ii Energy Efficiency Strategy:The Energy Efficiency Opportunity in the UK

1

Ministerial Foreword

Energy efficiency belongs at the heart of a
low-carbon economy. By reducing energy use
and cutting down on waste, we can reduce
energy bills, make our energy system more
sustainable, and drive down greenhouse
gas emissions.
Too often, governments have neglected the role
that energy demand reduction can play in
managing our energy system.Yet measures that
reduce demand can contribute in a more
cost-effective way to meeting our energy and
climate goals than supply-side measures.That’s
why energy efficiency – as a way of reducing
demand – takes pride of place at the centre of
the Coalition Government’s policy framework.
I want Britain to get as close as possible to using
only the energy we really need. We could be
saving 196TWh in 2020, equivalent to 22 power
stations through, socially cost-effective
investment in energy efficiency.That is around
11% lower than the business as usual baseline.
It could also reduce carbon emissions by
41 MtCO2e, contributing to achieving our
carbon budgets.
Britain’s homes have been built and developed
over hundreds of years, and their energy
efficiency varies from good to dreadful. Bringing
as many homes as possible up to the level of
the best is not only a worthwhile investment;

it also presents a huge business opportunity,
including a chance for British companies to
develop expertise which can be exported to
overseas markets.
This strategy sets the direction for energy
efficiency policy for the coming decades.
It makes clear our ambition, the barriers that we
need to address, and the additional steps we are
taking now to stimulate the energy efficiency
market. It shows how we will act to connect
finance with demand, encourage innovation, and
make energy efficiency information more
accessible to the consumer.
Energy efficiency can reduce energy bills for
households and businesses, and can boost the
economy in a sector with great potential for
future growth, driving innovation in the process.
The prospect of achieving more with less
energy is an exciting one, and this strategy sets
out the opportunity in full.

Edward Davey
Secretary of State for Energy and
Climate Change

2 Energy Efficiency Strategy:The Energy Efficiency Opportunity in the UK

3

Clarification of scope

The Energy Efficiency
Devolution
Deployment Office (EEDO) Any development of policy in the area of energy
EEDO has developed this Strategy, drawing
from expertise across Government and
considering energy efficiency potential across
the UK economy, including in businesses,
buildings, products and transport. It is the first in
a series of documents that EEDO will produce.
EEDO has been set up within DECC to support
the delivery of our existing energy efficiency
policies, by improving our evidence base and
analysis, ensuring effective delivery against the
observed energy efficiency potential in the
economy, and by bringing coherence to the
Government’s offer to the consumer.
Beyond DECC, EEDO forms an inclusive
initiative with UK Government Departments,
the Scottish and Welsh Governments
represented on its quarterly Steering Board and
Northern Ireland having observer status. As the
evidence base is developed, the objective will be
to share information, by region and sectors
where possible, and consider solutions to
achieving further energy efficiency potential as a
group.

efficiency needs to take into account the
following arrangements:

•	 that, in Scotland1 and Wales, the
encouragement of energy efficiency is
devolved, while the regulation of energy
efficiency is reserved; and
•	 that the promotion and regulation of energy
efficiency is devolved to Northern Ireland.
Furthermore, as policy ideas in this Strategy are
developed they will need to take account of
where they may impact on other policy areas
that are devolved to Scotland and Wales.
Northern Ireland are able to draw from EEDO’s
work as it considers its own future energy
efficiency policy.
This approach is reflected in this Strategy, with
differences between the policy frameworks of
devolved Governments clearly referenced.

1	 Low Carbon Scotland, the Scottish Government’s first report on proposals for meeting the annual climate change
targets set under the Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009.
http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Topics/Environment/climatechange/scotlands-action/lowcarbon/rpp

5

The Energy Efficiency
Opportunity in the UK

1.	 The UK now has a huge opportunity to
optimise the energy use of both domestic and
business customers, reducing bills and/or
warming homes, while at the same time,
delivering a more sustainable society. Individuals
can do this through taking action to reduce their
demand, such as turning off energy using
products that are not in use, buying products
that are more efficient or installing energy
efficiency measures in their homes. Businesses
can take similar actions, reducing their long term
operating costs.The critical importance of
energy efficiency to our long-term energy policy
is reflected in last December’s Carbon Plan2.

3.	 This strategy identifies four overarching
barriers to greater energy efficiency that have to
be overcome. Action is already being taken, but if
we further pursue these barriers we will be able
develop a stronger, self sustaining energy efficiency
market and more consumers will be able to see a
return, creating positive reinforcement of the
potential of energy efficiency.The four
corresponding ‘barrier annexes’ to this strategy5
outline those policies that are already in place to
tackle these issues and provide case studies where
public and private sector organisations have
already been successful in achieving greater
energy efficiency, realising the associated benefits.

2.	 Many of the views received in response to the
February 2012 Energy Efficiency Call for Evidence3,4
recognised huge potential but asked for greater
certainty on what was needed to improve our
energy efficiency at a national level.This response
sets out the long term direction required as well as
specific actions that will be taken now.

4.	 Our broad assessment of the policy
framework is that the energy efficiency agenda for
households is well covered by existing initiatives,
although there is still a need to maximise the way
these policies work.There is, however, particular
further interest in significant commercial and
industrial energy efficiency potential not already
covered by the existing policy.

“This is an Energy Efficiency Strategy to maximise
existing policy and realise the wider energy efficiency
potential that is available in the UK economy.”
2	
3	
4	
5	
6	

“We estimate that through socially cost-effective
investment in energy efficiency we could be saving
196TWh in 2020, equivalent to 22 power stations6,7”.

Carbon Plan, DECC, December 2011
Energy Efficiency Call for Evidence, DECC, 8 February 2012.
The Government’s Call for Evidence summary of responses can be found at Annex F of this strategy.
Annexes A-D.
The costs and benefits of measures have been calculated from the societal perspective, in line with the appraisal guidance
set out in the Green Book and the supplementary guidance provided by the Inter-departmental Analysts’ Group on valuing
carbon emissions avoided, energy savings and air quality improvements. This means that the value of energy savings is
based on the resource costs, not the retail price (and non-traded carbon emissions and air quality impacts are included).
Capital costs are assumed to be paid upfront and financing costs are excluded. The costs and benefits are discounted over
time at the social discount rate. A measure that is cost-effective from the societal perspective may not be cost effective for
the individual investor. For more detail on the methodology of the EE-MACC, see Annex E.
7	 Assumption of a power station with 1 GW capacity operating full-time..

6 Energy Efficiency Strategy:The Energy Efficiency Opportunity in the UK

5.	 The potential for the 2020s is even greater.
Considered in this way, energy efficiency can
play a major role in the UK’s balancing of energy
demand and supply.
6.	 Box 1 provides a summary of additional
actions we are taking alongside this strategy in
order to help stimulate a self sustaining energy
efficiency market.These actions and others
across the broad energy efficiency spectrum
are covered in more detail within the barrier
annexes.

Understanding energy
efficiency
“Energy efficiency is a measure of energy used
for delivering a given service. Improving energy
efficiency means getting more from the energy
that we use.”
7. There are different ways to improve energy
efficiency. For example:
•	 ‘Innovation’ can lead to the equal or greater
output with less energy.
•	 ‘Cutting out wasted energy’ reduces energy
needed while maintaining output.

Box 1: Further action taken as part of this Energy Efficiency Strategy
•	 A key focus is supporting the finance market through: publishing guidance on financing
energy efficiency for the public sector; announcing a research project with ENWORKS to
understand the process, costs and benefits of financed energy efficiency projects; initiating
an assessment of compatibility of energy efficiency investments with the public sector
budgeting framework; taking the RE:FIT programme, which facilitates the public sector use
of the ESCO market, nation-wide and the Electricity Demand Reduction project.
•	 We are going further on energy efficiency innovation by: announcing three new ‘energy
efficiency’Technology Innovation Needs Assessments (TINAs); sponsoring three new
energy efficiency Green Business Awards; and, reviewing the way that new innovative
energy efficiency measures are reviewed and accredited.
•	 We are working to strengthen the evidence base through: commissioning research into the
potential of advanced heating controls; working with the IEA to explore all benefits of energy
efficiency; setting out a future DECC Evidence Strategy; and co-ordinating with Research
Councils UK and others, to support the development of a knowledge hub for the refurbishment
of existing homes as well new Energy Demand Research Centres, announced with this strategy.
•	 A further focus area is controls and information, where we will: launch a behavioural trial
with the John Lewis Partnership on whether providing information on lifetime electricity
running costs helps consumers; making funding available to increase the proportion of
facilities managers receiving specialist energy efficiency training; develop a trial to study the
impact of advice on how to use heating controls provided when boiler checks are carried
out; and announce a forthcoming DECC Community Energy Strategy as well as
commission a Community Energy Efficiency Outreach Programme with Groundwork UK.
•	 Within audits and standards, we will focus on: beginning the process for implementing
energy audits for non-SME enterprises, as required by the Energy Efficiency Directive; and
seeking the ISO50001 Energy Management Standard accreditation for DECC.

The Energy Efficiency Opportunity in the UK 7

•	 ‘Heating technologies’, such as heat pumps,
can deliver greater output for less supplier
energy.
8.	 Through greater energy efficiency we can
use less primary fuel or power to enjoy the
same level of output. For example, by improving
manufacturing equipment it is possible to
produce the same or more with lower
overheads. Improved energy efficiency can
provide many economic, social and
environmental benefits for the UK and yet we
are not doing all we can to realise them.
9.	 Clearly, this is not a new policy agenda.
The first energy demand reduction policies
were developed by the Department of Energy
in 1974 in response to oil shocks and many
different approaches have been taken since to
improve our energy use efficiency, with some
success8. Approaches have changed, as have the
ways in which we have used energy, but there
has never been a quick fix. So why an Energy
Efficiency Strategy now?
10.	 We must continue to find solutions, such
as those provided by the Green Deal and Smart
Meters, which allow us to tap into the cost

effective energy efficiency improvements that
are right there in front of us; whether it be
through more efficient industrial processes,
better use of heat, or simply installing energy
efficient lighting.

The energy efficiency
opportunity
11.	 The energy efficiency sector in the UK
already accounts for about 136,000 jobs and
had sales of £17.6 billion in 2010/11. Sales in this
sector have grown by over 4% per year in the
UK since 2007/08, and are projected to grow
by around 5% per year between 2010/11 and
2014/15. However, there is more potential in
the market9.
12.	 Stephen Chu, the US Secretary of Energy,
has said that “energy efficiency is not just
low‑hanging fruit; it is fruit that is lying on the
ground”10. With the right market in the UK we
could unlock more of the potential for energy
efficiency investment, helping to generate
growth and jobs. Alongside the associated
carbon reductions, improvements in our energy
security by reducing demand for imported

Box 2:Why now?
There are good reasons to set the direction on improving energy efficiency in the UK:
•	 finding ways to do more (or the same) with less makes economic sense;
•	 it can help households and businesses reduce their energy bills at a time of increasing
energy prices;
•	 many energy efficiency improvement schemes are approaching implementation and we
need to clearly set out the linkages and the collective ambition;
•	 we need to be clear as to the role of demand side management as our electricity
generation market is reformed; and
•	 energy efficiency needs to be taken forward as a cost effective solution to carbon
reduction to meet our carbon budgets.
8 See Figure 3 for the trend of consumption per capita in the UK.
9 K-Matrix, Low Carbon and Environmental Goods and Services data (2010-11).The energy efficiency sector has been
defined as the energy management and building technologies subsectors.
http://www.bis.gov.uk/policies/business-sectors/green-economy/market-intelligence/market-data
10 Steven Chu,The Times, London, 26 May 2012..

8 Energy Efficiency Strategy:The Energy Efficiency Opportunity in the UK

energy, warmer homes and lower resulting
energy bills mean increasing energy efficiency is
win-win-win. We must, and will, make it happen
in the UK. Greater energy efficiency may also
support improvements in wider resource
efficiency.

Energy efficiency potential in the
UK economy
13.	 Responses to the Energy Efficiency Call
for Evidence highlighted the significant energy
efficiency potential in the UK economy and
detailed analysis confirms that there is significant
cost effective potential.The Energy Efficiency
Marginal Abatement Cost Curve (EE-MACC)
estimates the energy savings through
implementing energy efficiency measures.
It is based on detailed modelling of ambitious
scenarios for the potential for investment in
energy efficiency from different sectors of the
economy, based on current evidence.The more
cost-effective a measure, the closer it is to the
left-hand side of the chart. For more detail on
the methodology and assumptions see Annex E.
14.	 We estimate that through socially costeffective investment in energy efficiency we
could be saving 196TWh in 2020, equivalent to
22 power stations11,12. Were all this potential to
be realised, final energy consumption in 2020
could be 11% lower than the business as usual
baseline.This potential can be found across the
UK economy and realising this could have
significant benefits for businesses and
households. For example, the EE-MACC analysis

suggests there is potential for cost effective
energy efficiency in commercial buildings and
industry over and above that which we expect
to be realised through policies such as the
EU-ETS, CCAs or CRC (DECC analysis suggests
that around 14% of total energy use in the
business and public sector are in organisations
that are not included in these policies).
15.	 Further, there is the potential to save
energy through changing how we use it, both in
domestic and business settings, while maintaining
the benefits delivered.This potential is not
fully captured within the framework of the
EE-MACC. Developing a stronger understanding
of the potential for energy efficiency and
evaluating the impact of policy on incentives to
invest in energy efficiency is a priority for EEDO.
As the evidence base improves, the detailed
assessment what the potential is for energy
efficiency investment may be adjusted.

The benefits of energy efficiency
16.	 Economic growth: Installing energy
efficiency measures often requires local labour13,
and the investment has the potential to boost
employment and economic growth. The
business community see this as important in the
current global economic climate14,15. There are
also long-term growth benefits. For example,
lower domestic energy bills can lead to higher
disposable incomes that can be spent elsewhere
in the economy, while businesses can see a
reduction in running costs and so an increase
in productivity. Simple changes in energy use

11 The costs and benefits of measures have been calculated from the societal perspective, in line with the appraisal
guidance set out in the Green Book and the supplementary guidance provided by the Inter-departmental Analysts’
Group on valuing carbon emissions avoided, energy savings and air quality improvements . This means that the value
of energy savings is based on the resource costs, not the retail price (and non-traded carbon emissions and air
quality impacts are included).The capital costs are assumed to be paid up front and financing costs are not included.
The costs and benefits are discounted over time at the social discount rate. A measure that is cost-effective from the
societal perspective may not be cost effective for the individual investor (and vice versa).
12 Asssumption of a power station with 1 GW capacity operating full-time.
13 Last year Groundwork, a third sector organisation, helped 4,200 people progress into training, education or
employment, many of them into ‘green jobs’(see Annex D for more detail).
14 Economist Intelligence Unit, Energy Efficiency and energy savings: a view from the buildings sector, October 2012,
http://www.globalbuildings.org/resources/uploads/Report_EIU_GBPN.pdf
15 The colour of growth: Maximising the potential of green business, CBI, July 2012.

50

100

150
250
300
Energy savings in
2020 TWh

Domestic
Commercial and public sector
Industry
Transport
Products

For details of the measures see
Figure E1 in Annex E

200

Notes:
For more detail on the methodology and assumptions see Annex E consistent with the 2012 DECC energy projections and supplementary Green Book Guidance appraisal guidance. The business as usual baseline
excludes policies that have been introduced since 2009.The net present values are calculated in 2012 terms.
Products policy estimates become increasingly uncertain beyond 2020, where the market may naturally deliver more efficient products – this will be reviewed in future. The energy savings from Tranche 1 and 2 of
products policy within the industrial sector have been included in the potential for energy savings in industry.
Smart meters estimates are consistent with cost and savings assumptions as applied in the smart meter impact assessment and costs required for the delivery of the policy are taken into account (i.e. not only the
asset costs for the provision of the technology are reflected).To be consistent with the methodology used here, financing costs have been excluded.
The transport analysis is consistent with that included in the Carbon Plan (December 2011).The assumptions, on fuel prices and growth for example, have not been revised since.
Estimates for the energy savings from CERT (20% uplift and extension) and CESP are consistent with the projected net energy savings set out in the DECC energy projections.The estimates of energy savings is net
of comfort taking, but we have not valued comfort taking for these measures. The NPV for these policies is estimated based on discounting to 2009.

-150

-100

-50

0

Cost effectiveness as measured by NPV/lifetime energy savings
£/MWh
50

Figure 1: 2020 Energy Efficiency Marginal Abatement Cost Curve

The Energy Efficiency Opportunity in the UK 9

16 K-Matrix, Low Carbon and Environmental Goods and Services data (2010-11).The figure shows the size of UK Energy Efficiency Sector exports in 2010/11 to 50 other
countries. These are the countries with the highest sales from their own Low Carbon and Environmental Goods and Services sectors, based on when the data series
started in 2007/08.

Exports from the UK Energy Efficiency Sector in 2010/11 were worth £1.8 billion

Figure 2: UK energy efficiency exports in 2010/1112
10 Energy Efficiency Strategy:The Energy Efficiency Opportunity in the UK

The Energy Efficiency Opportunity in the UK 11

behaviour can deliver some of these benefits
with little up-front cost.

•	 Arup carrying out energy efficiency audit
work on university campuses in the USA.

17.	 Longer term investment in energy
efficiency technology can also lead to a virtuous
circle as innovation leads to cost reductions
which can make it cheaper and easier to invest
in energy efficiency in the future. Developing
our innovative capacity in technology, materials
or business models for energy efficiency opens
up the potential for increasingly significant
export opportunities for the UK as the global
effort to combat climate change ramps up.

•	 The BRE (Building Research Establishment)
are working with partners in China and Brazil
to develop Green Building Demonstration
Parks where UK companies can showcase
their world-class building techniques,
products and services for homes and
communities and help set the standard
for sustainable development.

18.	 Thinking more broadly than headline
export figures, we can see real examples of UK
expertise shaping people’s approach to energy
efficiency across the globe. For instance:
•	 Mark Group using the know-how developed
over four decades in the UK to establish
successful energy saving operations in the
USA, Australia and New Zealand.
•	 CO2 balance supporting the distribution of
energy efficient stoves in Tanzania.

19.	 Economic studies show that improved
energy efficiency can bolster productivity,
increasing growth and reducing inflation. A study
of the Government’s energy efficiency policy
between 2000-2007 estimated that these
policies increased the annual rate of economic
growth by around 0.1 percentage points
within that period17. The study also estimated
that these policies resulted in roughly 270,000
additional jobs in 2010 owing to the
cumulative impact of higher growth. Looking
forward, DECC analysis suggests that the

Box 3: Energy efficiency and the DECC fuel poverty strategy for England
Tackling fuel poverty is about helping people on low incomes who cannot keep warm at
reasonable cost.There is some evidence that certain vulnerable groups, such as households
with older people and children, can be the most at risk of health detriments associated with
cold homes, such as respiratory illnesses. Energy efficiency has a clear role to play in assisting
these households, insulating them from the cold as well as the effects of rising energy prices.
Earlier this year, Professor John Hills published his review of fuel poverty. In it he proposed a
new framework for measuring fuel poverty, which the Government has announced it intends
to adopt subject to the outcome of an ongoing consultation.The Government also announced
it would publish a new fuel poverty strategy in 2013.
Under the proposed new measurement approach, a household is fuel poor if it is low income
and has high energy costs relative to all other households. A key factor driving energy costs
is, of course, energy efficiency. As such, the Government’s new strategy will set out how
energy efficiency improvements can be made in such households, to provide a sustainable
means of reducing costs.

17 Barker,T., Ekins, P., & Foxon,T. (2007).The macro-economic rebound effect and the UK economy. Energy Policy,
4935-4946..

12 Energy Efficiency Strategy:The Energy Efficiency Opportunity in the UK

Green Deal and ECO alone could support
up to 60,000 jobs across the UK in 201518.
20.	 Savings for domestic and business
consumers: As highlighted as part of the
recent ‘Big Energy Saving Week’, improving the
UK’s energy efficiency is central to delivering
a fair deal for the consumer. UK households
are already benefitting from improvements in
energy efficiency such as heating efficiency
and insulation. Building Research Establishment
modelling suggests that, if no energy efficiency
gains had been made since 1970, current energy
use would be almost double their current levels,
adding about £1,000 to the average annual
energy bill19. Energy efficiency will continue to
have a role in driving long term reductions in
household energy bills.
21.	 Wellbeing can also be enhanced through
increased energy efficiency. For example, a
higher disposable income, as a result of lower
energy bills, can allow increased spending on
other necessities. In addition, the health benefits
from properly installed energy efficiency
measures can be significant. It is possible to
quantify health benefits in quality of life terms, in
line with the principles of the Department of
Health/NICE guidance. DECC modelling of the
impact of the installation of solid wall insulation
in all properties in England, gives a total
improvement in the health of those individuals
in the properties of £3.5bn – £5.0bn over the
lifetime of the measures. If all cavity walls
reported unfilled in 2009 were also filled this
would provide a further monetised health
benefit of £4bn – £6bn over lifetime of the
insulation20.
22.	 Some of the financial savings from energy
efficiency measures may be spent on energy
consuming goods and services: the rebound

effect.This means that the overall impact on
energy consumption is smaller, although
consumers may feel a benefit from the
additional energy consumption. The nature of
rebound effect will vary depending on the
energy efficiency measures adopted. For
example if someone increases the level of
insulation in their property, the direct rebound
effect would be an increase in the temperature
to which the house is heated and an indirect
rebound effect would be using the savings on
heating bills to buy an additional television. It is
possible that the direct rebound effect might be
reduced through providing advice when energy
efficiency measures are installed.
23.	 Energy efficiency is also one of the central
pillars of the Government’s efforts to tackle fuel
poverty. Improving the energy efficiency of the
home is often the most cost-effective way of
making a sustained reduction in household
heating costs and removing that household from
fuel poverty. Professor John Hills’ Review of Fuel
Poverty in England21 included a consideration of
the role of energy efficiency in helping
vulnerable groups (see box 3).
24.	 Emission reductions: To deliver against our
greenhouse gas emission targets over the
coming decades in the most cost effective way,
we need energy efficiency to improve
significantly across all sectors. The 2011 Carbon
Plan22 sets out scenarios through which the UK
could meet its legally binding target to reduce
greenhouse gas emissions by 80% between
1990 and 2050.The Carbon Plan 2050
scenarios require energy efficiency to contribute
a reduction in final energy consumption per
capita between 2007 and 2050 of 31-54%.
Figure 3 shows that, after moving to a 2011
baseline, these Carbon Plan Scenarios now
require per capita savings of between 21% and

18	 Final Impact Assessment for the Green Deal, DECC, June 2012
19	 Energy savings from Energy Consumption in the UK table 3.18 and current energy prices.
20	 Preliminary modelling that assumes the insulation measures are valued over their lifetimes and are appropriately
installed in line with regulations and industry guidance.
21	 Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have a separate fuel poverty strategy and fuel poverty programmes.
22	 Carbon Plan, DECC, December 2011.

The Energy Efficiency Opportunity in the UK 13

Figure 3: UK final energy consumption per capita compared against carbon plan scenarios:
1980‑205023
35,000
2007 baseline

Consumption per capita (kWh/capita)

30,000

Policy package to 2030
to be developed

25,000
2011

Scenario 1, 21%

20,000

Scenario 2, 35%

X Scenario 3, 43%

15,000

Scenario 4, 47%

10,000

5,000

0
1980

1990

2000

2010

47% between 2011 and 2050.The current
policy package is on track to be comfortably
within this range through to 2020 but additional

2020

2030

2040

2050

action is needed to maintain progress after
202024 and energy efficiency tends to be a
cost-effective option.

Box 4: DECC 2050 Scenarios
In the 2011 Carbon Plan, DECC set out four scenarios to achieve reductions in greenhouse
gases of 80 per cent between 1990 and 2050. These scenarios were set against a 2007
baseline.
•	 Scenario 1: Low energy efficiency and high nuclear generation (31% energy per capita
saving from 2007 baseline).
•	 Scenario 2: High Carbon Capture & Storage (CCS) and additional Bio-energy (43% energy
per capita saving from 2007 baseline).
•	 Scenario 3:CORE MARKAL scenario (50% energy per capita saving from 2007 baseline).
•	 Scenario 4: High energy efficiency and higher renewables (54% energy per capita saving
from 2007 baseline).
*Note: Figures 3 and 4 these scenarios have been extrapolated to a 2011 baseline.

23	 Energy Efficiency Statistical Summary http://www.decc.gov.uk/eedo
24	 Low Carbon Scotland (http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Topics/Environment/climatechange/scotlands-action/lowcarbon/rpp),
the Scottish Government’s first report on proposals for meeting the annual climate change targets set under the
Climate Change (Scotland) Act 2009 details areas of joint working such as the establishment of the Green Deal and
ECO and also highlights Scottish initiatives such as its approach to retrofitting insulation in existing homes and
Scotland’s targets for renewable heat and electricity.

14 Energy Efficiency Strategy:The Energy Efficiency Opportunity in the UK

Figure 4: UK final energy consumption compared against carbon plan scenarios: 1980-2050
2,500
Policy package to 2030
to be developed

Final energy consumption (TWh)

2,000
2007 baseline

Scenario 1, -1%

1,500

Scenario 2, 16%

2011

X

1,000

Scenario 3, 27%
Scenario 4, 33%

500

0
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

2035

2040

2045

2050

Figure 5: Projected savings of Green House Gas (GHG) emissions by type: 2010-203025,26,27
180
160
140

MtCO2e

120
100

Other savings

80

Low carbon energy saving

60

Energy efficiency saving

40
20
0
2008

2013

2018

2023

2028

25	 Greenhouse gases include Carbon dioxide, Methane, Nitrous Oxide, Hydrofluorocarbons, Perfluorocarbons and
Sulphur hexafluoride.These are presented as CO2 equivalent based on their Global Warming Potentials. Non-CO2
emissions arise from non-energy related activity for example methane from agriculture and fluorinated gases from
industrial processes. Low carbon energy savings’ includes generation and transport. ‘Other savings’ are the non-CO2
savings from agriculture and waste. (Energy Efficiency Statistical Summary http://www.decc.gov.uk/eedo)
26	 Energy efficiency policies have been defined as those aimed to reduce final energy consumption (for example
product standards or installing insulation) Low carbon energy savings include switching to low carbon energy sources
(e.g. renewable electricity, transport bio-fuels etc) and transformation sector energy savings. Other savings include
savings of non-CO2 greenhouse gases.
27	 DECC, Updated Energy and Emissions Projections, October 2012.

The Energy Efficiency Opportunity in the UK 15

Box 5: Central Government Departments – 2010/11 10% carbon emissions reduction target
In May 2010 the Prime Minister announced that central Government would reduce its carbon
emissions by 10% within 12 months.This target spanned 3,000 central government office
buildings and was met by a combination of managing buildings more efficiently, rationalising the
estate, investment in energy efficient technologies and green information technology and
changes to staff behaviour. 
Within the year, a 13.8% reduction was achieved, equivalent to 104, 532 tonnes of carbon
dioxide or nearly 238 million kWh of energy – an estimated saving of £13 million on
energy bills. The Prime Minister has subsequently announced a new five year commitment;
this time to reduce Government greenhouse gas emissions by 25% for 2014/15 compared to
a 2009/10 baseline across a broader scope of the central government estate and from
business-related transport.
25.	 In terms of energy consumption, the
Carbon Plan scenarios translate to a range from
a 1% in absolute final energy consumption from
2011 to a 33% decrease. Again, Figure 4 shows
that the UK is well on course to achieve this
trajectory in the short term but without further

policy action energy consumption will rise again
in the 2020s28. As well as taking action now, we
need to set the direction for this in subsequent
decades as it will take time for the energy
efficiency market to mature. This strategy is the
first step.

Figure 6: Projected UK final energy consumption 2000-203029
2,500

217 TWh saving 2030

2,000

1,500

Central
policy
scenario

163 TWh saving 2020

TWh

Business
as usual

1000

500

0
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

2015

2020

2025

2030

28	 The DECC energy and emissions projections only take account of policies for which funding has been agreed and
that are sufficiently well developed to allow robust estimates of future savings to be provided.  Therefore the
projections for the 4th carbon budget (2023 – 2027) onwards represent a baseline scenario in which the
government takes no further action to reduce energy demand or increase take up of renewables outside the power
sector. Therefore the projections for 2030 do not do not represent the government’s view of what we expect to
happen. The government does plan to take further action to reduce energy demand and remains fully committed to
meeting its carbon targets.
29	 Energy Efficiency Statistical Summary http://www.decc.gov.uk/eedo

16 Energy Efficiency Strategy:The Energy Efficiency Opportunity in the UK

26.	 The existing policy package is due to
deliver savings in greenhouse gas emissions of
134 MtCO2e (24%) in 2020 and 161 MtCO2e
(28%) in 2030, relative to business as usual.
In 2020 33% of these savings are due to
improved energy efficiency with the remaining
coming from switching to low carbon energy
sources for example nuclear power and road
transport biofuels.The impact of current policies
that reduce energy demand are assumed to
taper off in impact after 2022, (the fourth
carbon budget period) and by 2030 the share
of energy efficiency policy impact falls to 31%.
In the non-traded emissions sector30, energy
efficiency policies make up 59% of the savings in
2020 and 75% of the savings in 2030.

27.	 A sustainable and secure energy system:
Through reducing energy consumption we
improve the UK’s energy security31. A more
energy efficient UK will have lower exposure to
international energy market price rises and
volatility. There can also be specific benefits to
the energy system of decreasing demand as it
reduces the long-term need for investment in
additional infrastructure that would have
otherwise been required.This has the potential
to reduce the overall cost of our energy
generation framework in the future.

Box 6: Implementing the 2012 EU Energy Efficiency Directive
In June this year, and with active support from the UK, Member States agreed the new Energy
Efficiency Directive.This is due to be published shortly and will need to be fully implemented
by Spring 2014.The Directive is a significant step forward by the EU as it looks to meet its
target to reduce primary energy consumption by 20% by 2020 against business as usual
projections.The Directive includes obligations on Member States to:
•	 set themselves indicative targets for primary energy consumption in 2020, taking into
account the EU’s overarching 2020 target;
•	 meet annual targets for building renovation, or equivalent energy savings, on the central
government estate;
•	 meet binding energy saving targets through the deployment of a supplier obligation and/or
equivalent policy measure/s;
•	 require non-SME enterprises to undergo energy audits every four years;
•	 ensure developers of new generation installations over 20MW undertake a cost-benefit
analysis of the case for developing a Combined Heat and Power (CHP )Plant; and
•	 report regularly to the European Commission through a series of periodic National Energy
Efficiency Action Plans.
EEDO will lead on the implementation of this Directive, working with other Departments and
Devolved Governments to deliver its requirements cost effectively. For example, we will
consult on the implementation of the requirement for large commercial building energy audits
during the first half of 2013.

30	 Emissions that are not covered by the EU Emissions Trading System.
31	 See forthcoming Energy Security Strategy, DECC.

The Energy Efficiency Opportunity in the UK 17

Our ambition for improving energy
efficiency
28.	 The UK: Success for EEDO will be
delivering energy demand reduction beyond
that which current energy efficiency policies are
projected to deliver, maximising the
performance of the existing framework and
going further.The above comparison against
what is required to meet our carbon budgets is
one indicator of how important achieving this
will be, particularly from 2020 onwards.
29.	 Current projections show that, with no
additional energy efficiency policies from 2009,
final energy consumption had been projected to
rise from the 2010 level by 168 TWh over the
next 20 years32. However, the existing policy
package is due to deliver savings of 163 TWh
(9%) in 2020 and 217 TWh (11%) in 2030

relative to the business as usual projection.
This means by 2020 current energy efficiency
policy should save the UK the amount of energy
equivalent to that currently used by about nine
million homes in a year or the output from
19 power stations33. A full analysis of energy
efficiency indicators is shown in section 2 of
the Statistical Summary34.
30. European Union: The EU has a target to
save 20% of its primary energy consumption by
2020, against the EU’s 2007 business as usual
projection through improvements in energy
efficiency. But the Commission estimated in
2011 that existing policies in member states
meant that the EU was only on track to get half
way towards that target. Under the Danish
Presidency, the Commission therefore
developed an Energy Efficiency Plan, published
on 8 March 2011, with the aim of closing this

Figure 7: Primary energy consumption per unit of GDP (PPP adjusted)
8

7

TWh per billion 2005 USD PPP

6

5
China
France

4

Germany
India

3

Japan
2

United Kingdom
United States

1
1990

1995

2000

2005

2010

Source: IEA

32	 DECC Energy & Emissions Projections, October 2012,
http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/about/ec_social_res/analytic_projs/en_emis_projs/en_emis_projs.aspx#2012
33	 Assumption of a power station with 1 GW capacity operating full-time.
34	 Energy Efficiency Statistical Summary http://www.decc.gov.uk/eedo

18 Energy Efficiency Strategy:The Energy Efficiency Opportunity in the UK

gap.The Plan contained a range of proposals for
action across all sectors of the economy to
which the EU Energy Efficiency Directive is
intended to give legislative effect. It will also
replace and repeal two existing Directives: the
Co-generation Directive (2004/8/EC) and the
Energy End Use Efficiency and Energy Services
Directive (2006/32/EC).
31. International: Although there is significant
further potential, the UK has already made
reductions in energy intensity and is now one
of the least energy intensive economies in the
developed world. Over the last 10 years UK
energy intensity has fallen by 27%, compared
to 16% in Japan and United States, 20% in
Germany and 14% in France. July 2012 analysis
by the American Council for an Energy
Efficiency Economy (ACEEE) shows that, of the
12 largest world economies, the UK is
performing best overall on energy efficiency
indicators35.
32. This is in part due to the current structure
of our economy, with strong services and
financial sectors, although we also have a
manufacturing sector that is roughly comparable
as a proportion of GDP to countries such as
France and the US. Nevertheless, there is still
significant un-tapped potential for further
energy savings when compared to some others,
particularly around domestic energy use and in
some industrial sectors and we want the UK to
take the lead.
33. The advantages of energy efficiency have
been well documented36 but, to increase our
understanding further, EEDO will collaborate
with international partners to support the
International Energy Agency (IEA) project
on further exploring the wider benefits of
energy efficiency.

The barriers to deploying
energy efficiency
34.	 While the evidence suggests that there is
significant potential for cost-effective investment
in energy efficiency, this potential is not being
realised in full. The existence of market failures
and other barriers to energy efficiency means
that we see less investment in energy efficiency
than is best for the UK. To meet this ambition,
we need to address the barriers to energy
efficiency.
35.	 While it is possible to characterise these
market failures and barriers in a number of
different ways, in this Strategy we have
categorised them as issues relating to an
embryonic market, information (its provision
and lack of trust), misaligned financial incentives,
and behaviour barriers that mean energy
efficiency is undervalued. While we have
separated out these groups of barriers, they are
often inter-related and work together to reduce
investment in energy efficiency. Solving one area
of market failure would not be enough on its
own to realise the full potential for energy
efficiency. At the same time, although there may
be overlap, if you were to remove one of these
barriers from the list, there would be a notable
gap in the analysis.
36.	 Each of the four barriers described below
is considered in dedicated annexes to this
strategy, showing progress that has already been
made by existing policy and identifying further
ways in which we can address the energy
efficiency potential in the UK economy. Policies
often tackle more than one barrier and where
they do this is reflected. Where barriers or
policies take a different form in different sectors,
this is also described.
•	 Embryonic markets: We do not need to
create an energy efficiency market, but we
want to see it grow and become ‘mainstream’

35	 The ACEEE 2012 International Energy Efficiency Scorecard,
http://www.aceee.org/sites/default/files/publications/researchreports/e12a.pdf
36	 The colour of growth: Maximising the potential of green business, CBI, July 2012.

The Energy Efficiency Opportunity in the UK 19

Figure 8: Estimated energy cost as proportion of total expenditure, by UK sector, 2009
(Experimental analysis)37

Energy cost as proportion of total expenditure

70%

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%
Energy industry

Iron and steel

Transport services

activity, particularly use of different forms of
financing. While there are examples of
companies focused on helping domestic and
non-domestic consumers improve energy
efficiency, the market remains
underdeveloped, especially in comparison
with the United States. Energy efficiency
product and services companies could have
much greater penetration into the wider
commercial, industrial and public sectors,
given the benefits they offer. In the absence
of a developed market there is relatively little
expertise on either the demand or supply
side for energy efficiency investment.This
constrains the development of financial
products to support energy efficiency

Domestic

Other industry

Other services

investment and leads to high transaction
costs. Without a catalyst to drive
development of the market, the costs around
investing in energy efficiency will remain high,
reducing cost-effectiveness.
•	 Information: One of the key characteristics
of the embryonic market is that there is a
lack of access to trusted and appropriate
information. Energy efficiency improvements
are often made through purchasing upgraded
equipment of which energy efficiency may
only be one characteristic. Where
information is available, it may be generic, and
not tailored to specific circumstances, which
means that potential investors are not in a
position to assess the benefits of an energy

37	 DECC analysis of Office for National Statistics data. Data for the non-domestic sector sourced from secondary
analysis of the 2009 Supply Use Tables produced by the Office for National Statistics (ONS) as part of the National
Accounts. Data for the domestic sector is sourced from the 2009 Living Costs and Food Survey. Private
transportation is included in the domestic sector. The transport services sector is defined as organisations which
identify their primary business activity as transportation.
This is experimental analysis and as such each sector has an associated margin of error. Total expenditure for the
non-domestic sector is defined as final consumption expenditure plus the compensation of employees and non
deductable VAT. Gross capital formation has been excluded from this definition of expenditure. Total expenditure
in the domestic sector includes VAT.

20 Energy Efficiency Strategy:The Energy Efficiency Opportunity in the UK

efficiency investment. Financing of energy
efficiency projects can be undermined by the
absence of standardised monitoring and
verification processes which means that the
benefits of energy efficiency investments are
not trusted. While information is available
about overall energy consumption both in
the home and in business settings, it can be
difficult to relate that back to individual
activities to identify opportunities to make
energy efficiency improvements. In the
absence of clear, trusted information,
many individuals do not prioritise energy
efficiency investments.
•	 Misaligned financial incentives: It is not
always the case that the person who is
responsible for making energy efficiency
improvements will receive the benefits of
there actions. For example, in most cases
commercial rented tenants are responsible
for their own bills and therefore it is in their
interest to reduce the bills, but contractual
arrangements around landlord/tenants or
facilities management may inhibit investment.
Landlords are unlikely to invest unless they
will realise the benefits in monetary terms.
On a societal level, wider benefits such as
security of supply or emission reductions are

not directly felt by those making energy
efficiency investments and, as a result, the
decision to invest is based only on the
benefits directly received.Therefore, energy
efficiency investments are not prioritised as
they might otherwise be. Figure 8 shows that,
across the entire economy, energy costs can
be a relatively small proportion of costs for
many sectors, but in aggregate that energy
use is a huge ask of our energy system.
•	 Undervaluing energy efficiency: The lack of
salience of energy efficiency increases the
impact of hassle costs and behavioural
barriers. Energy efficiency changes may
involve significant hassle costs for those
carrying out the investment, which increases
the costs of the investment. For example,
disruption caused by building works or
disruption to production lines. Energy
efficiency improvements may not be seen
as strategic for a company and therefore
not prioritised. For example, outside of the
energy intensive industry sectors, energy bills
are only a small proportion of business costs.
If the relative gain is small, then the hassle
costs can act as a significant barrier, especially
if there is uncertainty around the benefits of
the investment. While hassle costs are not a

Figure 9: Age profile of homes in England: 201038
13%
22%
8%

pre 1919
1919-44
1945-64
1965-80
17%

20%

1981-90
post 1990
20%

38 DCLG English Housing Survey.
http://www.communities.gov.uk/housing/housingresearch/housingsurveys/englishhousingsurvey/

The Energy Efficiency Opportunity in the UK 21

market failure, they compound the impact of
other behavioural barriers, reducing
investment in energy efficiency.This is often
why companies are reluctant to invest in
energy efficiency, seeking short payback
times, even if a project is cost-effective at
usual interest rates. Wider economic
uncertainty is also reducing willingness
to invest.

Maximising the potential
of existing schemes
37.	 Many existing schemes address the above
barriers and our strategy is to maximise their
potential impact.This decade will see a
revolution in buildings energy management.
Never before have household and business
consumers been supported by such a range of
Government measures in order to achieve
the highest standards of improved energy use.
We will have the Green Deal, Renewable Heat

Incentive (RHI), Feed in Tariffs (FiTs) and Smart
Meters all available at the same time. This an
era of new opportunities for consumers but
also the supply chain and we have discussed
with many businesses their plans for the future.
38.	 Although at least 14 million homes in
Britain are not properly insulated, out of a total
of 27 million39. Our housing and building stock is
incredibly varied and high proportion is very old.
As of 2010, 39% of homes in England were built
before the end of World War II. New buildings
are built to higher standards than ever before
but it is possible for older housing to catch up
through retrofitting and microgeneration
approaches.
39.	 It used to be that images of buildings
where people need much less energy and
managed every aspect of energy use were
set in the future, or seen in a very high end
retrofit examples on TV. But the changes we

Figure 10: 19th century house... 21st century energy management

39	 Analysis from DECC Insulation Statistics (July 2012)
http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/statistics/energy_stats/en_effic_stats/home_ins_est/home_ins_est.aspx

22 Energy Efficiency Strategy:The Energy Efficiency Opportunity in the UK

are bringing forward will make this the norm
and make it affordable to millions.

space and water heating as well as for
householders.

40. Figure 10 shows the extensive range
of measures that will be supported by the
emerging suite of schemes. Of course, different
people will want to make changes at different
times and some will want to do as much as they
can together. Both are possible.

44. The National Planning Policy
Framework41,42 we published earlier in the
year sets out how planning should support
the transition to a low carbon future.
The Framework looks to local councils to,
for example, plan new development in
locations and ways which reduce greenhouse
gas emissions and, when determining planning
applications, expect new development to
take account of landform, layout, building
orientation, massing and landscaping to minimise
energy consumption. We have also made it
clear that local councils in their planning
should actively support energy efficiency
improvements to existing buildings.

41. To realise the potential of the schemes to
change the energy management of buildings
requires a number of elements to be right for
each scheme individually. A key challenge and
current priority of the Energy Efficiency
Deployment Office is understanding how the
schemes interact, can work together and how
we might build on them for the future.
42. We are currently focused on the year
ahead and mapping the ‘customer journey’,
exploring the further linkages between existing
policies, and working with the supply chain to
unlock the opportunities around a joined up
offer for the consumer. For example, could
packages be developed that take advantage of
the Green Deal, FiTs and/or RHI. We need to
understand how different types of consumers
first become aware of the options that are
available to them and the steps that they need
to take. Initial market signals suggest that some
in the market will deliver packaged options, but
it will be necessary to ensure that the whole
policy landscape does work together.
43. To further facilitate this all related future
policies will give particular consideration to
energy efficiency conditionality. For example,
as part of the September 2012 RHI consultation
on expanding the scheme40, we are consulting
on minimum energy efficiency requirements for
district heating, commercial space, industrial

45. To deliver even more savings from these
and other policies in the coming years EEDO
will continue working across Government and
with the Devolved Administrations to explore
ways in which policy improvements can divine
greater energy efficiency. This will include
rationalisation and ensuring greater mutual
reinforcement of policies in the medium- to
long-term. It will also mean ensuring that these
demand reduction policies are aligned.

An energy efficient future
46. We all have a stake in ensuring that we
maintain security of energy supply and avoiding
dangerous climate change. It is important that
we all consider what opportunities we might
take to work towards these national and,
particularly in the context of climate change,
international goals. Energy efficiency provides
such an opportunity and, at the same time, an
opportunity to save money and improve
productivity. As the Carbon Plan makes clear,

40 Renewable Heat Incentive Consultation Documents, Department of Energy & Climate Change, September 2012:
http://www.decc.gov.uk/en/content/cms/meeting_energy/renewable_ener/incentive/incentive.aspx
41 National Planning Policy Framework, Department for Communities and Local Government, March 2012:
http://www.communities.gov.uk/documents/planningandbuilding/pdf/2116950.pdf
42 Scotland has its own planning framework:
http://www.scotland.gov.uk/Topics/Built-Environment/planning/National-Planning-Policy/npf/NPF3

The Energy Efficiency Opportunity in the UK 23

our broader strategy is to focus on energy
efficiency now, recognising that early demand
savings are a no regrets, cost effective way of
reducing the effort we will later have to make
in decarbonising the energy system.
47.	 Through to 2030 there will be significant
changes to the way we use energy. For example,
the way we heat our homes and the way we
power our transport as we transition away from
fossil fuels. Processes will be more energy
efficient, but energy use is still set to rise.
We need to exploit existing opportunities to
bear down on that potential energy use.
48.	 There are good examples of progress in
the last decade. For instance, by 2020, products
policy being implemented in the UK is projected
to save 11% of electricity demand.There has
been the impact of advances in information
technology, including basic heating controls that
have now become digital and can now be
controlled via smartphone. We need to make
best use of these advancements if we are to
further increase the country’s energy efficiency.
It is these things that can help us build the
homes of the future, such as that in Figure 10.
49.	 This Strategy has identified the significant
energy efficiency potential and the multiple
benefits that could arise from achieving that
potential. We need to invest now if we are to
overcome the barriers to achieving an energy
efficiency market that is mainstream and we
have already described actions that we are
taking now (see box 1 and Annexes A-D of
this strategy).
50.	 Looking ahead to the coming year,
EEDO’s work will include:
•	 leading the implementation of the EU
Energy Efficiency Directive, including
consulting on the introduction of energy
audits for large commercial enterprises in
the first half of next year;

43	 eecostrategy@decc.gsi.gov.uk

•	 working with the other Government
Departments and the Devolved
Administrations to further develop the
evidence base against the gaps identified as
part of the analytical work that supported
this strategy;
•	 developing a series of sector by sector
guides on what benefits increasing energy
efficiency can bring to consumers by next
summer;
•	 ensuring policies combined to deliver a well
integrated ‘customer journey’ in the energy
efficiency market;
•	 considering further options for maximising
the impact of existing policies and
addressing the additional energy efficiency
potential that has been identified;
•	 continuing to accept views and ideas through
the eedostrategy@decc email address43; and
•	 reporting alongside next year’s Annual
Energy Statement on progress against this
Energy Efficiency Strategy.
51.	 Improving the way we use energy is
essential to our future economy and future way
of life. We have the opportunity to lead the
world in becoming more energy efficient and
we must take it.

Department of Energy and Climate Change
3 Whitehall Place
London SW1A 2AW
www.decc.gov.uk
URN: 12D/422
© Crown copyright 2012

