Chapter 9

Wildlife and Nature Conservation
9.1

Protected Areas

The first national park in India was declared in 1935, now famous as the Corbett National
Park. Since Independence, there has been a steady rise in the number of Protected Areas
(PAs) (National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries), especially after the enactment of the
Wildlife Protection Act in 1972. In 1988, there were 54 national parks and 372
sanctuaries covering a total area of 109,652 sq km. By the year 2000, this number had
increased to 566, covering 1,53,000 sq km, or 4.66% of India’s geographical area. There
are currently about 597 national parks and sanctuaries in India, encompassing 1,54, 572
sq km or 4.74% of the country’s geographical area. The latest review of the Wildlife
Protected Area Network document brought out by the Wildlife Institute of India,
Dehradun, recommends to bring the total area under the Protected Area network to 870,
totaling 1,88,764 sq km or 5.74 % of the country’s geographical area. This would
translate into 163 national parks covering 54,789 sq km or 1.67% and 707 sanctuaries
covering 1,33,975 sq km, or 4.07 % of the countries geographical area. Recently, the
Bombay Natural History Society, in collaboration with various NGOs and government,
has identified 463 important bird areas (IBAs). Out of these 463 IBAs, 199 are not
officially protected. Many of these IBAs are extremely important for bird and general
biodiversity protection and should be included in the PA network system. Similarly, the
Wildlife Trust of India along with the Asian Elephant Research and the Conservation
Centre have identified 88 elephant corridors that also need protection and lie outside the
PA network
Besides the official PAs, there are numerous sacred groves, scattered all over the country,
that are important for biodiversity conservation. Some sacred groves represent forest
types that have disappeared from the area. Besides sacred groves, there are many small
community conserved areas. Many villagers do not allow hunting in their village ponds
and lakes. These serve as excellent habitats for waterfowl. Similarly, the tribal reserves of
Andaman and Nicobar are perhaps the best-protected forests left in these emerald islands.
The present Protected Area network has many serious inadequacies. Several biological
regions, communities and species are not or only partially represented, and most of the
PAs are too small in size to give long-term viability. This could lead to genetic isolation
of small populations and result in populations becoming unviable, endangered by all the
classic threats of an island biogeographic situation There is thus an urgent need that the
sanctity of the Protected Areas along with their surroundings and linkages, are preserved.

9.1.1

Biosphere Reserves

Apart from the protected areas system mandated under the WPA,1972, certain areas have
also been declared as biosphere reserves by the Government of India. The Wildlife
Institute of India states the following as the reason for the formation of Biosphere
Reserve (source: http://www.wii.gov.in/nwdc/biosphere.htm):
111

The programme of Biosphere Reserve was initiated under the 'Man and Biosphere'
(MAB) programme by UNESCO in 1971. The purpose of the formation of the biosphere
reserve is to conserve in situ all forms of life, along with its support system, in its totality,
so that it could serve as a referral system for monitoring and evaluating changes in
natural ecosystems

In the current situation, the selection of a Biosphere Reserve is based on considerations,
which are generally ad hoc. In all instances, significant areas of Biosphere Reserves are
managed either as Sanctuaries or National Park and as such all the applicable restrictions
in such PAs are operative
There is a need to develop guidelines for the formation of Biosphere Reserves, which lay
down clearly not only the criteria but also the management implications. In the existing
situation, it is not clear as to how the object of a Biosphere Reserve is significantly
different from National Parks and Sanctuaries. It is pertinent to point out that only 3 of
the 13 Biosphere Reserves meet the criterion of the Man and Biosphere Programme of
the UNESCO.
Since management and conservation applications are stricter under the Wildlife
Protection Act, it should not be that instead of creating a Park or Sanctuary a Biosphere
Reserve be created to avoid the regulations of the WPA. Nor is it advisable to
superimpose a biosphere reserve where a PA already exists or to change the category at
this juncture. The attempt should be to establish biosphere reserves where it is neither
appropriate nor feasible to establish one of the four PA categories listed under the WPA.
Some very apt areas where Biosphere Reserves need to be established are the Abhujmar
region of Bastar and the Jarwa Reserve in the Andamans.

9.1.2 Species (Fauna and Flora)
Out of the 12,28,153 life forms described till now in the world, India has about 89,451 or
7.28% and more are likely to be discovered. Nearly 60,000 insects have been identified
till now. About 3,000 out of the 35,000 described species of crustaceans are found in
India. Similarly, its fish fauna is very rich with more than 2,500 fish species known to
occur in India. Other life forms consist of 210 species of amphibians, 456 species of
reptiles, 1225 species of birds and 390 species of mammals.
There are many species of animals endemic to India or the Indian subcontinent. For
example, 36 species of mammals are not found anywhere else in the world. Similarly, we
have 176 species of endemic birds and 214 species of reptiles confined to the Indian
subcontinent, mainly in India. The highest percentage of endemism is found in
amphibians – 128 species of frogs, toads, salamander, etc., out of 209 (61%) are
restricted to India. Moreover, for some species India has the major population. For
instance, nearly 60% of the world’s tigers, 80% of the world’s1 one-horned rhinoceros,
100% of the Asiatic lion, 65% of the Asian elephant and 80% of the world’s gharials, are
found in India.
India is reported to have 16,500-19,400 taxa of flowering plants, which is approximately
7% of all described species in the world. Of these, nearly 107 species are aquatic. The
country has also recorded 48 gymnosperms, 1,135 pteridophytes, 2,850 bryophytes, 2,021
lichens, 6,500 algae and 14, 500 fungi. These are only such species that have been
described till now. Wild plants contribute significantly to livelihood needs with more
112

than 1,000 species having been recorded to have food value and more than 3,000 species
being recorded for medicinal purposes, besides use in fibre, fodder, gum, dyes, scents,
essential oils and for religious purposes, according to the recently concluded NBSAP
process.

9.2

Policy, Law and Administrative Set-up at the Government of India

9.2.1 The Current Wildlife Set-up in the Ministry of Environment and
Forests
Forest and wildlife are subjects listed in the Concurrent List of the Constitution. At the
Central Government level, the Union Ministry of Environment and Forests is responsible
for all matters dealing with policy on wildlife conservation, at the State Government
levels the Forest Departments under their control implement the national policies. The
Wildlife Wing in the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of India, is
headed by the Director, Wildlife Preservation, who is also designated as the Additional
Director General of Forests (Wildlife) to the Government of India.
The Wildlife Wing has three Divisions, namely, Project Tiger Division, Project Elephant
Division and Wildlife Division, each headed by an officer designated as Inspector
General of Forests. A Deputy Inspector General of Forest (Wildlife) and an Assistant
Inspector General and Joint Director (Wildlife) provide support to the Wildlife Wing.
These three Divisions look after national policies and projects, international coordination, Centrally Sponsored Schemes and State level implementation of activities
relating to the conservation of wildlife in Tiger Reserves, Elephant Reserves, national
parks and wildlife sanctuaries of India, wildlife laws, International Conventions and
Treaties, matters relating to zoos, wildlife conservation, international trade in wildlife and
wildlife articles, research, capacity building, major policy interventions, court cases,
Parliament related matters, budget, besides a host of other related matters. Two
autonomous organizations, the Wildlife Institute of India and the Central Zoo Authority,
also headed by officers of the rank equivalent to that of a Joint Secretary to the
Government of India are under administrative control of the Wildlife Wing. The Wildlife
Institute of India is an academic institute recognized as one of the Centres of Excellence
in the country. The Central Zoo Authority is the statutory authority for the recognition
and technical development of the zoos in India. The Director, Wildlife Preservation is
assisted by four regional subordinate offices, each headed by a Regional Deputy Director,
Wildlife Preservation, with headquarters at the four main ports of export and import, viz.,
Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai and Kolkata, to check on international trade in wildlife and
wildlife articles.

9.2.2 Funding Support for Wildlife Conservation
Government of India provides part financial support to the State Governments under
certain Centrally-sponsored Schemes. The rest is borne by the State Governments from
their own resources. These Centrally Sponsored Schemes include schemes for
Development of National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries, Project Tiger, Project Elephant,
Eco-development, Beneficiary Oriented Tribal Development, Central Sector Scheme on
Strengthening of Wildlife Division, grants-in-aid to Wildlife Institute and central grant to
the Central Zoo Authority. During the IX Five Year Plan the Wildlife Wing provided
113

support to the tune of Rs 463.8 crores under these schemes. During the X Five Year Plan
the two schemes on tribal development and eco-development have been merged with the
schemes on Project Tiger and National Parks and Wildlife Sanctuaries. A new scheme for
the Protection of Wildlife outside Protected Areas has been proposed. The outlay for the
X Five Year Plan is Rs 820 crores. Further details are given in the reports on the
respective Divisions.

9.2.3 Project Tiger Division
Launched in 1973 with nine reserves covering an area of 16,339 sq km., Project Tiger has
been extended to 28 reserves in 18 States, encompassing 37,761 sq km. of tiger habitat,
with the addition of four new tiger reserves viz. Pakui–Nameri (Arunachal/ Assam: 1206
km2), Bori–Satpura (Madhya Pradesh: 1486 km2), Bhadra (Karnataka: 492 km2) and
Pench (Maharashtra: 257 km2). Further, eight potential areas in the country have also
been identified for subsequent inclusion under “Project Tiger”.
Project Tiger is an ecosystem based conservation support project in which an optimum
presence of tiger indicates that the complex ecosystem is in its prime health. The outlay
of assistance provided to the States under the Centrally Sponsored Scheme of Project
Tiger was Rs 75 crores in IX Five Year Plan which has been enhanced to Rs 150 crores
in the X Five Year Plan with the part-merger of the ongoing C.S.S., “Eco-development of
National Parks and Sanctuaries including Tiger Reserves” and the C.S.S. “Beneficiary
Oriented Tribal Development”. Complementary inputs for eco-development and
voluntary village relocation provided earlier in separate projects have now been merged
with Project Tiger as an Umbrella Scheme.
Under the ongoing externally aided “India Eco-development Project”, as many as 572
eco-development committees have been formed in seven Protected Areas covering
75,600 families, to reduce the dependency of local people on Protected Area resources,
with reciprocal commitments.
Initiatives have been taken for evolving a trans-boundary cooperation protocol with
Bangladesh.
Information and communication technology is being used for linking important tiger
reserves in the GIS Domain for evolving a management support system and crime
detection, dissemination of information through the web and involving a ‘National Tiger
Monitoring and Habitat Evaluation System’ with regional protocols.
“Project Allowance” has been provided under the scheme to field staff working in tiger
reserves. 100% Central Assistance is provided for deploying anti-poaching strike squads
in Tiger Reserves, apart from expenditure relating to research, veterinary, monitoring and
evaluation, compensation to the legal heir of staff / person killed while performing duty,
and for monitoring of tiger population. The threat to the tiger is from poaching, to avenge
livestock killed, for international trade in its skins, bones and other body parts and due to
reduction of undisturbed habitat and the prey base. The tiger population in the country
currently stands estimated at 3642, as per 2001- 02 estimate. The impact of Project Tiger
is also visible in the form of arresting soil erosion, recharging of ground water regime and
enrichment of forest cover in the tiger reserves. Despite recent tiger population reverses,
the Project is recognized as a role model for wildlife conservation. As per a recent report
114

in the media, Project Tiger has been rated as one of the 56 events that changed India since
independence.
The project, which was a pioneering effort of a unique kind, has shown how a megaspecies could be used to create support for diverse and representative ecosystem
conservation, which can and has conserved water, soil, faunal and floral biodiversity and
wilderness.
9.2.3.1

The Tiger Task Force Report

Following the uproar caused by the news that the national animal had disappeared from
one of the Tiger Reserves, namely Sariska in Rajasthan, the Chairman of the National
Board for Wildlife and the Prime Minister of India, Dr. Manmohan Singh, set up a Task
Force to assess the situation vis-a-vis Project Tiger and to submit a time-bound report.
Sariska was a crisis waiting to happen and it is bound to occur e1sewhere if matters are
not rectified. It also brought into limelight the prevalent situation with regard to wildlife
conservation in the country, for if this be the situation in one of the oldest reserves of the
prime project initiated by the Government for the conservation of the tiger in particular
and of nature in general, one can assess the situation in "lesser" parks and wildlife
sanctuaries, not to speak of other habitats and of wildlife in the country. Nature
conservation efforts unfortunately, have historically always flowed from the 'top': the
British, the princes, and a couple of Prime Ministers. The conservation movement has not
taken root in rural areas and even in the urban areas outside a segment of society.
Considering the short time given for the task, ‘Joining the Dots’ is a very well presented
and fairly comprehensive report with a number of appropriate suggestions, some known,
others brought into greater focus than before. Some of the notable recommendations
cover institutional mechanisms such as creation of two separate departments of
Environment and of Forests and Wildlife within the MoEF and the creation of a subcadre of wildlife specialists and professionals within the forestry services, which this
report also stresses upon. It recommends greater powers to the Project Tiger Directorate
and periodic independent audit of each reserve; recruitment of local personnel to man the
PAs; the traditional hunting tribes and communities living in and around PAs to be
integrated in the conservation efforts and the people to be provided alternatives, relaxing
minimum educational qualifications, if required; protection by security forces of any
reserves threatened by insurgency; a focus on control over wildlife crime including a
special bureau to deal with this menace; development of forensic facilities to assist the
bureau; a closer bilateral relationship to be built up with China to combat illegal trade;
the introduction of a more scientific method of estimating tiger population and
monitoring the habitat; a greater emphasis on research to assist better conservation; an
urgent and realistic review of villages and people that need to be relocated from Tiger
Reserves and of assuring acceptable and beneficial relocation; need of deve1oping
linkages with the local people to help both the people and wildlife to co-exist, including
payment of compensation; and regulation and management of tourism so that it would
assist conservation and not be in conflict with it. It also advocates for the payment for
ecological conservation rendered by tiger reserves. The NFC endorses these
recommendations.
115

There are certain aspects of the report with which the NFC is not in agreement with, as is
evident from the text of this report. There are also certain omissions and some inadequate
assessment of the different dimensions of some of the topics raised in the report
The Task Force Report wants to have “empirical evidence that the use of habitats by
people is endangering conservation efforts”. Any rational person can assess for himself
the degree of demographic impact by comparing the qualitative and quantitative
difference in the biota in the unexploited core area of a national park such as Kanha,
which the Task Force visited, and that surrounding the villages on the periphery of Kanha
Tiger Reserve. Indeed, it is pertinent to know that when the sal borer epidemic struck the
forests around Kanha, lakhs of trees died but the core area of Kanha, which is not
demographically impacted, had hardly any infestation. This is because the trees in the
reserve had the vigour to resist the infestation and the vigour was there because of the
lack of biotic and edaphic pressure on the core area. The sal die off was even more
prevalent around the inhabited areas than in areas farther from human habitation. The
Tiger Reserves which the task force visited and saw tigers were those in which human
habitations have been relocated. If the Task Force had visited the much more problematic
ones where there is a greater demographic impact such as Indravati in Chhattisgarh,
Nagarjunasagar -Srisailam in Andhra, Palamau in Jharkhand and Simlipal in Orissa, the
opinion formed may have been different in this regard. In some states like Rajasthan and
Gujarat, practically no forests worth the name survive outside the effectively managed
protected areas. It must be accepted that forest dwelling communities of today cannot be
kept in idyllic isolation and may well exploit forest for commercial purposes and not just
for survival.

9.2.4 Project Elephant Division
Project Elephant is a Centrally Sponsored Scheme for wildlife conservation aimed at a
species that, because of its large rangeland requirements and because of the fragmented
range elements, often comes in conflict with human populations. The elephant is not a
carnivorous predator, but its requirements of fodder and water compete with the
requirements of livestock reared by human beings living in and around its habitat. The
main thrust of the Project is on improvement of elephant habitat and mitigation of
conflict of interest with human communities. The Project was launched in February 1992
for providing the required support to 12 elephant range States of India, keeping in view
the requirements of elephant reserves and approved by the Central Government.
An amount of Rs.61.82 crores has been spent under Project Elephant since its inception
in February 1992 till 31.3.2003.The outlay for the Project for the X Five Year Plan is Rs
60 crores. Also, Rs.11.68 crores (Rs. 2.00 crores. for the North-East) had been earmarked
under the Project during 2003-04. The States receiving central assistance during 2003-04
under Project Elephant include Assam, Arunachal Pradesh, Meghalaya, Nagaland,
Tripura, West Bengal, Jharkhand, Uttaranchal, Orissa, Kerala, Tamil Nadu, Andhra
Pradesh and Karnataka.
The population of elephants in India has increased from about 25,000 in 1992 to over
28,000 in 2001. Five new Elephant Reserves, namely Sonitpur, Dihing-Patkai, Kaziranga
Karbi-Anglong, Dhansiri–Lumding and Chirang-Ripu have been recognized in addition
to the existing reserves, altogether covering 11 elephant management ranges in India.
116

Major activities under the Project include: habitat improvement, fire protection, land
acquisition for consolidation of habitats and establishment of corridors, procurement of
equipment (weapons, tranquillizing sets, wireless sets, vehicles, etc.) for protection,
census of elephants, immunization of cattle on the forest fringe, payment of ex-gratia
grant for damage to human life and property by elephants, construction of elephant-proof
barriers, construction of patrolling tracks and camps, etc.
The main threats to elephant populations arise from the conflict for land, food and water
with the people and their livestock and the main thrust of the Project is, therefore, on
mitigation of man-elephant conflict and habitat enrichment. The number of human beings
killed in encounters with elephants in and around the elephant inhabited forest areas was
reported to be 384 during the year 2002-2003. Expenditure on conflict management
during 2002-2003 included Rs 2.61 crores financial support provided to the State
Governments for taking up anti-depredation measures and Rs 1.69 crores for meeting the
expenditure on payment of ex-gratia relief to the victims of elephant depredations.
Thirty-eight cases of killing of elephants for ivory were reported from the States. Support
was also provided for other related items on habitat improvement, infrastructure, antipoaching activities, etc., to the State Governments, as proposed in their Annual Plans of
Operation.
There is a large population of elephants kept in captivity by people in different parts of
the country. Project Elephant has registered 700 elephants by implanting coded
microchips for identification of the elephants in Delhi, Assam and Arunachal Pradesh.
The Project also brought out a book on Management of Captive Elephants during this
period to help in the better maintenance of elephants in captive conditions.
On the international scene, Project Elephant is involved in the program for Monitoring of
Illegal Killing of Elephants (MIKE) initiated under the aegis of the Convention on
International Trade in Endangered Species of Flora and Fauna (CITES), to which India is
a party.

9.2.5 Wildlife Conservation Division
This Division deals with all matters relating to national parks and wildlife sanctuaries not
covered by the Project Tiger and the Project Elephant Divisions. The X Five Year Plan
outlay for works relating to this Division is of the order of Rs 485 crores. The Division
also acts as a nodal point for the Wildlife Institute of India and the Central Zoo Authority,
which are autonomous bodies under the administrative control of the Government of
India. The two organizations receive support from the Government of India in the form of
grants processed by the Wildlife Division. The details on these two bodies are given
separately. The Division also handles the Centrally Sponsored Scheme “Development of
National Parks and Sanctuaries” and the Central Sector Scheme “Strengthening of
Wildlife Division and Consultancies for Wildlife Conservation.”
The Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 has been amended with effect from 1 April 2003.
The amendments include, inter-alia, provisions that flow from the National Wildlife
Action Plan adopted by the country in 2002. Two new categories of protected areas,
namely Conservation Reserves and Community Reserves, have been incorporated in the
amended Act to facilitate coverage of all biogeographic zones, forest types and wild
species of flora and fauna, and peoples’ involvement in establishment and management
117

of such protected areas. The amendment has also facilitated the issue of certificates of
ownership to the bona-fide possessors of animals, animal articles, trophies, etc., derived
from animals listed in Schedule I and part II of Schedule II of the Act, who had not been
able to declare their possessions earlier. The law has become stricter for the offenders. It
also makes clear that PAs which have areas that have had rights extinguished under any
legislation, will be deemed to be finally notified (Sections 26-A(b) and Explanation U/S
35(8) of the Act)
9.2.5.1

Conservation of National Parks and Sanctuaries

The Government of India through a Centrally Sponsored Scheme “Development of
National Parks and Sanctuaries” provides the financial assistance to national parks and
sanctuaries managed by the State Governments. The scheme provides 100% Central
assistance on items of works of non-recurring nature. There are a few identified items of
recurring nature which are essential and which need support for a few years. The scheme
provides assistance on such items on a 50% sharing basis, the matching share coming
from the State Government concerned. Under the scheme, an assistance of Rs 72.28
crores was provided to the States during the IX Five Year Plan. The outlay for the X Five
Year Plan is Rs 350 crores, which includes the merged schemes for Eco-development and
Tribal Rehabilitation.
9.2.5.2

Strengthening of Wildlife Division and Consultancies

Under this Centrally Sponsored Scheme the infrastructural and conservational
requirements of the Wildlife Division are met. This Division handles the works of the
four sub-ordinate offices of the Deputy Directors, Wildlife Preservation located at
Kolkata, Chennai, Mumbai and Delhi, with their supporting offices at Amritsar,
Guwahati and Cochin. The function of these offices is to monitor and take measures to
check the international trade in wildlife and wildlife articles passing through the ports of
entry into and exit from the country. Besides, research proposals from independent
research agencies and institutions on applied aspects of wildlife conservation, are also
provided support from this head. There are 10 ongoing research projects, dealing mainly
with applied wildlife conservation undertaken by various organizations including the
BNHS (4), Institute of Environment Education and Research, Pune (1), University of
Patna (1), Garhwal University (1), Nature Environment and Wildlife Society (1), Gene
Campaign (1) and the Chilika Development Authority (1). The subjects covered relate to
wildlife habitats in the Dangs, Rajaji National Park, Western Ghats, ecological studies on
the Gangetic Dolphin, Irravady Dolphin, forest spotted owlet, vultures, spot-billed
pelican, endangered wildlife in West Bengal and genetic diversity in the Western Ghats.
The duration of research projects varies between one year and three years and the total
support asked for is Rs 88.34 lakhs. Nine more are in the pipeline.
Organization of meetings, workshops, events, awards, etc., is also covered under this
scheme. An amount of Rs 10 crores is provided as outlay for this Scheme for the X Five
Year Plan.

9.2.6 Central Zoo Authority
The Central Zoo Authority (CZA) was established as a Statutory Authority under the
Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972 in February 1992, with the prime objective of
118

overseeing the management of zoos and to provide them with the necessary technical and
financial inputs to come up to the desired level of management. The Authority specifies
the minimum standards for housing, upkeep and veterinary care of the animals kept in a
zoo; evaluates and assesses the functioning of the zoos with respect to the prescribed
standards or norms and based on it, recognizes or derecognizes zoos. The law does not
permit functioning of a zoo in India unless it is recognized by the CZA. The Authority
also, inter-alia, identifies endangered species of wild animals for purposes of captive
breeding, coordinates the acquisition, exchange and loaning of animals for breeding
purpose, coordinates training of zoo personnel in India and outside India, coordinates
research in captive breeding and educational programmes and provides technical and
other assistance to zoos for their proper management and development on scientific lines.
The Ministry of Environment and Forests provides grants-in-aid to the CZA for providing
financial assistance to zoos in the country for improving housing facilities, veterinary
facilities and upkeep of animals. During the IX Plan Period, the Authority had provided
Rs. 3748.43 lakhs for the welfare of animals in zoos. The X Five Year Plan outlay for the
CZA is Rs 75 crores, and 83% of the Grants-in-aid of 1080 lakhs during the year 20022003 was released to zoos for improvement of animal housing and upkeep.
Administrative and operational cost was kept to the minimum at 5.6% of the total
allocation.
The CZA have evaluated 418 zoos in the country and granted recognition to 164 zoos.
Since its inception in 1992, 91 zoos have been closed down and their animals
rehabilitated appropriately. Cases of these zoos, which were derecognized, are currently
being reviewed for their possible re-recognition. Seven mini zoos in Andhra Pradesh,
Bihar, Daman and Diu, Himachal Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh and Haryana were closed,
and the zoo at Peshwe Park, Pune was shifted to an alternative site at Katraj. Fourteen
zoos, which were having inappropriate housing and existing in very small areas have
been extended at their existing site or have moved to alternative larger and better areas.
Since January 2002, the CZA has issued wild animal health care guidelines to the zoos
and continuous monitoring by the CZA has resulted in the reduction of death rate among
tigers in zoo to an all time low since 1995-96 at 9.74%.
For strengthening of diagnostic facility on a zonal basis six veterinary institutions located
at Bhubaneshwar, Chennai, Guwahati, Bareilly (IVRI), Anand and Jammu have been
identified and MoU on modalities finalized and signed with the concerned universities.
In order to infuse new technology in the field of assisted reproduction of endangered
species, a laboratory is being constructed in collaboration with the Centre for Cellular and
Molecular Biology (CCMB) at Hyderabad.
To facilitate coordination among zoos in ex-situ conservation, a website of the Authority
was also launched. With a view to bring transparency in functioning of zoos, an inventory
of animals giving details of death and birth was published and distributed widely.
Five Rescue Centres for rehabilitating 300 lions and tigers received from circuses have
been established at Vandalur (Tamil Nadu), Bannerghatta (Karnataka), Nahargarh
(Rajasthan), Visakhapatnam and Tirupati (Andhra Pradesh). In coordination with the
Ministry of Social Justice, State Government and field officials, the CZA organized
119

seizure and transport of 116 lions and 6 tigers from 13 circuses to four rescue centres
established by the Central Zoo Authority. A total of 292 animals rescued from circuses
have been rehabilitated at these Centres till August 2003. The CZA also coordinated with
CITES authorities to rescue 1,800 star tortoises from Singapore and in their rehabilitation
at the Nehru Zoological Park, Hyderabad.
In order to upgrade the technical skills of zoo personnel, 70 zookeepers and 30
supervisory level staff were provided training in 2002.
To further the cause of conservation through ex-situ interventions, a premier conservation
effort of a new kind, planned breeding programmes for rehabilitating Red Panda and Lion
Tailed Macaque in their natural habitats, has been taken up by the CZA. As a part of this
programme, release of captive bred Red Panda from the Padmaja Naidu Himalayan
Zoological Park, Darjeeling to the Singalila National Park in West Bengal, has been
carried out as a first step, on 15 August, 2003.

9.2.7 Wildlife Institute of India
Established in 1982, Wildlife Institute of India (WII) is an autonomous body under the
administrative control of the Government of India and is recognized as India’s premier
institution that provides both capacity building as well as research inputs for
improvement of wildlife conservation in India. Under the Central Sector Scheme, grantsin -aid to the Wildlife Institute of India amounted to Rs 50 crores for the X Five Year
Plan.
During the past year the Institute trained 20 officers in wildlife management under their 9
month Diploma course, 23 officers under their 3-month Certificate course and 8 students
are attending the MSc Wildlife Biology course conducted biennially by the Institute.
Short term specialized course modules are also being conducted by the Institute in
subjects related to wildlife conservation. The subjects covered by the Institute relate to
training in eco-development for biodiversity conservation, wildlife protection law and
forensic sciences, environmental impact assessment, wetland conservation and legal
issues in wildlife management. Between 2001 and 2003 a total of 91 participants attended
the courses. The Institute also provides training inputs to Indian Forest Service officers
undergoing different training modules at the Indira Gandhi National Forest Academy,
Dehradun. Despite the fact that there are wildlife wings in the States and there are almost
600 PAs in the country, the majority of the PAs are manned by personnel not trained at
the WII. Its training facilities are being greatly under utilized, as a result of which the
unused training slots are being offered to SAARC countries and others. It is also pertinent
to note that even the miniscule number of persons trained at the WII are not, after
training, posted in the PAs of the State nor, indeed, into the wildlife wing, all of which
defeats the very purpose for which the WII was created. The WII has recently initiated
forensic studies and proposed parameters and guidelines.

9.2.8 Olive Ridley Turtle Conservation Project
A significant proportion of the world’s Olive Ridley turtle population nests at nesting
sites along the eastern coast of India. The endangered species of sea turtles is also a focus
of attention of the international community who looks up to India to provide safety to the
nesting sites and to the turtle populations that seasonally arrive there for the propagation
120

of their species. The Sea Turtle Conservation Project initiated by the Ministry of
Environment and Forests, in collaboration with UNDP in November 1999, with a total
allocation of Rs 1.29 crores, has been completed and the report published by the Wildlife
Institute of India. The Project has identified and made an inventory map of the breeding
sites of sea turtles, developed guidelines to safeguard the species and minimize turtle
mortality caused by human activities. It has also prepared tourism guidelines for ecotourism in sea turtle areas and has developed national and international cooperative and
collaborative plans of action for Sea Turtle Conservation. A significant achievement of
the project has been the use of satellite telemetry to trace the migratory route of Olive
Ridley turtles in the seas, and the sensitization of fishermen and the State Government of
Orissa to the use of the turtle excluder device (TED) by the fishing trawlers, to check
turtle mortality in fishing nets

9.2.9 A National Institute of Coastal and Marine Biodiversity at
Kanyakumari.
Marine biodiversity has immense potential for contributing to the economy of India as a
large part of India’s population subsists on the resources available to them along the
country’s long coastal region, in 53 coastal districts of 10 maritime States and 6 Union
Territories including the Andaman and Nicobar and Lakshadweep. Marine biodiversity
forms the main employment as well as material generating resource. However, the
scientific aspects of the management of marine biodiversity have not received the
attention it deserves.
The Ministry of Environment and Forests has initiated the process of establishment of a
National Institute for Coastal and Marine Biodiversity. The Wildlife Institute of India,
Dehradun, has been entrusted with the task for development of the Institute. An Action
Plan for 2003-2004 for the establishment of the Institute has been drawn up by the WII,
an amount of Rs 20 lakhs has been provided to it for initiating action for this purpose.
A proposal for allocation of 20 hectares of government land at Kanyakumari has been
sent to the Government of Tamil Nadu and it is under their active consideration.

9.2.10 UNF–Unesco World Heritage Programme
The Government of India had received funding support for preparing capacity building
and awareness projects for the four world heritage natural sites, namely, Nanda Devi,
Kaziranga, Manas and Keoladeo National Parks. The Project Document has been
completed and the funding support from UNF-UNESCO is expected. The World Heritage
Committee has encouraged India to prepare the tentative list of its outstanding natural
sites and submit details for future nominations. Recognition as World Heritage sites helps
in improving conservation values and status, socio-economic development through
enhanced funding support, increases eco-tourism activity and conservation awareness
among the masses. It enhances the significance of the site in the eyes of the people and
the government.

9.2.11 Indo-Russian Inter-Governmental Commission
The Working Group on Environment and Natural Resources is an important component
of the Indo-Russian Inter-governmental Commission. In its meeting held in April 2003 at
Moscow several important decisions were taken which included the Siberian Crane
121

Conservation Project for introduction of captive bred Siberian Crane chicks in the flock
of common cranes, so that the migration of the Siberian Cranes in India can be revived
and the loss of this magnificent bird to India in recent years, be regained.

9.2.12 Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild
Flora and Fauna
The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Flora and Fauna
(CITES), also known as the Washington Convention, is a very important treaty for the
conservation of species. CITES came into being in 1976 and currently has more than 160
countries as signatories to it. The CITES through its once-in-two year Conference of
Parties and intervening Committee Meetings decides on the protection levels that need to
be accorded to various species in international trade, by placing them in the different
Appendices. For example species on Appendix I are banned from international trade,
those on Appendix II have a certain regulatory regimen on trade and those on Appendix
III have regulations applicable only to those species and derivatives that come from a
certain region. India was one of the earlier signatories to CITES and has been an active
member at all meetings, particularly in the area of tiger, elephant and Tibetan antelope
conservation, India has been very pro-active.
A new resolution on the Conservation of Asian Cats was proposed by India in November
2002, during the XII meeting of the Conference of Parties to the CITES. This resolution
has been adopted. Whale shark is a highly endangered species. India, Philippines and
Madagascar sponsored a joint-proposal for inclusion of whale shark in Appendix II of
CITES, which was ratified at the Conference of Parties in Santiago, Chile. India and USA
also jointly sponsored a proposal for including all species of roofed turtles of genus
Kachuga, in Appendix II, which was also ratified in COP XII of CITES.

9.2.13 Others
Other international agreements and instruments, i.e. inter alia the Ramsar Convention,
Convention on Migratory Species and International Whaling Commission are discussed
under Chapter 18.

9.2.14 Tiger Enumeration Methodology
An all India estimation of tigers is done once in every four years, covering all its habitats
in the country, apart from Protected Areas and Tiger Reserves where it is done every two
years, and in case of some reserves (e.g. Ranthambhore) every year. Daily tracking
records are also kept in Project Tiger areas and record of sightings by visitors are also
maintained on a daily basis. The methodology is amenable to being carried out by
frontline field staff. The pug marks (foot impressions) of tigers recorded through paper
tracings, plaster casts and digital photographs (at some places) which are dated, signed
and preserved in the concerned Forests Divisions, enable fixing individual identity,
sexing and ageing. These are recorded along with other evidence to arrive at an estimate,
after tallying and eliminating duplicates. The methodology yields a total count, rather
than a statistical estimate. However, there may be errors in taking paper tracings. Also,
there has been a general feeling that tiger numbers may be overestimated in various
regions due to several reasons that may include technical and systemic issues. The
numbers game puts undue pressure on the system to deliver “a higher tiger count” than
122

the previous year and this also leads to the failure of a system that otherwise could work
in the field in Indian conditions, the authorities giving warped and excessive figures.
The methodology followed so far is based on collection of pugmarks, which are
individualistic. In the forthcoming all India estimation, apart from the traditional method,
a refined pugmark method having much less scope for human error would be used, in
addition to camera traps, for arriving at the population figures density. This would be
correlated with relative indices based on evidences for crosschecking. Further, other
factors of the habitat would also be taken into account in the Geographical Information
System (GIS) domain. For the first time, the Govt. of India would involve itself in the
primary data collection.

9.3

Stakeholder Views and Suggestions

In the responses received, the following viewpoints in brief, were put forth:-

9.3.1 Wildlife Management
Most people feel that a separate wing of the Forest Department should look after
management and protection of wildlife. The services of an ecologist have been deemed
necessary by some for parks and sanctuaries. Others suggest that silviculture in PAs
should aim not only at forest protection but also at augmenting herbivore food and
habitat enhancement. Stray concerns have been raised about the quality of nourishment
that wild animals find. Many hold that changing crop patterns around PAs will minimize
man-animal conflicts. On the issue of people and parks, responses range from asking all
habitations to be removed from PAs and closing tourism in all seasons, to arguing for the
natural rights of the human inhabitants of PAs. No consensus can be said to emerge.

9.3.2 Ecotourism
The common thought is that Ecotourism can boost economy and generate funds for
conservation, and that the private sector should be deployed in nature education and ecotourism. A small number of people also feel that ecotourism may disturb the balance in
protected areas.

9.3.3 Wildlife and Biodiversity Conservation

• There needs to be an assessment of the extent of livelihood dependence of local
•
•
•
•

•
•

communities and their contribution to ecosystem and wildlife conservation.
The area of PAs must be at least 5% of the geographical area of the country.
The rights of the people in PAs must be settled in time bound manner.
Biodiversity conservation must be looked after by the forest department at the
central as well as State level, in coordination with other agencies.
Periodic review is needed of the list of the animals in the different schedules of
the Wildlife Protection Act. The species may be added or deleted on the basis of
review. The culling /export of the surplus animals may be considered by the
Government to avoid man-animal conflict.
Rules needed for Community Reserves and Conservation Reserves.
In view of rising PA-people conflicts a third party arbitration mechanism may be
explored.
123

9.4

Controlling Poaching, Illegal Extraction and Trade in Wild Flora
and Fauna

It is abundantly clear that poaching and trade seriously affects a wide range of wild
species. Measures for field control of poaching vary in quality in protected areas, but are
practically non-existent in reserved forests and other categories of forests. Nevertheless,
non-PA forest areas are vital for species and habitat conservation as well, for the PA
network is only representative of the total forests of the country. Even in case of PAs it is
observed that foresters at the level of Range Officers and below are not adequately
trained and equipped in their duties. In particular, they lack knowledge of the provisions
and practice of Wild Life (Protection) Act and that of the CrPC and IPC, which are just as
important to bring an offender to book. The contribution of technical non-governmental
agencies in training must be looked into and used wherever appropriate.
The control of poaching and trade can only be achieved by intelligence gathering. This
aspect of crime control is often not given the importance it deserves and is a sub-set of
traditional anti-poaching operations such as camps, patrols, watchtowers, etc. However,
rupee for rupee, building and maintaining information sources (even when there is no
poaching problem) is critical to controlling crime. The base principle in crime combating
should be that there is always a threat of poaching even if it has not manifested itself.
This will be the best pre-emptive step to take.
A distinction not often understood is between anti-poaching and anti-smuggling. The
mafia-type gangs operating from cities are the driving force behind poaching. A
substantial part of species in trade is meant to be smuggled outside India. Wildlife crime
is no different from many other kinds of crime such as narcotics, gunrunning, trafficking
in humans, etc., and controlling this requires the same skills, aptitude and equipment as
that of any other crime. Though empowered under the WPA, agencies of the government
such as the CBI do not take wildlife crime as seriously as it should be taken. Greater
motivation, training and empowerment should be provided to non-wildlife enforcement
agencies to act in this field. This is particularly true of Customs Department as they are
mandated to curb illegal movement of goods internationally. As India has considerably
relaxed the import export rules regarding traditional contrabands such as electronic
goods, it may well be a good time for them to emphasize on wildlife crime. The World
Customs Union has recently placed greater emphasis on environmental crime, including
those on derivatives of wild species. As a signatory to CITES, India is committed to
enforce regulations arising out of it and it is in her interest to do so. . It would also be
pertinent to point out that the Committee on Prevention of Illegal Trade in Wildlife and
Wildlife Products or the Subramaniam Committee in its report of 1994 had recommended
a number of measures for the control of poaching and trade. Partial implementation of the
recommendations made in the report had taken place but the creation of a specialized
wildlife crime unit and that to provide legal training and support to wildlife law
enforcement agencies are still languishing.

9.5

Rationalization of PA Boundaries, Relocation of Settlements and
Upgradation and Finalization of the PA Network

A large number of people reside within Indian PAs. This acute problem with all the
ramifications of man-animal and people-park conflicts on the one hand, and the denial of
124

basic facilities to the people on the other, has to be approached on several fronts. There is
an increasing realization amongst the people living in the PAs that as long as they reside
in the PAs there will always be conflict and their access to the market, availability of
goods and services like transport, medical facilities and education, will always be
hampered. Many forest communities are willing to move out of such areas if they are
given adequate alternative land and other means of livelihood.
Although ‘Protected Areas’ in the form of National Parks, Sanctuaries and Closed Areas
were in existence in the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972, yet statutorily “Protected
Areas” have been defined only in 2002 through an amendment in the Wild Life
(Protection) Act, 1972. The relevant provision reads as follows: “(24A) “Protected area”
means a national park, a sanctuary, a conservation reserve or a community reserve
notified under sections 18, 35, 36A and 36C of the Act;’ Further, the amendment also
substituted the heading in Chapter IV i.e. “SANCTUARIES, NATIONAL PARK AND
CLOSED AREAS”, for ‘PROTECTED AREAS’. The concept of protected areas as defined
in the Act does not include administrative categories such as Biosphere Reserves, Tiger
Reserves and Elephant Reserves.
Further, new PAs are getting increasingly difficult to form. The reasons for the same are:
1. Delayed procedure for the settlement of rights, where required.
2. In recent years, a PA has become politically and socially unpopular due to the fear
of displacement, denial of access to bio-resources, etc., especially since the
degradation of non-PA areas has left the PAs with more bio-resources in
comparison with the neighbouring forests.
3. The protection afforded in PAs has also led to an increase in animal populations
within PAs, which has led to greater raids on neighbouring crops and livestock
and thus greater man-animal conflicts.
The creation of Protected Areas are only taking place to compensate for the loss of
forests due to developmental projects and are specifically insisted upon in Clearance
Conditions of the Ministry of Environment and Forests e.g., the clearance condition of
the Lower Subansari, which recommended for the catchments area of the Dam to be
declared as a National Park, and the Human River Project adjoining Tadoba Andheri
Tiger Reserve wherein submerged area is to be declared as Sanctuary while submerging
prime Tiger Corridor. The clearance of the Narmada Sagar Project in Madhya Pradesh
also lays down the setting up of PAs in adjacent forests, which the State has not fulfilled
so far.

9.6

Achieving Linkages between the PA system

Corridors or linkages between protected habitats must be considered a vital conservation
need for biodiversity conservation and conflict reduction mechanism. Such corridors or
linkages must be planned keeping in mind animal migrations or movements,
representations of ecological gradients between habitats, the needs of local communities
as well as planned developmental projects. A number of such areas have been identified
and prioritized. For example the Wildlife Trust of India and the Asian Elephant Research
and Conservation Centre have recently brought out a publication identifying all the
important Elephant Corridors of India, which has been ratified by State Forest
125

Departments. Similarly the BNHS has coordinated the Important Bird Area programme
in India. The Bio-geographic report by Rodgers and Panwar1 mentioned above also
recommends the conservation of numerous identified corridors.
Once identified, prioritized and agreed to, respective State Governments must declare
them and either make them part of existing protected areas, or declare them as
Ecologically Sensitive Areas under the EPA. If extension of existing PAs – either a
National Park or Sanctuary – is not possible then corridors could be covered under a
Conservation Reserve and on private land under a Community Reserve. Agro/farm
forestry and afforestation under the Lok Vaniki can also be encouraged and actively
supported to provide forest cover on private lands.
Ecologically Sensitive Areas (ESAs) are declared under the provisions of the
Environment (Protection) Act, 1986 and the E.P Rules of 1986. The power to declare the
same is vested in the Central Government. Declaration of ESA is a centralized process
and aims at addressing specific environmental threats such as mining, industrialization,
construction etc in ecologically sensitive areas.

9.7

Improved Management of Protected Areas

It is regrettable that despite conclusive evidence that the nation’s incalculable natural
wealth vests in our effectively managed protected areas and indeed, have a long-term
future mainly in these entities, the forest departments of the States continue to regard
them and the wildlife wings in whose charge they are or should be, as unimportant or
even extraneous. Protected areas are viewed not as the regulators of water and the last
havens of hope of our virgin and climax forests and biotic communities both faunal and
floral, but as wasted resources. This mindset prevails despite the change in priorities from
the National Forest Policy of 1952 to the current one of 1988 and despite the fact that
experience has taught that usage once allowed, cannot be effectively regulated and that
the nation’s needs cannot be fulfilled by exploiting the less than 2% of the area that is
inviolate today. The PAs and the parent wildlife wings, therefore, are today “suffered” by
the State Governments, not supported for what they are and what they mean to the nation.
This attitude is reflected in the lack of importance that is accorded to them, and which in
turn manifests itself in financial allocations, allotment of personnel and lack of support to
fulfill management pre-requisites and implementation of law.
Firstly, the Wildlife Wings and the PAs are treated as “dumping” grounds of unwanted
officers and staff of the forest departments. Such personnel neither have the interest and
aptitude for, nor training in wildlife management and once posted, would make
endeavours to get away from their postings. It is significant that the few officers in the
States trained in the WII are not given wildlife postings, and the few officers interested in
nature conservation and committed to it, are persuaded to go elsewhere. The officer corps
which mans the PA system and the Wildlife Wings, therefore, are mostly unprofessional,
disinterested and even disgruntled.
Protection is the very basis of conservation, especially in a poor and populous country
like India, with its mounting demographic impact. It is ironic, therefore, that the inverse
1

Rodgers, W. A., Panwar, H. S. and Mathur V. B. 2000. Wildlife protected area network in India. – A
review. Dehradun, Wildlife Institute of India.

126

pyramid manifests itself at the cutting edge of conservation i.e. the forest guard/beat
guard/ wildlife/ game guard level. This is so in territorial forest divisions as it is in PAs.
While the number of officers has increased, the area/size of the forest/ wildlife guard beat
has remained constant for the last sixty years or more, in the whole country. Furthermore,
while recruitment of vacancies continues in the case of officers, those of these field staff
remain unfulfilled due to financial constraints and the daily wagers who used to
complement these field personnel, are also being mostly discontinued. The average age of
the forest/wildlife guard is now over 40 years in most States and over 50 in some. In
decades gone by, a single guard could patrol alone. That is not possible anymore.
Training in wildlife management is mostly not imparted to the subordinate staff either by
their superiors, or in a training school.
A further manifestation of the disregard and distrust of PAs and of the Wildlife Wings, is
that the Chief Wildlife Warden, usually a person next in seniority to the PCCFs, is often
not fully in control of the PAs ostensibly under his charge, and has no control over
wildlife conservation in the territorial divisions. The personnel of the PAs report
frequently to the territorial DFOs, who are also their drawing and disbursing officers. The
control of the buffer areas surrounding PAs, even major National Parks and Tiger
Reserves, are still vested with territorial DFOs and not with officers, even of the rank of
Conservators, in charge of the PAs concerned. This prevents the PA managers from
involving the local people in eco-development activities and as buffers to the core areas
of the PAs. MoEF had issued instructions that the Chief Wildlife Warden should make an
entry in the CRs of Territorial DFOs as to the contribution made by them for nature
conservation. Nowhere is this directive followed.
Each PA should have a Management Plan, for not only for the PA itself, but also for the
buffer and it would cover tourism as well. Most PAs, including National Parks do not
have them or they are not updated.
Certain duties enjoined upon the PA managers by the Wildlife Protection Act are still not
being carried out in a number of PAs. Amongst them are cattle immunization (Section
33-A), registration of arms (Section 34) and removal of encroachments (34-A), etc.
Section 29 of the Act pertaining to the removal of forest produce for the improvement
and better management of the PA, was being misused by the State Governments for
continued exploitation of the PA under the garb of improvement and better management!
As a result, this section was amended in 2002, and which now not only makes such
removal more stringent and accountable, but also lays down that forest produce so
accrued shall be given to the local people for their bona fide use. However, in violation of
the letter and spirit of this law, some State Governments still continue to exploit PAs. The
extraction of tendu leaves, sal seed and other forest produce is also banned now under
law in Parks and Sanctuaries. Yet, some States still continue with the practice under some
excuse or the other. If the law enforcers themselves violate the law, how effectively can
they prevent others from doing so?

9.8

Promoting Research and Monitoring

Knowledge about a species, ecosystem and ecological processes is essential for better
management of PAs and for better conservation of species, especially when most PAs are
becoming ‘islands’ in a sea of humanity. Basic research is required to know the carrying
127

capacity of PAs and of different ecosystems, to reduce man-animal conflict, to know the
impacts of long-term overgrazing, collection of minor forest products, fire, floods,
tourism etc, and also to know the benefits that PAs and ecosystems accrue to the nation
and to local communities. While everyone acknowledges the role of forests, grasslands,
and wetlands in maintaining the water regime of an area or of a river system, there is
hardly any empirical data on this aspect in our country. Many species e.g. rhino, lion,
swamp deer, hispid hare, have recovered from very small numbers with a small genetic
base. At the same time, fragmentation of habitat/ecosystem is creating small isolated
populations. There is no long-term study on genetic deterioration of small populations.
With increasing human population (India’s population is estimated to reach 1.4 to 1.5
billion mark in another 40-45 years before leveling off), habitats/PAs will become more
isolated, with very little chance of natural dispersal/movement of some animals from PAs
into a larger landscape.
One of the goals of setting up PAs is to increase our understanding of the ecosystems and
biological processes, for the advancement of science. This can only be achieved through
Research and Monitoring. Research and Monitoring are also essential for planning
conservation management and for evaluating its efficacy. This also includes monitoring
impact of climate change on natural habitats. Despite the importance of research, there is
no legislation that promotes and facilitates research in natural habitats, whether these are
PAs, reserved forests, community land, farmland, etc. In fact, there are several
legislations that discourage research. The interpretation of ‘research’ (permits, funds,
entry, etc) is often left to the whims and fancies of decision makers. Fundamental
research on species and ecosystems may look academic to a PA manager but it is
essential for the advancement of science and also for long-term monitoring of
species/ecosystem. Both fundamental and applied research should be encouraged,
especially the latter. Moreover, basics of research methodologies, and the importance and
appreciation of research should be taught to PA managers during their training in
Dehradun and other forest institutes. Presently, many PA managers discourage and
deprecate research and researchers. Wildlife disease is an emerging threat all over the
world due to various reasons. While we have veterinarians in every district, who mainly
look after domestic animals, we lack good wildlife vets. We do not have vets even in
national parks. There is no short-term or long-term monitoring of wildlife diseases in any
PA in India. There is not much research on the introduction and reintroduction of species.
With increasing fragmentation of habitats and local extinction of some species, there is a
need to gain knowledge about introduction and reintroduction and rehabilitation. For
example, the Grey Hornbill (Tockus Birorstris) has become extinct in the Gir; possibly
due to hunting pressure a couple of decades ago. However, the situation has improved
and the area is better protected now. Can we reintroduce the grey hornbill in Gir? Is the
habitat suitable? How many pairs need to be reintroduced? We need to know all this
before any reintroduction attempt is made. Similarly, there is a need to captive-breed and
reintroduce the Great Indian Bustard in suitable areas in Rajasthan, Gujarat and possibly
Madhya Pradesh. However, before this is done, a feasibility study needs to be done for
each area. Investigations and research also needs to be done to evolve techniques to mass
capture, translocate and rehabilitate certain species like the nilgai, blackbuck and wild
pig.
128

There are some well-managed PAs (e.g. Corbett, Kaziranga, Periyar, etc) where data on
major vertebrate fauna have been collected for many decades. Many PA managers also
keep scientific information. Each DFO/RFO/Forester keeps a daily diary, sometimes with
valuable information on sightings of larger animals, forest fires, poaching cases, etc but
unfortunately, there is no system where this valuable information is also made available
to researchers. Forest officials are required to submit their diaries/records to their
superiors, but these records disappear in the office files or are thrown out after some time.
If a researcher or an institute sends copies of a report/paper to the Forest Department,
they are often not available after some time.
India is one of the largest producers and consumers of fertilizers and pesticides. Except
for some academic research in universities and government institutes, there is no longterm research on the harmful and persistent effect of pesticides on wildlife, particularly
birds, fish and amphibians. Many apparently common bird species are no more common,
especially in farmlands, and many amphibians and fish have declined due to pesticide
pollution of the water systems.

9.9

Ecotourism

The cardinal principle when considering tourism, and all other issues, in National Parks,
Sanctuaries and other protected areas is that in all such areas the conservation interests of
wildlife, both fauna and flora and of their habitats, must be considered paramount. All
other interests must be secondary to this prime and over-riding consideration.
Protected areas are essential for the long-term health of the country as they form what
may well be the only remaining nucleus of biodiversity and an invaluable gene pool.
They must be conserved with that objective in mind. Pristine eco-systems, unmodified by
human efforts are the aim and not creating reservoirs of animals in manicured settings!
Protected Areas should not be viewed as a mere facility for recreation but rather as a site
for preserving an area of natural diversity, including both fauna and flora, that in addition
affords nature lovers an opportunity to observe wildlife in its natural state and to have
communion with nature.
The temptation to develop tourism at the cost of wildlife interests must be firmly resisted.
While it is true that tourism can generate valuable and needed financial inputs to national
parks, wildlife sanctuaries and other protected areas, this must never be at the cost of the
interests of wildlife.
Tourism in PAs has the potential to prevent illegal activities such as illegal felling of
trees, poaching, encroachments, etc. However uncontrolled tourism disturbs wildlife and
even hinders their breeding behavior. Tourism properly regulated can be force for
conservation, and create amongst the visitors on empathy for nature and particularly for
the PA in question, while it is also true that indiscriminate unregulated tourism can
destroy PAs.
In most areas, with only a very few exceptions, all the revenues from tourism go to the
consolidated fund of the State Government and are not available directly to the PA. In
any case the earnings from wildlife tourism are insignificant compared to the amount
spent in maintaining the PAs. Mechanism should be set up for ploughing back the
revenues earned and the PAs should also be in a position to receive donations and
129

assistance from well-meaning NGO’s, institutions, organizations directly rather than only
through the department at the State level.
In view of the fact that the conditions prevalent in different protected areas vary widely
and also change over time, it is essential that the precise tourism practices permitted in
any area be decided after careful consideration of the local situation and then according to
a written and approved tourism plan for the particular protected area. ‘The Tourism Plan’
should be a distinct section of the ‘Protected Area Management Plan’. Tourism activities
–those permitted and those prohibited- should therefore not be left to the whims of an
individual PA manager but should as a matter of policy be prescribed in the Management
Plan and be known to all. If there has to be changes from time to time, they should be
well reasoned and not sudden.
Tourism zones should be clearly defined. The Tourism Plan must also be revised and
updated periodically. No new tourist facilities and complexes be established where a 5
km radius of a PA without the prior approval of the State Wildlife Board.
Development around the protected area, particularly in the buffer zone, must be to protect
the eco-system and as far as possible to exert a centrifugal pressure on human populations
in the area. Steps that serve to attract a population to these sensitive areas are not in the
long-term interest of the PA.
Tourism does not occur in Protected Areas alone but is also a feature of other forested
areas, particularly those located in mountains near hill stations, along trekking routes and
around water bodies. In such situations too the authorities must take steps to educate the
public about being eco-sensitive, to avoid damaging natural flora and to ensure that there
is no fire hazard caused by their careless picnicking.
There is an especial category of visitors to several protected areas that need particular
attention. Pilgrimages to very well known and deeply revered sites impinge on several
protected areas where literally thousands of pilgrims go to temples and other sites within
PAs. Fortunately, the biggest influx occurs annually on pre-determined anniversaries, so
special arrangements can be made. Some of the best known are the annual pilgrimage to
Sabrimala in the Periyar Tiger Reserve, to the fort in Bandhavgarh by the Kabir Panthis,
in Sariska to the ancient temples. Even in Ranthambore the temple in the fort on the hill
attracts vast numbers of worshippers. Many, if not most PA’s have a temple associated
with it and worshipers do want and need access. Keeping in mind the religious sentiment
of the people and the long-standing tradition of allowing access, it is not practical to cutoff access to these sites. However, it is important that the park and forest authorities
ensure that traffic is regulated and the safety of both wildlife and pilgrims is ensured.
Permitted periods and routes can be delineated and public awareness enhanced to make
the annual event eco-sensitive. Religious bodies and NGOs can be usefully harnessed to
be a force for conservation. The aim should be to not only protect the PA and wildlife,
but to try and send back pilgrims as a force for conservation.

9.10 Mitigating Man-Animal Conflict
Man-animal conflict is going to be the most important issue that will threaten wildlife in
India in the coming years. With over 60% of the world’s tigers, 65% of its elephants,
80% of the Asian rhinos and 100% of Asian lions, the country is home to a large number
130

of the world’s mega-fauna. It is also home to over one billion human beings. Large
animals need space to live, move, breed and feed. Inevitably, with fast shrinking habitat
they come into conflict with human beings. This is accentuated by human development
unthinkingly cutting into their migration paths, breeding grounds or core habitats.
Conflict will be most acute when both animals and man first come into contact i.e. a new
road cutting through a park, new settlements coming up in forest. There can be no more
poignant example than the 11 elephants that were poisoned in 2001 in the reserve forests
around Nameri Wildlife Sanctuary in Assam due to illegal encroachment of forest.
Conflict will reduce either if the animal components have diminished in a landscape to an
extent that there is no problem or if well thought out conflict mitigation measures that
involve landscape level planning and local site level implementation, is put in place. In
most cases, be it with elephants in North Bengal, leopards in Maharashtra or the western
Himalaya, blackbuck in western India or nilgai in northern India, the final solution lies
only in land use planning and implementation. Interim solutions include putting up
barriers between man and animal, shifting problem animals or illegal encroachers out of
conflict areas, etc. The current issues can be considered by looking at the three major
species specific conflicts that occur in India involving elephants, carnivores (especially
big cats) and ungulates, although, monkeys and bears also cause high levels of conflict in
urban and Himalayan belts, respectively.
a) Elephants are large, migratory beings that require large habitats connected by wellestablished movement paths, which when they lie outside the habitat and when they
connect two strips of habitat are called corridors. Broadly, man-elephant conflict can
be addressed and mitigated in four ways: (1) Introducing barriers such as trenches,
fences or repellants such as crackers, watcher squads etc between the elephant and
man (2) Change in cropping patterns around elephant areas to include non-palatable
crops i.e. diminishing of attractants (3) Securing corridors of elephant movement (4)
Culling or capture of rogues and problem herds. The first method is the most often
used for temporary alleviation and when using this it is important to see that barriers
do not impede migration, as this will only increase conflict and is used largely to
enclose human settlements rather than fence elephant habitat. The second and third
are extremely important long-term measures that need to be done for any semblance
of a permanent resolution of the problem. The last method should only be used in
case of identified and established rogue animals and in such cases, mercy killings are
warranted. Capture of elephants should not be encouraged as it increases aggression
and conflict in the herd and because the overall utility of elephants in captivity is
decreasing in the modern context.
Capture of entire problem herds could be
attempted as has been done in Sri Lanka, but the question then would be as to where
could they be translocated to.
b) Large carnivores (especially big cats): The emphasis should be on leopards and in
certain areas tigers, or wolves. The critical fact to consider here is that on most
occasions such conflict is due to lack of the correct sized prey, the increased
familiarity of the animal to man and a lack of understanding of wildcat or canid
biology. Prey-base is the most important factor to consider for ameliorating such
conflict. Local subsistence hunting is what normally depletes such prey-base and this
should be stopped. Problem animals, if identified as threats to human life, must be
eliminated and not caught and kept in captivity. Translocation of animals must be
131

done after obtaining adequate knowledge of species biology. This may be done under
strictly scientifically monitored manner only and in case of big cats with an essential
pre-requisite of radio-collared monitoring.
c) Ungulates: There is recurring and severe conflict between crop grazing ungulates
that live in proximity of human beings such as the nilgai, blackbuck, etc., in many
parts of India. The emphasis should be on protection of crop using intensive
protection methods during peak raiding periods This should be a priority wildlife
conservation measure as crop damage is driving local people into poisoning
indiscriminately, sometimes leading to casualties of humans, livestock and much
more endangered animals. Conflict must therefore be viewed as a very important
threat to wildlife in the current scenario. A very appropriate measure would be to
develop alternatives to the current cropping pattern, involving agriculture
experts/institutions and taking into consideration the animal/bird species that are
causing the major damage in a given area, the soil and climate suitable to the crops
suggested as alternatives, their profitability, etc. For instance, it is known that crops
like chillies, “jeera”, “karela” and aloe vera are not damaged by blackbuck and others.
Lack of compensation or delay in the disbursement for the damage causes to the life and
property by wild animals, is another cause for the animosity against PAs and species.
Compensation could be divided broadly with two categories – for death of a human being
and secondly death to livestock and damage to crops and other property.
Normally, it takes weeks, if not months before compensation is paid and that too often
after paying a bribe to expedite payment. The compensation amount is frequently very
meagre and retribution comes by way of poisoning of carnivores, electrocution by
dangling live wires, trapping or outright killing.
An example could be had from the endeavor of the tiger conservation programme of
WWF-India under which arrangements were made to reward anyone bringing news of a
carnivore kill, making compensation payment within the day if possible and then having
paid full compensation of the value of the animal, to be decided by the elders of the
affected village, taking possession of the kill and then allowing the killer to have its food.
This would prevent the concerned predator from hunting again, of the “kill” being taken
away, and prevent the kill from being poisoned, as it would be watched over by a
nominee of the people and being paid for it. The most important impact of the efficacy
of the system was that not one tiger or panther was poisoned in the vicinity of the Corbett
National Park despite over 1500 livestock having been killed, over a period of about 15
months.
Human kills should be compensated even more expeditiously, but they are not.
Attempts have been made to insure crops against damage by wild animals. The
commercial banks, however, are very reluctant to insure. This needs to be pursued and
an acceptable formula for crop damage insurance needs to be worked out.
Paying compensation by government for damage caused to crops by wild animals such as
the elephant, wild pigs, or blackbuck, is very problematic and involves on spot inspection
and assessment of damage, to be done by the “lower” staff, and numerous complaints of
corruption have occurred. . It was attempted in Meghalaya for two years, but was given
up for the expenses of almost 60 lakhs in compensation it was causing.
132

9.11 Ex-situ Conservation
The priority of conservation must overwhelmingly be upon in-situ conservation, as
thereby protection is accorded not only to species as naturally evolved in biotic
communities, but in the process, habitats, ecosystems, biodiversity and wilderness itself
are also protected. Nonetheless, with the threat of extinction facing so many species of
flora and fauna, especially micro fauna, ex-situ conservation assumes increasing
importance.
The guiding principle should be that no living species however insignificant or useless it
may appear to be, should be allowed to go extinct. There are two methods of insuring this
as a safeguard against extinction in the wild.
a) Propagation in captivity, and
b) Gene bank preservation of genetic material/ and cloning/resurrection of the species
that may have gone extinct.
As regards (a) above, India has a large number of zoos and safari parks, some owned by
the government, others by municipal and other bodies. Almost universally the upkeep and
management is well below acceptable standards. Furthermore, instead of complementing
in-situ conservation, zoos and safari parks are a drain upon it. Capture of wild specimens
for zoos has now luckily stopped, but unhygienic conditions prevalent in zoos result in
almost universal infestation of animal diseases like TB, which precludes the possibility of
captive animals being released into the wild for the danger of contagion to wild
populations. Besides, to give one example, the Chatbir Zoo of Haryana consumed over
80% of the State’s outlay on wildlife, thereby eating into the capital that could well have
served the fund-starved PAs and other in-situ conservation efforts in the State, and in the
process they had over 40 tigers which were of no conservation use and over 80 lions of
mixed Afro-Indian strain, which were worse than useless from the wildlife standpoint.
Zoos must also serve as centres for arousing empathy for animate beings and a love for
and interest in the nation’s fauna, and not just places for recreation. Our zoos have failed
on this account as well. Happily, with the establishment of the Central Zoo Authority of
the Government of India, things are improving.
In the context of (b), it may be appropriate to mention the case of the Indian or Asiatic
cheetah (Acinonyx jubatus venaticus), which is the only large Indian mammal that has
gone extinct in the last hundred years. Project Tiger has proved that under the aegis of a
mega species like the tiger, its prey species and diverse habitats can also be saved. The
reintroduction of the cheetah – through cloning of the Asiatic race with genetic material
derived from Iran – would arouse great interest and pride. This project is vital not only
for this superb animal, but for its endangered prey species and its arid and semiarid
habitats, which are fast depleting. If genetic propagation of the Asiatic race poses too
many problems, introduction of the African cheetah from Namibia is also a possibility.
Biotechnology as a science has perhaps the greatest potential for providing health,
sustenance and well being to mankind, in the face of exponential population increase.
Genetics play a major role in this science and, from the economic standpoint, the most
valuable gene pools of all are the wild counterparts of species domesticated and
133

cultivated by man. The human race has a terrible track record of depleting, degenerating
and making extinct the wild counterparts of the species , both floral and faunal, that it has
domesticated and used. The wild dromedary and the Kouprey, the progenitor of our
domestic cattle, are but two examples. Ironically, however, nobody takes any notice. The
syndrome continues in India and no one seems even to notice.
The wild buffalo (Bubalus bubalis) is a classic example of “genetic swamping” of the
living dead. There are more domesticated buffalo in the world than all the other livestock
species put together. The wild animals are far larger than their domesticated brethren, and
the foetus of a calf sired by a wild bull is so large that mortality of the mother is a
common feature during birth. The wild buffalo from the human welfare viewpoint is
perhaps the most valuable wild animal in the world. There are now possibly no true wild
buffaloes outside India.
In India, in the recent past, they occurred only in Assam and Chhattisgarh; and in Nepal
only in the Kosi Tappu Sanctury. The ones in Kaziranga got degenerated in past decades,
as did the Kosi Tappu population. Manas Tiger Reserve in Assam had the largest
surviving “pure” wild buffalo. But no more. Genetic degeneration has changed the
composition of the entire population. The malaise has started affecting the remnant
population in the Udanti sanctuary in Raipur. There are perhaps less than 30 true wild
buffalo left in the world, severely pursued and harried in the insurgent – controlled
Indravati National Park in Bastar. The Government is at present not even contemplating
a serious programme to save the genetic purity of this magnificent animal.
The progenitor of the domestic fowl is the red jungle fowl, another most “valuable”
genetic resource for man. But here too crossbreeding with domestic fowl has started and
the wild counterparts are being affected. Interbreeding is also occurring amongst wild
and domestic pigs. In the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, the survival of the indigenous
and ecologically adapted Andaman pig (Sus scrofa andamanensis) as a wild taxa is under
threat.
Wild mangoes perhaps exist nowhere in India except in the Satpura National Park in
Madhya Pradesh. Wild citrus, wild rice and others are also threatened by genetic infusion
from domestic counterparts.
A special survival strategy will have to be worked out to save the remaining truly wild
buffalo on the highest priority. Domesticated chickens and pigs should not be allowed
within National Parks and efforts need to be made to segregate the wild and domestic
stocks of these two animals.
Genetic material will have to be kept of the pure wild buffalo, if any do remain by the
time this action is initiated, to someday revive the species in a test tube. The same is true
of many gravely endangered faunal and floral life forms.

9.12 Recovery of Endangered Species
There are a number of species of fauna and flora, listed under Schedule I of the Wild
Life (Protection) Act, 1972, which are critically endangered. They need to have special
recovery plans prepared to ensure their recovery and to prevent extinction, local or total.
Under these individual plans, which need to be revised every five years or so, the
134

prevalent status and distribution of the species, its coverage under the PA system and
which prominent habitats are left out of it, the threats, etc., would be assessed. The
concerned States, assisted and motivated by MoEF, would be responsible for the
implementation. Species covered under special projects like Project Elephant etc., need
not have such recovery plans
The Indian Wildlife Protection Act has various schedules and species/taxon are included
in different schedules depending upon threat levels. However, there is a misguided
tendency that as soon as anyone suggests to the MoEF to include a particular taxon in
Schedule I (mostly without any basic information), the MoEF obliges. The MoEF and the
State Forest Departments think that just by including a species in Schedule I or Schedule
II, their responsibility is over and the species is safe. It is suggested that this tendency to
include every species in Schedule I should be stopped. We further suggest that detailed
status and threat assessments of each species and taxa should be done by experts and only
on the basis of their opinion species should be included in various schedules.

9.13 Relocation and Rehabilitation of Species
Relocation and rehabilitation of species is done mainly for three reasons. Firstly, to
translocate excess or troublesome individuals and groups of species (which has been dealt
with under item 5.12), secondly, to reintroduce species locally made extinct or to
augment populations rendered critically low, and thirdly to rescue temporarily displaced
individual wild animals.
As regards the first category above, while it may be necessary to destroy individual
animals that may be dangerous to human life, the option of translocation and
rehabilitation should be explored in the case of animals harmful to human property. Only
where such an option is not feasible should the option of destruction as vermin or
permanent captivity, be undertaken. It must be borne in mind that while there may be
excess of certain species in some parts, the species is not surplus everywhere in its habitat
in the country. An example in point is the nilgai. It could be translocated to many PAs
where it could augment the prey base of the tiger. It could be introduced in the KunuPalpur Sanctuary in Madhya Pradesh where shortage of prey is one of the factors
hampering the re-introduction of the lion. The proposal of the re-introduction of the lion
in Kunu-Palpur has also been delayed greatly and the process must now be expedited on
a priority basis.
The techniques of mass capture, translocation and rehabilitation of herds of animals as
social units, especially of “bothersome” species like the nilgai, blackbuck and wild pig,
have not been developed as yet in India. This, despite the WII having been assigned this
special task and the Southern African countries who are the world leaders in this field,
having offered India their expertise. The MoEF and WII need to take up this work
urgently and evolve techniques which are suitable to India for mass capture, translocation
and rehabilitation, and then pass on the techniques to the State Governments, who can
then establish special units for this purpose. In this endeavour, captured animals must not
be kept captive unduly long or to contact pathogens which are the bane of our captive
animals.
In the case of reintroduction of the second category above – i.e. where they have become
locally extinct or greatly reduced in numbers – it must be first ascertained, through a
135

detailed analysis, as to the reasons for the local extinction or severe reduction and what
needs to be done to overcome these constraints. Only when these deleterious factors have
been overcome should the reintroduction be carried out. The individuals/herds so
reintroduced, need to be constantly monitored.

9.14 Genetic Degeneration
A most insidious and overlooked aspect of loss of biodiversity and the extinction of gene
pools in the wild, is the inter-breeding between wild species and their domestic
counterparts. This is particularly relevant in the case of the wild buffalo (Bubulus
bubalis), the red jungle fowl (Gallus gallus gallus) and the wild pig (Sus scrofa). There
are more domestic buffalo in the world than any other domestic livestock, but surviving
wild population of pure wild buffalo is perhaps restricted to the relict, isolated groups
totalling less than 30 in the insurgency plagued Indravati National Park in Chhattisgarh,
and a few individuals in the Udanti Sanctuary in the same State. The red jungle fowl,
with the grey one (Gallus sonnerati), is the progenitor of all domestic fowl, but studies
have revealed that inter-breeding between the domestic fowl and wild red jungle fowl has
occurred to a far greater extent than believed, with the consequent loss of the wild genetic
resource. The ubiquitous domestic pig is breeding with the wild specimens, with the same
result. In the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, they have their own indigenous races (Sus
scrofa andamanensis, etc.). Thus, genetic “swamping” may well now cause the very
extinction of these isolated indigenous races on which the local tribes, like the Jarawas,
depend for their protein intake.
The intrinsic value of these wild genetic resources as the counterparts of the country’s
most common domesticated animals and birds is incalculable. Yet no attention is being
paid to this loss of biodiversity so important to human welfare.

9.15 Restoration Ecology
During the last 100 odd years, massive plantations of exotic trees have taken place, all
over India. Sometimes prime forest was cut down to plant fast-growing, commercial
timber and fuelwood trees. However, during the last 10 years, the Forest Department has
stopped or curtailed growing such exotics in protected areas. There are many protected
areas where these exotics or introduced species have matured and are ready for
harvesting (e.g. teak and eucalyptus in Dudwa National Park in Uttar Pradesh,
eucalyptus, pine and Acacia mearnsii in Mukurthi National Park in Tamil Nadu, teak
again in Buxa tiger reserve, etc.) but due to the national park status of the sites, the State
Forest Departments have not harvested them.
At the same time, trees growing outside forests (TOFs), including farm forestry, play
more important role in meeting national timber requirements than government forests.
Present level of availability of timber is more from TOFs than government forests.
Productivity is much higher and cost of timber production is much lower under farm
forestry, as compared to forests (natural forests as well as plantations).

9.16 Involvement of the Military and Paramilitary
Armed and paramilitary forces deployed on the nation’s borders have effective control
over vast habitats that are critical to a number of montane and other species. Their active
involvement in the conservation of these areas would not only prevent poaching by these
136

personnel themselves as has been the case in the past, but will prevent poaching and
habitat degradation by others, prevent illegal transit of wildlife products and will provide
periodic data to the wildlife authorities concerned as to the status and distribution of a
large number of taxa about which very little is known. Similarly, if sensitized, the Air
Force and the Navy could also be of invaluable help in this regard, to both carry out
surveys in remote areas and to prevent illegal traffic in wildlife products.
The Army has set up a special unit called the Environment and Ecology Cell, which deals
with conservation aspects. It has been in touch with the MoEF for a number of years. It
would be appropriate if MoEF, the cell and concerned State Governments work out
collaborative projects in different selected areas for long-term conservation efforts,
involving strict protection of areas and species, especially endangered species, their status
surveys, and the prevention of the passage of illegal wildlife trade.
The Indian Army today is one of the largest landholders in the country with
establishments located in different ecosystems and biogeographic zones. Their locations,
deployment, and nature of duty, binds them with land and nature. Today, the real estate
of the Army comprises 62 cantonments, 192 military stations, depots/training
establishments, maneuver areas, firing ranges and military farms.
The Indian Army is deployed in many areas rich in ecological diversity, like the Rann of
Kutch, the Thar Desert, the length and breadth of the Himalaya, the tropical rain forests
of northeast India, the Western Ghats and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands. This and the
fact that the bulk of the manpower is recruited from rural areas, gives the jawan an edge
in understanding nature and the intricate web of life. The very organizational structure,
training, motivation, discipline inter-communications and mobility, make the Army
ideally suited for environmental protection, when not otherwise employed on the prime
task of national security.

9.17 Recommendations
[111] A serious attempt must be made to rationalize protected area boundaries by
implementing the recommendations of the committees appointed for this purpose
earlier and taking up work in states where there may be no such reports. The
leadership and funds must come from Ministry of Environment and Forests. In
lieu of the areas that would be excised from the protected areas in pursuance of
this effort, the states on their part would add other larger human settlement-free
habitats to the protected areas concerned, or to others, within their states. There
must be a quid pro quo, with the approval of the Supreme Court. By this exercise,
a large number of human settlements on the periphery of the protected areas
could be excluded, some huge protected areas which are only on paper like the
Solapur Sanctuary in Maharashtra and the National Chambal Sanctuary between
Rajasthan and Madhya Pradesh, could be made practical and effective, as
smaller sized protected areas. In lieu, other larger trouble-free areas could be
added to the protected area system, the caveat being that dereservation of
inhabited areas from protected areas to be only done after the areas chosen to be
added to the protected area system in lieu of those dereservations, would be first
notified as protected areas
[112] In keeping with the Supreme Court directives, after undertaking a rationalization
of park/sanctuary boundaries, those rights that need to be acquired should be
acquired and those rights in sanctuaries that can be allowed to be exercised
137

[113]
[114]

[115]

[116]

[117]
[118]

[119]
[120]

keeping the long-term conservation of that sanctuary in view, should be allowed
to continue as per the provisions of the Wild Life (Protection) Act.
In keeping with the 2002 Amendment of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, parks and
sanctuaries should be regarded as final and wherever legal action still remains in
view of the said amendment, it should be completed in a time-bound programme.
Though it would not be feasible to relocate all the human settlements that would
still remain in the protected areas, certain settlements that are particularly
problematic because they are in the middle of the protected areas or occupying
some crucial habitat, could be motivated to move out voluntarily. The best
solution would be to give resident communities a choice of degraded forestland
away from the protected area (if non-forest land is not available) and more land
than they would surrender, grants for building houses and all facilities that would
be available under the National Policy on Resettlement and Rehabilitation, 2003.
Non-government organizations must be involved to monitor the requirements of
the people and a generous package must be provided. The land must come from
the state governments, the resettlement costs from the Government of India, and
no ‘Net Present Value’ would be calculated for the forestland to be allocated. The
cost of translocation of villages from protected areas would thus be far lower
than that projected (e.g. 3200 crores for 273 villages cited by the Tiger Task
Force, 2005) and not all villages are required to be relocated from the protected
areas. This work of translocation must be accorded very high priority and the
central government must provide the funds in a phased manner,
A clear reason for the establishment of a protected area be established from the
outset, i.e. conservation of endangered species, representative wildlife habitat;
tourism; catchment area protection of a dam, etc. Every protected area should be
given a clear mandate and necessary conservation measures should be taken up
with that mandate in mind. The protected area manager should be judged whether
that mandate has been achieved, and not by taking easy conservation options.
New protected areas should be established in consultation with local people.
Protected area managers do not have a clear mandate, vision and priorities vis-àvis the protected area they are in charge of. Most protected areas do not still
have management plans. This combined with the protected area manager’s lack
of knowledge and commitment leads them to undertake “development” of their
protected area through construction activities like road building, constructions,
watch towers, etc, which are often uncalled for and even detrimental to
conservation.
Each protected area should have a comprehensive management plan, which
needs to be followed and revised periodically
The State Governments must forthwith stop illegal activities banned under the
Wild Life (Protection) Act, such as the continued exploitation of protected area
areas for commercial or other purposes, including collection of tendu leaves, sal
seed, harra and mahua fruit, etc.
The financial outlays given to protected areas, and to nature conservation and
control of illegal wildlife trade, need to be substantially enhanced.
A system should be developed where important records are maintained for
posterity in each district/state. Here, proper training to record accurately and
scientifically becomes important. A protocol for data maintenance, storage and
retrieval should be devised. Each protected area should also develop a library
where research reports and papers are maintained.
138

[121] A concerted effort be made to identify which sanctuary or portions thereof can be
upgraded into a national park, where human habitations or rights do not exist or
where they need to be acquired on a priority basis.
[122] Whenever possible, protected areas should have linkages with other protected
areas and habitats by extension of the protected areas over the corridors – either
as national parks or sanctuaries and where that is not possible by establishing
Conservation Reserves or Community Reserves. Tree cover over these identified
linkages may also be achieved by encouraging and actively supporting van-vaniki
and farm-/agroforestry on private lands. Such linkages be given adequate onground protection and ecologically harmful activities in these areas be restricted
and regulated.
[123] Linkages between management actions in protected areas falling in the same
biogeographic region must be kept in mind at all times.
[124] In all endeavors and decision making related to wildlife tourism, the axiom would
be that tourism must be in consonance with and subservient to the long-term
conservation interests of the protected area, habitat or species it relates to, and
never the other way round.
[125] Entry into the protected area must be regulated according to an assessment of the
capacity of that protected area to absorb vehicles / tourists without impinging on
the interest of wildlife and the habitat.
[126] Besides the designated tourism zone, protected area authorities must choose
alternate ranges to throw open to tourists on a one or two year rotational basis.
In protected areas where there is a heavy rush of tourists, those visiting parks for
longer periods may be refused re-admission to the designated tourism zone and
first offered entry into the alternate range opened for tourism. In areas of low
tourist pressure, the alternate zone may be offered as a choice.
[127] No attempts to develop recreational facilities in the protected area or its buffer
area should be permitted. Park managers must ensure that even private sector
entrepreneurs do not do so.
[128] Existing tourist complexes should be constructed in a way that they merge with
the surrounding landscape and as far as possible use local material
[129] Resorts set up for wildlife and ecotourism must undertake to ensure that at least
60% of their staff and 40% of their salary expenses go to local residents of the
area. This must be rigorously enforced, especially in tribal areas.
[130] A clear reason for the establishment of a protected area be established from the
outset, i.e. conservation of endangered species, representative wildlife habitat;
tourism; catchment area protection of a dam, etc. Every protected area should be
given a clear mandate and necessary conservation measures should be taken up
with that mandate in mind. The protected area manager should be judged whether
that mandate has been achieved, and not by taking easy conservation options.
New protected areas should be established in consultation with local people.
[131] Funds generated by tourism should not go to the public exchequer. Rather they
should go for eco-development of the local communities, especially the tribals. A
special fund should be created for this purpose, as has been attempted in some
states. Donations made by visitors should also go into this fund, which could also
cater to the welfare needs of the protected area staff. As funds given by
Government of India are often kept back by the State Governments, such funds for
individual protected areas could also provide an alternative source or routing
financial assistance.
139

[132] Besides being trained to serve as wildlife guides, local and tribal people should
be involved in anti poaching activities. They should also be encouraged to
develop and improve local handicrafts.
[133] Protected area authorities must train and certify local wildlife guides to
accompany tourists into the park. Any infringement of protected area rules by
tourists must be punished by a suspension of the guide for a week in the first
instance and for six months on subsequent occasions. A similar discipline should
be enforced on vehicles for hire to visiting tourists or even those belonging to
tourist resorts in the area.
[134] Interpretation Centres should be developed to provide visitors with an
opportunity to learn about the local flora and fauna and the role of the protected
area in protecting and conserving the environment and wildlife. These centres can
also be used for training the cadre of guides and motivating schoolchildren and
youth.
[135] Material in the form of user-friendly guidebooks on the protected area’s, giving
maps, flora and fauna and some information on the important rivers and other
geographical features need to be published. They should also include information
on the historical as well cultural importance of the area to make the visit
informative and meaningful. as well as the “dos” and “don’ts” while visiting the
protected areas.
[136] A system should be developed where important records are maintained for
posterity in each district/state. Here, proper training to record accurately and
scientifically becomes important. A protocol for data maintenance, storage and
retrieval should be devised. Each protected area should also develop a library
where research reports and papers are maintained.
[137] The Wildlife Wings and protected areas should be manned by personnel with
interest and aptitude. A sub-cadre needs to be developed for this. This would
ensure the four prerequisites – selection of the appropriate personnel, longevity of
tenure, training and prevention of posting of unsuitable persons. If personnel of
such requirements are not available from the IFS or SFS, they should be recruited
from the open field.
[138] An ecologist must be available on the staff or as an advisor to the managers of
important protected areas.
[139] The protected area managers, and not the territorial authorities of the Forest
Department, should have full and effective control over their protected areas, and
also of their buffers and corridors to the extent possible. Linkages with the local
people should be built up in the buffers.
[140] The Chief Wildlife Warden should have full and effective control, including
financial control, over the protected areas and buffers and over the officers and
staff, which man them.
[141] The Chief Wildlife Warden needs to make entries in the annual confidential
reports (ACRs) of territorial Conservator of Forests, DCFs and ACFs as to the
work done by them vis-à-vis nature conservation.
[142] The duties enjoined upon protected area managers and the Chief Wildlife Warden
under the Wild Life (Protection) Act, needs to be conscientiously carried out in
both letter and spirit.
[143] Training and motivation must be provided to the protected area personnel,
including promotional avenues and cadre management.
140

[144] The forest service as a whole be mandated to combat wildlife crime and undergo
basic level training in this regard. For combating specific wildlife crime
(poaching, trading and smuggling), training be imparted to field wildlife staff,
taking the assistance of specialized technical agencies, governmental or nongovernmental, in doing so
[145] Intelligence gathering be given adequate resources as contingency funds
allocated to the Chief Wildlife Warden and managers of important protected
areas, and special groups of personnel be trained in it and this be budgeted as a
regular part of anti-poaching operations. Wherever possible, special “cells” to
deal with organized illicit trade in wildlife be set up and suitable persons from the
police or other departments be taken on deputation.
[146] To assist the ‘cells’ to curb illicit trade in wildlife products, expertise in wildlife
forensics should be developed in each state, preferably in an established
institution or laboratory equipped with the requisite tools, in collaboration with
the Wildlife Institute of India.
[147] Each State and Regional Deputy Directors of Wildlife Preservation under the
Government of India, should set up computerized database on illegal wildlife
trade and the ongoing cases in court. These would feed a national level database
in the Ministry of Environment and Forests.
[148] The role of non-wildlife agencies in curbing wildlife crime is to be underscored
and they be given adequate mandate, training and incentive to help Government
curb wildlife trade.
[149] All forest protection staff must have group insurance against death, disease and
disability by the state to increase their morale and as a staff welfare measure.
[150] The broad recommendations of the Subramaniam Committee report of 1994,
especially the formation of the wildlife crime unit and the provision of legal
training and support to wildlife law enforcement agencies, be implemented.
[151] Government should enforce CITES more stringently and cooperate more with
other nations in doing so, especially our neighbouring nations, as ultimately this
would be in the country’s interest in preventing illegal trade. Recently, the
Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) has decided to set up a ASEAN
Wildlife Enforcement Network (ASEAN-WEN). Government of India must join
the process and both provide and seek cooperation from this set-up, and endeavor
to establish a similar set-up for South-Asia or South Asian Association of
Regional Cooperation.
[152] There have been numerous instances of wild animals being deliberately
electrocuted by cutting overhead wires, amongst them elephants, rhinos and
tigers. Livestock and humans have also perished. As far as possible, no electric
lines be laid over national parks and sanctuaries and those that exist should be
safeguarded against such vandalism and misuse.
[153] Though two new categories of protected areas have now been recognized under
the amended Wild Life (Protection) Act, namely, Conservation Reserves and
Community Reserves, hardly any new protected area under these two categories
have been established. As demographic restrictions envisaged under these two
categories are far less than in the case of national parks or sanctuaries, a
definitive effort needs to be undertaken by each state to identify and designate
protected areas under these two new categories. The Ministry of Environment
and Forests needs to undertake a survey to identify areas, which have potential
141

[154]

[155]

[156]

[157]

[158]
[159]

[160]

under these two categories of protected areas and need to persuade the States to
establish them, providing financial and other support for the same.
Situations in which biosphere reserves can be set up be delineated and it be
ensured that they follow the principles as laid down in the Man and Biosphere
programme in so far as it is not inconsistent with domestic legislation relating to
conservation and management of natural resources. It would also be useful to
include biosphere reserves within the legal framework, either through a separate
legislation or through its inclusion in the Biological Diversity Act, 2002 or
similar legislation.
Biosphere reserves should not be established in lieu of national parks or
sanctuaries but when due to demographic factors the establishment of a national
park, sanctuary, Conservation Reserve or Community Reserve is not feasible. It
would also be improper to impose a Biosphere Reserve over an existing park or
sanctuary, as that causes a dichotomy and confusion in approach and
management.
Significant wildlife habitats including biological corridors where immediate
declaration as protected area is not possible, be designated as ecologically
sensitive areas (ESAs) under the Environment (Protection) Act, 1986, (EPA) with
a view to restrict certain identified hazardous activities as also change in landuse pattern. Ecologically sensitive areas should also include areas such as
elephant corridors, important bird areas, etc.
Specified areas, including buffer zones of protected areas be designated as
ecologically sensitive areas (ESA) with a view to restrict identified hazardous
activities. This process should be based on a comprehensive and realistic
assessment of the current threat perception in the area surrounding a protected
area. An ad hoc and arbitrary fixation of ESA, such as a blanket restriction, is
likely to be counterproductive and can create hurdles in the creation of new
protected areas (PAs). Control of effluents and emission levels must be enforced
and PA managers must be involved in this control activity.
Since the power to declare protected areas largely vests with the State
Government, similarly, the concurrent power to declare ecologically sensitive
areas should also vest with the state government.
Mitigation measures for man-animal conflict must be both long-term and shortterm. Short-term measures may include barriers after considering whether they
act as barriers to wildlife movement or not, scaring and repelling techniques etc.
Long-term measures must include establishment of animal corridors, elephants
being a priority, attempting alternate cropping patterns around forests and areas
seriously impacted by wild ungulates and having wildlife clearances as a
mandatory part of broader environmental clearances of development projects.
Catching and translocating animals should not be seen as the easiest and most
politically-expedient solution to conflict, although it could be advisable in some
cases) and must be done only after the troublesome animals have been identified,
and when the biology of the species and its needs are taken into account and
monitoring measures are in place. Capture of social beings such as elephants in
particular is counterproductive to conflict resolution, unless whole herds as
social units are translocated. It must be borne in mind that according to the Wild
Life (Protection) Act as recently amended, the capture of Schedule I animals
should only be done after its release area has been identified and the release must
be done in the prescribed time-frame.
142

[161] Compensation mechanisms must be reviewed and schemes put under way in areas
of man-animal conflict. Compensation must be paid immediately and without
hindrance, and it must be commensurate with the damage caused and there must
be transparency in the whole operation. Attempt should be made to have crop
insurance against damage by wild animals around major protected areas.
[162] A very important field of applied research and its extension to field application,
which would greatly assist in reducing man-animal conflict, is identification of
crops, which could be planted around protected areas and elsewhere to reduce
the quantum of crop-raiding by species such as nilgai, blackbuck, wild pigs and
elephants. Needless to say, such crops should be suitable for the area and be
remunerative.
[163] Except perhaps for the tiger, elephant and rhino, there is no long-term monitoring
of most of our endangered species. As birds are easy to monitor and are a good
indicator of habitat quality, long-term monitoring protocols should be developed
for all our protected areas. Universities and non-government organizations
should also take up regular monitoring of birds and other wildlife outside
protected areas. The Government of India should encourage and fund animal and
bird monitoring and migration.
[164] Prioritizations such as that of Rodgers and Panwar (1988)2 and others brought
out by the Wildlife Institute of India, be seriously considered and gaps in the
protection of habitats of endangered species, unique or threatened ecotypes,
deficiency in coverage of biome and biographic representation, or some other
factor, be rectified by adding on such critical areas to the protected area network.
Wherever possible, this should be by establishment of a National Park or
Sanctuary. If it is not feasible to establish any of these two categories of protected
area, then Conservation Reserves or where land is privately owned, Community
Reserves could be established. The help of non-government organizations may be
taken in this wherever considered appropriate.
[165] Ex-situ conservation should start complementing in-situ conservation, both from
the captive propagation and educational standpoints.
[166] It is essential to store genetic material of gravely endangered species in gene
banks, as a safeguard against extinction in the wild, and both the Zoological
Survey of India and the Botanical Survey of India should ensure this. At an
opportune time, not only can the species be regenerated in captive conditions, but
if adequate measures have been taken, can also be introduced into the wild. A
very significant development has been the establishment of the Laboratory for
Culture of Endangered Species (LaCONES) by the Centre for Cellular and
Molecular Biology (CCMB) at Hyderabad, to undertake this important task. All
support needs to be given to LaCONES in this regard to save the genes of
endangered species and to help recover species from genetic ‘degeneration’.
[167] As a very valuable experiment both to restore a locally extinct mega-species and
to conserve its endangered prey-base and habitat, as well as to inculcate national
pride and interest, a serious effort be made to re-introduce the cheetah into the
wild in India.
[168] If any captive reared population of any species is sought to be introduced into the
wild, it must be carefully and clinically assessed to ascertain that they do not
carry pathogens, which could be conveyed to the wild population.
2

Rodgers, W. A., Panwar, H. S. 1988. Planning a protected area network in India. Dehradun, Wildlife
Institute of India

143

[169] Scientific re-assessment of the status of each species/taxon should be done by
experts and thereafter they be reassigned under the Schedules of the Wild Life
(Protection) Act. Such reassessment should be done every five years
[170] All those species that are in Schedule I, the Government of India, with the help of
State Forest Department and experts, should start Species Recovery Plans.
Sufficient funds and expertise should be provided for Species Recovery Plans. The
aims should be that once these Species Recovery Plans are successfully executed,
and the status of the species is improved, it could be down listed to Schedule II or
Schedule III. It should be considered a credit to the Ministry of Environment and
Forests and the concerned state Forest Department that a species has recovered
and is no longer under threat of extinction. For some species it may take 15-20
years to recover, but it should be seen that systems are in place that help the
species to recover. Periodic monitoring of the status of each species would be
very essential. At the same time, if status of a particular species deteriorates, it
should be upgraded to a higher Schedule and a Species Recovery Plan is started.
Even for so-called common species, whose populations are on the decline, there
should be targeted recovery plans, mainly by saving their habitats. An indicative
list of species for whom recovery plans need are a top priority, are: Malabar
civet, hangul, , wild buffalo, Nicobar megapod, Andaman teal, white-winged
wood duck, pygmy hog, greater adjutant stork, Ladakh urial, Gangetic dolphin,
Jerdon’s courser, vultures, and greater one-horned rhinoceros
[171] Project Elephant and Project Tiger have shown that by targeting rare and
flagship species, many habitats and associated species can be saved. However,
there are many species/habitats that are not covered by these two Central
government schemes, e.g. grasslands, wetlands, high altitude mountain, riverine
and marine environment. Certain species and their habitats need urgent attention
of the Ministry of Environment and Forests and state governments to formulate
projects in the fashion of Project Tiger. The snow leopard, the great Indian
bustard, the Gangetic dolphin and the dugong are prominent examples for this
purpose.
[172] To protect the highly endangered great Indian bustard (less than 500 left in the
whole world), lesser florican, Bengal florican and other grassland associated
flora and fauna, Project Bustard should be initiated. As protection of grasslands
would greatly benefit livestock, the Ministry of Agriculture and Animal
Husbandry should also be involved. These bustards are found in at least ten states
of India and therefore, it is vital to develop a centrally coordinated and funded
scheme.
[173] The snow leopard of the Himalaya is one of the most famous flagship species of
the ecosystem where it lives. This ecosystem is also very fragile and coming under
increasing human impact. Most of the rivers of north India originate from snow
leopard habitats, so it is in the national interest to protect and nurture such
habitats. As the snow leopard is found in five states (Jammu and Kashmir,
Himachal Pradesh, Uttaranchal, Sikkim and Arunachal Pradesh), it is necessary
to develop a centrally funded and coordinated scheme called Project Snow
Leopard. An attempt had been made in this direction in the 1980s, but Ministry of
Environment and Forests later merged the scheme with the on- going C.S.S on
development of national parks
[174] The lion has established permanent habitats in the Girnar, along the Saurashtra
coast, Hipavadli in Amreli district and elsewhere. The Government of Gujarat
should declare Girnar as a sanctuary and bring the outlying lion population in
144

[175]

[176]

[177]

[178]

[179]
[180]

Saurashtra within an overall lion conservation programme, and approach the
entire lion populations on a zonal or landscape basis.
India has five species of sea turtles and the world’s largest known turtle breeding
beaches for the Olive Ridley sea turtle (Gahrimatha, Devi and Rushikulya river
mouths in Orissa). Mechanized fishing trawlers have created new problems for
these sea creatures, as they have to come to the beach to lay eggs, sometimes
twice a year. As the turtles found near the coasts of West Bengal, Orissa, Andhra
Pradesh, Tamil Nadu, Kerala, Karnataka, Maharashtra, Goa, Gujarat and
Andaman and Nicobar Islands face various problems, some general and some
site-specific, a centrally-sponsored scheme is necessary to save them. Moreover,
the State Forest Departments are not geared to protect turtle habitats. Only a
long-term central scheme would be effective.
The terrestrial tortoises are today one of the most threatened group of animals in
the country. The commonest species, the star tortoise, is affected by illegal trade.
The Travancore tortoise and the Assam tortoise are gravely endangered due to
habitat destruction and other factors. Recovery Plans are needed for these
species.
The Wildlife Institute of India, in collaboration with countries/organizations
which have the requisite expertise, must evolve techniques suitable for group
capture of species like the nilgai, blackbuck and wild pig. After due testing, the
techniques should be transferred to the states, who should set up special ‘cells’
for such capture and translocation.
Thereafter, locally excess animals and those that are proving to be intractably
harmful to crops and other property, need to be captured, relocated and
rehabilitated where they could be accommodated without causing the same
problems to the local people. In this endeavor, the Government of India should
render financial support, at least in the initial phase.
In this operation, every effort must be made to reduce the trauma and injury and
the chances of contraction of pathogens during captivity. The period of captivity
must be very short.
After careful analysis and overcoming or mitigating the factors leading to local
extinction or reduction, certain species need to be re-introduced in some
protected areas. For this again, special techniques for capture and translocation
need to be evolved. Some examples of this category are the reintroduction of
rhinoceros and the eastern swamp deer in Manas; the gharial in the Brahmaputra
and Beki in Assam; the gaur in Bandhavgarh; the blackbuck in Kanha; the tiger
in Sariska; the wild buffalo from Indravati to Barnawapara in Chhattisgarh or
Kanha in Madhya Pradesh; the hog deer in Corbett National Park; the pygmy
hog in Nameri National Park and elsewhere in Assam and, of course, the lion in
Kunu-Palpur in Madhya Pradesh. Besides, the possibility of introducing the
brow-antlered deer from the captive populations, in Pobitara in Assam, needs to
be explored. This would be a special case of introduction into a new habitat, as its
previous habitats in Manipur are now not viable any more and the total world
population of this taxon is now confined to the Keibul Lamjao National Park in
Manipur. All endeavours must be made to bring back the Siberian crane to
Bharatpur, if necessary, from the more numerous eastern population now
migrating between China and Russia. The need to undertake a re-introduction of
the cheetah in India, after careful study and prior preparation, has been
mentioned elsewhere.
145

[181] The re-introduction of the lion in the designated protected area of Kunu-Palpur
be expedited on a priority basis. The Chairman of the National Board of Wildlife
could request the Chief Minister of Gujarat for the translocation of lions that
have strayed out of the Gir, to the project site of Kunu-Palpur.
[182] Studies be undertaken by the Centre for Cellular and Molecular Biology of
Hyderabad to identify the extent of genetic ‘swamping’ occurring in the current
populations of wild buffalo and in sample areas in the case of the red jungle fowl
and wild pig. The studies also need to identify the surviving populations that can
be termed as truly wild and parameters to judge the wild specimens of these
species.
[183] The same studies should recommend corrective/administrative action to curb the
threat and to retrieve the situation to the extent possible, with special recovery
plans for the wild buffalo and for wild pig in the Andamans.
[184] Investigations leading to practical recommendations, be carried out to prevent
future inbreeding between domestic and wild jungle fowl, pig and wild buffalo,
specially around protected areas
[185] In the interim period, a special effort and plan needs to be undertaken to save the
surviving wild buffalo populations that are apparently least genetically
“swamped” and at the same time the most threatened, in Chhattisgarh.
[186] The Ministry of Environment and Forests and State Forest Departments develop
centres of restoration ecology and to remove exotic species, even from a national
park, after thorough investigation. The Ministry of Environment and Forests
should develop a nodal agency that should look in to this problem and involve
ecologists, conservation non-government organizations and media.
[187] Strict guidelines should be developed for the removal of exotic trees and
restoration of natural habitats. No commercial interest should be involved to
remove exotic trees and they could be supplied first to the local people as per the
provisions of the Wild Life (Protection) Act. However, the money generated from
the sale of such timber should go back to the protected area.
[188] The following species are candidates for priority intervention by the Indian
Armed Forces, Border Security Force Indo-Tibetan Border Police and coast
guards. It is recommended that species programmes be initiated in conjunction
with them for these species:
Northern Command - Ladakh: black-necked crane, snow leopard, Tibetan argali,
ibex, Ladakh urial, Tibetan antelope and Tibetan gazelle; Jammu and Kashmir:
markhor, hangul, western tragopan
Eastern Command: clouded leopard, snow leopard, Tibetan gazelle, Tibetan
argali, and takin; Orissa: Oliver Ridley turtle
Southern Command - Gulf of Mannar: Dugong, corals; Lakshadweep:
Leatherback turtle, hawksbill turtle, giant clams and corals; Andaman and
146

Nicobar Islands: Leatherback turtle, hawksbill turtle, dugong, whales, sharks,
giant clams, Nicobar megapod
Western Command – Gujarat: Dugong and whale shark
Central Command - Musk deer, western tragopan, Himalayan tahr and serow
[189] The Indian Armed Forces can arrange environmental training programmes for
officers and jawans through their Green Governance initiative. Army training
manual on environment can be developed in a structured format, which will then
form an integral part of Army training.
[190] Army, Navy, Indo-Tibetan Border Police, Border Security Force and coast guards
should also contribute in prevention of smuggling of wildlife products along the
borders.

147

Chapter 10

Forests of the North-East
After extensive interactions with the governments of States and Union Territories across
India, the Commission recognizes the distinctive nature of problems and the existence of
a high proportion of forests and biodiversity in Northeast India. As such, a chapter has
been devoted to this area

10.1 Biological Diversity
Special mention needs to be made at this stage of the rich and varied biological wealth of
this region. It is acknowledged to be one of the few ‘Hot Spots’ of biodiversity in the
world.
The conservation of this biodiversity is of great significance for even the economy of
these States, especially when taxonomic findings are better documented; and systematic
studies done of the ecological and economic potential in terms of nutrition, medicine,
organic fertilizers and pesticides, etc. In such a situation, important areas of biological
significance having gene pools of a variety of fauna and flora, often endemic, require
special conservation measures. This has been partially recognized in the declaration of
some areas as Sanctuaries and National Parks and also in the inclusion of several species
in the Schedule-I of the Wild Life (Protection) Act, 1972. The position in respect of the
extent and coverage of these protected areas is brought out in Table 10.1:
Table 10.1: Extent and Coverage of Protected Areas in Northeast India
Name of the
State

Geographical
Area (sq km)

Number of
National Parks
and Sanctuaries

Area in
sq km

Arunachal
Pradesh
Assam

83743

10

9246

Percentage of WLS
Protected Areas to
Geographical Area of
the States
11.00

78438

9

1894

2.41

Manipur

22327

3

227

1.07

Meghalaya

22429

5

421

1.88

Mizoram

21089

4

941

4.46

Nagaland

16579

4

222

1.34

Tripura

10486

4

604

5.75

Total

255083

39

13555

5.31

NP- National Park WLS-Wildlife Sanctuaries

148

Remarks

NP-1
WLS-9
NP-2
WLS-7
NP-1
WLS-2
NP-2
WLS-3
NP-2
WLS-2
NP-Nil
WLS-4
NP-Nil
WLS-4
NP-8
WLS-31

As per the World Conservation strategy, 10% of the land area of the country should be
under Protected Area network. This may not be possible to be adopted for the general
areas of the country because of the high density of population. The population density of
the North-East being generally low and the niches of biodiversity being large, it is
therefore, desired that forest cover of the North-East extending into representative
biogeographic regions and biotic Provinces, should also be to the extent of 10% to 15%
of the land area.

10.2 Land Tenure System and Legal Aspects
10.2.1 Land Tenure System
Northeastern India stands unique in having separate land tenure systems compared to the
general situation in India. Out of the total forest cover of this area, about 35% belongs to
Government under reserved forests, protected forests and protected areas and the
Government have control over it. But the forests of the District Council, village
communities and private ownership in different States of the North-East have different
status and management.
In Arunachal Pradesh, the indigenous people, living traditionally acquire their rights over
as much land and forests as they inherit. Shifting cultivation is practiced on hill slopes on
land owned by the villagers. Traditionally the village is a unit of administration by itself
and the boundaries of the lands belonging to the villagers are very clearly known to the
village elders and these are respected by the neighbouring villages. The Village Council
divides the cultivated lands and distributes them amongst the clans living within the
village, who in turn subdivide them amongst the members of each clan. The right of the
persons engaged in shifting cultivation cannot be transferred to others outside the village
community. Within the same village, the land transfer can take place only with the
consent of the village clan. In case of land that is developed permanently, customary law
demands that the rights can be transferred to any one belonging to another clan or subtribe or tribal group, with the consent of the village clan to which the land belonged. No
land can be sold to non-tribal people.
In Assam, the areas permanently dedicated to forestry have been notified as reserved
forests or proposed reserved forests under the Assam Forest Regulation and District
Council Forest Act. All reserved and proposed reserved forests are well surveyed, well
demarcated and duly notified. The reserved forests constituted under the Assam Forest
Regulation before coming into effect of the District Council Forest Act, are not included
in the 6th schedule of the Constitution. However, these reserved forests in hill districts,
since couple of years back, have been allowed to be managed by the District Council
under scientific Management Plans prepared under the State authority. Generally, no
rights are allowed in reserved forests.
However, there are many encroachments in reserved forest and their magnitude is not less
than 3000 sq km. While legally all such people should be evicted, these encroachments
are continuing due to various reasons.
In Manipur, over 60% of the total forest area is still unclassified. The Manipur Land
Revenue and Land Reforms (MLR & LR) Act 1960, declares that all lands including
forests, mines and minerals, which are not the property of any person are the property of
149

the State. The landowners in their individual lands have permanent and heritable
transferable rights over the land and its use. Land ceiling has been imposed wherein a
maximum of five ha of irrigated land can be owned by a family of five members and for
each additional member of the family 1/2 ha may be owned. The ceiling is 10 ha, in case
of non-irrigated land. This Act also prohibits transfer of tribal land to a non-tribal and
land rights are thus acquired by (1) inheritance (2) transfer (3) allotment of new land by
Government. Transfer of land owned by tribal to a non-tribal may be possible only after
permission from the Deputy Commissioner and consent of the District council. However,
M.L.R. & L.R. Act, 1960 does not apply to hill areas where 70% of the forests are
located. The land tenure system in these hill villages is governed by the customs and
traditions of the tribes that inhabit such areas and these are basically of two broad types
viz. Naga and Kuki. However, there is one common factor, that the rights over land can
be acquired by clearing jungles, in addition to acquisition through inheritance and
transfer.
In Meghalaya, 72.98% of the land of the State falls under community ownership. This
also includes clan land and “rikynti” land, which are not strictly community land. The
rest consist of land acquired by the Government for its establishment and land assessed
for land revenue, which includes towns, bazaar land, homestead land, basti or paddy
lands, etc. The land tenure system is different from district to district and each of the predominant tribal community follows its own traditional system. In the Khasi Hills, one
category of land belongs to the community, and even if a member has a right to occupy a
portion of the land, he has no transferable right. In the second category, land is set apart
exclusively for certain clans, specially the original founders of villages. Such clans enjoy
absolute right of occupancy of the land as well as heritable and transferable rights. In the
Jantia hills, the Government did not recognise private ownership of high lands, but
allowed anyone to cultivate them.
In the Garo hills, there are two types of land tenure systems. In one category i.e. “akhing”
land, the individual families have only temporary right for cultivation. In the other
category, which are basically lands in the plains, permanent cultivation is allowed. All
these lands are assessed for land revenue, the rate of which is fixed either permanently or
temporarily for a period.
In Mizoram, about 51% of the forests are unclassified and 11% of the forest area is
controlled by the District Council. Most of the unclassified forests are owned by the
Village Councils. Parts of these forests are kept as village safety and supply reserves and
in rest of the areas of forests, Jhuming is extensively practised. No systematic survey and
demarcation has so far been carried out in Mizoram. By and large almost the entire forest
areas have been affected in the past by Jhuming; resulting in clearance of primary tree
cover and .leading to degradation of land, except in the southeastern part of the Lunglei
district and southern parts of Chhimtuipui district. Land rights accrue on permanent
occupancy of either agricultural or residential areas, especially in wet rice cultivation,
terraced rice cultivation and fruit plantation in permanent plots. The Jhumias do not have
such rights. The jhum lands being property of village community, the ownership of such
land is shared amongst the community. The ownership during the period of cultivation is
decided by a lottery once in a year.
150

In Nagaland, about 93% of the total forest areas is still unclassified. In most of the tribal
groups immovable landed properties are recognised in four categories. (1) private land
(2) clan land (3) morung land, and (4) common village land. Most of the unclassified
forests belong to any of these categories. The jhum land does not belong to individuals. It
is the property of entire community and the people living in the village. The Naga Jhum
Land Regulation Act 1946, gave the original inhabitants absolute right over their jhum
land and recognised their eligibility for the practice of shifting cultivation, grazing of
cattle, etc. Naga Forest Act, 1968 gives the Government absolute right to carve out forest
reserves and acquire any plot of land for its purpose.
In Tripura, about 29% of the Forest area is still unclassified. In 1960, the Tripura Land
Revenue and Land Reforms Act was passed, which declares that all lands which are not
the property of any person are the property of the State. This Act abolished the
intermediary rights bringing the raiyats into direct contact with the State. The raiyats are
entitled to construct buildings, wells, tanks, etc., and improve the land for better
cultivation. Under this Act, there is also land ceiling based on family size. For a family of
one person the ceiling is 2 ha If a family consists of 5 members the limit is 4 ha In case of
more members in the family, for each additional member 0.6 ha is granted, subject to a
ceiling of 7.2 ha Transfer of land by a tribal to non-tribal is not valid unless the
transaction has the written consent of the Collector.
The rights and concessions in the North-East region also go mostly by tradition and
precedence. There has been little codification of such rights and concessions being
enjoyed by the people of the region, particularly the tribals. There exists a distinct
undercurrent of opinion within the individuals, communities and District Councils to
interpret any order banning the use of land, extraction of forest produce as aimed, at not
only the livelihood security but the ethnic identity and aspiration of the population. Often,
they refer to the Article 371 and Article 244 (VI Schedule) of the Constitution as a
support to their absolute ownership and right to use the land. However, the relevant
clauses in 6th schedule give the local people the right to manage the land and forest
produce and most people in the North-East have been noted to manage the forest
resources in a sustainable manner.

10.2.2 Legal Aspects
The application of Acts of Parliament to the various States in the North-East vary from
State to State, and sometimes from district to district within the same State.
The two main provisions which govern the applicability of Acts of Parliament and the
State Legislature to the Northeastern region are Article 371 and 244 of the Constitution.
In so far as the State of Nagaland is concerned, Article 371 A of the Constitution states
that "No Act of Parliament in respect of:(a)

Religious or social practices of the Nagas,

(b)

Naga customary law and procedures,

(c)

Administration of civil and criminal justice involving decisions according to Naga
customary law and

151

(d)

Ownership and transfer of land and its resources shall apply to the State of
Nagaland unless the Legislative Assembly of Nagaland by a resolution so decides.

Thus, the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 passed by Parliament would not perhaps apply
to the State of Nagaland. It is, however, noted that by way of an executive order, the State
Government has extended the application of the Forest (Conservation) Act 1980 to the
forests declared as “Reserved” vide Notification No. FOR- 58/82 dated 3.7.86. This
covers only 3% of the forest area of the State.
With regard to the State of Assam, generally all Acts of Parliament apply, except as
modified for the Sixth Schedule Areas of Karbi Anglong and North Cachar Hills. Here, it
is specified that the above said District Councils (Sixth Schedule Areas) shall have
among others, the powers to make laws with respect to:
i)
The allotment, occupation or use or the selling of land other than any land which is
a reserved forest, for the purposes of agriculture or grazing or for residential or
other non-agricultural purposes or for any other purposes likely to promote the
interests of the inhabitants of any village or town.
ii) The management of any forest not being a reserve forest.
iii) The regulation of the practice of jhum or other forms of shifting cultivation and
iv) Alienation of land
“Reserved forest” means any area which is a reserved forest under the Assam Forest
Regulation 1891 or under any other law for the time being in force in the area.
It is noted that the State Government of Assam has entrusted the management of even the
reserved forests to the above said District Councils. With respect to the State of Manipur,
a similar provision exists in the Hill Areas of the State. This is governed by the Manipur
(Hill Area) District Council Act, 1971 which empowers the Hill Area District Councils to
control and administer the following matters:
i)
The allotment, occupation or use, or the setting apart of land, other than land
acquired for any public purpose or land which is a reserved forest, for the purpose
of agriculture or grazing or for residential or other non-agricultural purposes or for
any other purposes likely to promote the interests of the inhabitants of any village
or town situated within the autonomous district for which that council is
constituted,
(ii) the management of any forest not being a reserved forest, and
(iii) the regulation of the practice of jhum or other form of shifting cultivation.
However, in the absence of any specific provision in the Constitution, it cannot be said
that the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 does not apply to the State of Manipur, although
in practice the Hill Areas unclassified forests have remained outside the Central Act. In
any event, Article 371 C of the Constitution clearly states that the executive power of the
Union shall tend to the giving of directions to the State as to the administration of the Hill
Areas.
In so far as the State of Mizoram is concerned, it is governed by Article 371 G of the
Constitution for the State and Section 12 B of the Sixth Schedule in so far as the notified
tribal areas are concerned. According to Article 371 G, notwithstanding anything in the
Constitution, no Act of Parliament in respect of,
152

i)

religious or social practices of the Mizos,

ii)

Mizo customary law and procedure,

iii)

administration of civil and criminal justice involving decision according to Mizo
customary law, and

iv)

ownership and transfer of land.

shall apply to the State of Mizoram unless the Legislative Assembly of the State of
Mizoram by a resolution so decides. Provided that nothing shall apply to any Central Act
in force in the Union Territory Mizoram, immediately before the commencement of the
Constitution (Fifty Third Amendment) Act, 1986. In view of the provision to the Article,
the Forest (Conservation) Act, 1980 would apply to the State of Mizoram. In so far as the
Sixth Schedule Areas in the State of Mizoram are concerned, three Councils lie in
Chhimptuipui District and are:
(a)

the Chakma District,

(b)

the Mara District, and

(c)

the Hai District.

They enjoy the same privileges and power as most other Sixth Schedule Areas as
indicated for the State of Assam.
Similar is the case with the States of Meghalaya and Tripura and the Sixth Schedule
Areas within these States.
In so far as the State of Arunachal Pradesh is concerned, all Acts of Parliament apply to
the State.
Border Problems
There are border problems in the North-East, between the following States:
Assam-Nagaland
Assam-Arunachal Pradesh
Assam-Meghalaya, and
Assam-Mizoram
The border problems have mainly arisen out of Notification of boundaries of the
erstwhile State of Assam, both during British Rule and consequently at the time when
reorganization of the North-eastern States took place. These are matters to be sorted out
by the Central Government and the State Governments, as per law and mutual agreement.
The border disputes have resulted in the absence of effective Government control over
the disputed areas which has further resulted in large-scale encroachment and destruction
of forests. In addition, there are problems of illicit felling of timber along the TripuraBangladesh border and of illegal trade in border along the Manipur-Myanmar border.

10.3 Shifting Cultivation
Shifting cultivation (locally called “Jhuming”) which is slash and burn agriculture, is
practiced over a large part of the North- Eastern States and is a traditional practice over
generations. Though reliable figures about the exact extent of jhum land and other related
153

practices are not available, broad estimates indicate that out of the total area of 25.5
million ha of land in North-East, about 3 million ha is under settled agriculture and about
2.7 million ha is under jhum. At any given time roughly about one-sixth of the total jhum
land is under current jhum. It is the tribal population that practices shifting cultivation
and which comprises 80% and more of the total population in the States of Arunachal
Pradesh, Manipur, Mizoram and Nagaland. Approximately 4.5 lakhs families are reported
to be involved in shifting cultivation in the region (Table 10.2). The Ao tribe in the
Mokokchung District of Nagaland reportedly has the best model of shifting cultivation.
The entire area is divided into 10 coups with a 40-year cycle.
Table 10.2 - Shifting Cultivation in Northeastern Region
State

Arunachal
Pradesh
Assam
Manipur
Meghalaya
Mizoram
Nagaland
Tripura
Total

Annual area
under shifting
cultivation

Fallow period (in
years)

700

3-10

Minimum area
under shifting
cultivation one
time or other (sq
km)
2100

696
900
530
630
190
223
3869

2-10
4-7
5-7
3-4
5-8
5-9

1392
3600
2550
1890
1913
1115

No. of families
practising
shifting
cultivation.
54000
58000
70000
52290
50000
116046
43000
443336

As against the figure of 3,869 sq km under shifting cultivation estimated by the Task
Force, State of Forest Report 2003 estimates the area under shifting cultivation as 5,476
sq km., break-up of which has been given in Table 10.3.
Table 10.3 - Forest Cover affected due to Shifting Cultivation (area in km2)3
State
Arunachal Pradesh
Assam
Manipur
Meghalaya
Mizoram
Nagaland
Tripura
Total

Dense Forest

Open Forest

663
272
125
141
351
321
221
2094

262
337
730
543
336
1011
163
3382

Total
925
609
855
684
687
1332
384
5476

There are various theories about the impact of shifting cultivation, which have been
advocated from time to time. These are reflected in the report of Dhebar Commission.
(1960-61), the report of Task Force of the Planning Commission on development of tribal
areas in 1973, the report of the National Commission on Agriculture in 1976, the report
of FAC, UNFPA, 1980, and Task Force on shifting cultivation of the Ministry of
3

State of Forest Report 2003. Dehra Dun. FSI.

154

Agriculture 1983. While in some reports, jhum cultivation has been termed as a
pernicious practice, not only in terms of destroying forest wealth, but also accelerating
soil erosion, in other reports instead of condemning it as an evil practice, there have been
suggestions to regulate the shifting cultivation on scientific lines, so as to limit its
disadvantages and to promote fertility of the soil. However, all the reports have indicated
gradual phasing out of the shifting cultivation by permanent agricultural practices.
In early parts of this century, the jhum cycle used to be more than 30 years, but because
of fall in productivity of the land and increase in human population, the cycle has now
come down to three to six years generally, even though in some of the States in localized
areas the cycle up to 15 to 20 years are still seen. It is this general decline of the shifting
cultivation cycle that has become a threat to the ecology soil stability, fertility and
biodiversity of this region and has become a concern for the States of this region. With
the shortening of the jhum cycle, the land does not have time to recover, even bamboo,
which is the first succession of forest crop after the abandonment of the cyclic Jhum
cultivation does not have adequate time to grow back.
The North-Eastern Council (NEC) with the mandate to help balanced development of the
North-East, started pilot projects in these States during the 5th Plan period for the
settlement of Jhum families to permanent agriculture on developed lands. The pilot
projects started in 1974-75 and were normalized in 1978-79. The average investment per
family for weaning over shifting cultivation to settled cultivation was about Rs.5,000/- to
start with, which increased to Rs. 20,000/- per family in early 80's, Rs.30,000/- per family
in late 80s and about Rs.50,000/- per family currently. However, the total families settled
so far by the process are about 6000 only, against roughly 4.5 lakhs of families involved
in Jhum cultivation.
The evaluation of pilot projects of Jhum control schemes of North-East by the
Administrative Staff College of India, Hyderabad, indicate that the average land area
provided to each family for such settled cultivation is about 1.6 ha minimum being 1 ha
in Manipur with a maximum of 2.2 ha in Nagaland. The work included land
development, soil conservation, irrigation facility, horticultural development and
agricultural input in the form of seeds, fertilizers, etc. With shift to settled cultivation
from shifting cultivation, the requirement of Jhum land per family has come down and
reduction varies from 60% in Manipur to 22% in Meghalaya. In Mizoram the settled
families have stopped Jhum cultivation. A study by the Forest Survey of India indicates
that while there has been an overall decline of shifting cultivation area in North-East by
about 14%, it showed increase in Arunachal Pradesh and significant increase in Assam.
The reason for the schemes taken up for resettling jhumias not showing commendable
progress, has been attributed by the Administrative Staff College of India, Hyderabad in
their evaluation report, to inadequate irrigation facilities, lack of post project period
extension services, technical assistance, lack of communication and marketing facilities
and inadequate land area provided. The general suggestions that have come up to
improve the situation includes proper education and awareness of tribal families,
expansion and extension of irrigation, communication and marketing facilities, better
financial support, proper training and visit programmes, increasing the support period and
agricultural input. There is also reference to the need to increase credit facilities to the
Jhum families and sensitisation of the jhumias to adopt improved agricultural practices,
155

conservation measures, crop pattern as developed by the Indian Council of Agricultural
Research (ICAR), as well as adoption of agroforestry programme wherever possible.
While there is no reference to the gender issues in this context, it requires greater
attention as women are engaged in jhuming in large numbers and look to it for increasing
food security of their families.

10.4 The Dilemma
The forests in this region are amongst the richest in biodiversity in the world and contain
endangered and endemic species of fauna and flora. They are the most extensive in the
sub-continent, yet the areas under the control of the various State Forest Departments are
amongst the smallest. As much as 65% of the land area is covered by forest, extending to
80% or more in the hilly tracts. The land tenure systems are unique and communities and
individuals own the large majority of forests. The forests are not mapped and the
politico-social system is such that if there is any doubt about the ownership of a particular
piece of land or forest, the claims of the community or individual will prevail in the
absence of records. Almost all the hilly tracts with some exceptions as in Sikkim, are
clear-felled and burnt for shifting cultivation, whose felling cycle has now become totally
untenable, reduced from 30 years felling cycle of pre-independence era to 2 to 3 years
now in some cases. All attempts earlier to wean away the people from this selfdestructive practice have not succeeded, though there is now a growing antipathy
amongst the people themselves towards this age-old practice, which is now becoming
increasingly unremunerative.. Forests and their management with the concomitant
practice of shifting cultivation should form the top priority in governance and should
obtain the greatest attention and allocation of resources from the States concerned, from
the Central Government and the North-Eastern Council (NEC). Forests affect the life and
life-styles of a higher percentage of people of each State of the North-East than of any
other State in India. But they receive amongst the lowest priority in both attention and in
financial allocation. To compound matters further, there are boundary disputes between
the States and problems of wood, wildlife poaching and smuggling with bordering
countries of Myanmar and Bangladesh.
A large number of reports and recommendations have been made, but none have been
implemented to any great extent. Amongst the most recent is the report of the Rajamani
Committee (Report of the Expert Committee on North-East, MoEF, June 1977), whose
recommendations this Commission also endorses. Some of the suggestions of this report
are highlighted and augmented below.
Various research organizations like universities and the ICAR Centre at Bara Pani have
been engaged in developing models for different geo-climatic zones, by which the
adverse affects of shifting cultivation could be reduced. These initiatives included :• ICAR three-tier model (experiment by ICAR)
• NEPED (Nagaland Environment Protection and Economic Development (Experiment
by Government of Nagaland)
• Salt models (sloping agriculture land technology (Experiment by EBPIHED)
• SWEET (Sloping Watershed and Environment Engineering Technology (Experiment
by SFRI
156

• Intensive watershed based livestock production system (Experiment by ICAR)
• Modified shifting cultivation practices undertaken by Jhumias with introduction of
cash crops like large cardamom, medicinal plants, broom grass, betel leaf and betel
nut, cinnamon, fruit orchards and orchid cultivation (documented by RCNAEB and
SFRI)
The practice of shifting cultivation leads to large-scale deforestation, soil and nutrient
loss, and invasion by weeds. A great threat to biodiversity is posed due to this practice.
The shifting cultivation practiced on slopes in these high rainfall areas causes downstream siltation of the water bodies. Market forces and change in the social milieu have
led to a reduction in the authority of the community leaders who have not been able to
influence the jhumia families as before, to make the Jhum cycles more viable. Shifting
cultivation has to be made ecologically sustainable, if it is indeed allowed to be
continued. Substituting the prevailing agriculture practice with farm forestry and
horticulture may ensure ecological security in the region. The advantages of farm forestry
would facilitate greater biomass production, reduced soil disturbances and greater
production of fodder and fuelwood. A positive recent development is that the jhumias of
the North-East are themselves coming to realize the increasing unproductivity of shifting
cultivation which is not commensurate with the effort put in and are themselves
increasingly keen to change to alternative means of livelihood. Government must
facilitate this changeover. During a field visit by a member of the NFC, it was revealed
that the villages are not fully dependent on shifting cultivation and a substantial portion
of their income is derived from employment, trade and other sources. The tribal
population mainly depends on renewable resources of firewood, fodder, timber, water
and animal husbandry and is not willing to move out of its natural habitat. These
resources are drawn from the forest patches surrounding the habitations. Productivity
from forests is much higher than agriculture in the hills of northeastern forests.
The Village Forest Committees constituted for the protection and development of the
degraded forests are providing alternate employment opportunities to the tribal. This
initiative can engage some of the tribals away from shifting cultivation. Generating
adequate employment opportunities during the lean season of forestry operations will
also prevent tribals from practicing shifting cultivation. Employing tribals under rural
employment schemes would also divert their attention to an economically viable option
of sustained livelihood. By encouraging cooperative efforts for carrying out forest-based
activities, i.e. basket making, rope making, cane furniture, processing of minor forest
produce, honey collection, etc. may be made commercially viable by providing proper
marketing facilities. This will discourage them from practising shifting cultivation and
help them economically, and assist in the phasing out of the practice of shifting
cultivation.
The total literacy campaign may be implemented to increase the literacy rate. Services of
various NGOs and voluntary agencies, besides the regular government machinery, may
be availed of for educating tribal women and children. The problems of the North-Eastern
States have to be handled with a holistic mission approach where the problems of forests
cannot be dealt in isolation. The issues like employment, agriculture, literacy and poverty
are to be addressed simultaneously with forest management to get a solution.

157

The status of demarcation of forest areas is very fluid and there are instances where
encroachments are legalized to the benefit of encroachers in the absence of appropriate
maps and boundaries available to the SFDs. This leads to disputes in settlement and is
reflected in Working Plans. The preparation of Working Plans and obtaining due
approval from the Government of India also should be done on priority basis. As most of
these States are forest dominated, the scope of other options is limited.
The North-East contains the highest number of endangered and vulnerable plant and
animal species in the country. Eleven species of medicinal plants are critically
endangered, five more are endangered and three are vulnerable. Agarwood and the yew
(Taxus walliciana) are hugely overexploited and all ‘edible’ species including elephants
in two States, are hunted for food or medicine. Poaching for ivory, horn and pelt is on
the increase. The coverage of protected areas in this region is less than 6% of the
geographic area, which is far short of the 10% recommended by the World Conservation
Union for areas rich in biodiversity and low in human population. PA coverage
particularly needs to be extended in Manipur, Nagaland and Meghalaya, which have less
than 2% of their respective land areas under the PA network.
For the safety of settled agriculture and social system, conservation of forest resources in
Assam and Brahmaputra valley is most essential. Only with such conservation can the
area progress towards a positive change. If the nexus between politician, bureaucrat and
contractor goes on developing, as is the case in Assam, Uttaranchal, Himachal, and
Kashmir, then any attempt of development will be diminished and then the exploited
tribal people will try to take revenge. It is, therefore, necessary that the government and
the Indian society at large consider very seriously the problems, resources, possibilities
and difficulties of north-eastern States bordering China, Burma, and Bhutan and have
been peaceful so far.

10.5 Recommendations
[191] The traditional rights of the North-eastern people’s forest and land must be
honoured. They should have the right to conserve, manage and utilize their forest.
[192] Weaning away of the jhumias from shifting cultivation by improved animal
husbandry, horticulture, settled agriculture, apiculture and other appropriate
agricultural and pastoral practices and occupations. In this context, it is
pertinent to note that the Administrative Staff College of India, Hyderabad has
reported (1989) that approximately 4.5 lakh families of this region were
practicing shifting cultivation and that the total cost of weaning one family away
from shifting cultivation was Rs.50,000. This would have made the total outlay
worth Rs. 2,250 crores, which was not too high a requirement if phased over
some 10 or 15 years. The situation may have changed, but a detailed assessment
of the acceptable alternatives and the financial requirements thereof need to be
carried out and given the highest priority in administrative attention and
allocation.
[193] While the process of weaning away people from shifting cultivation must be
encouraged, in the meantime;
a) Increase security of land tenure for shifting cultivators for both the
agricultural and fallow phases by reconsidering the classification of shifting
158

[194]

[195]

[196]

[197]
[198]

[199]

[200]

cultivation areas and categorizing them a agricultural land with adaptive
forest management in the fallow period.
b) Strengthen and capacitate customary institutions for improved local level
governance, management of tribal, community-based natural resources, and
tenurial access and control.
c) Reorient existing credit policies to be sensitive and proactive to situations
where common property regimes apply.
d) Encourage coordination among different government agencies that have
responsibilities for aspects of shifting cultivation especially forestry,
agriculture, rural development.
Propagation and sale of medicinal plants in the North-East would be a very
promising proposition to provide to the land-owner in the region an alternative to
jhuming. A special ecologically sustainable programme needs to be undertaken in
this regard.
Bamboo is the most versatile crop of the North-East and its management and
protection can be best served if the propagation, cultivation, management,
harvesting, value addition and marketing is done through a “mission mode” and
the mandate is with the Ministry of Environment and Forests, Government of
India. Bamboo is a fire-succession plant and grows profusely in the North-East.
There must be facilities for its commercial usage.
Agroforestry is another very viable alternative. But to ensure its success there
should be no hindrance to the harvest, transportation and sale of the produce.
Mizoram has taken up teak plantation on a large scale. But the farmers must be
enabled to extract this tree without waiting for government clearances.
ICAR Centre at Barapani has developed many models for agro-climatic zone
settled agriculture, with horticulture / poultry etc. to make livelihood selfsustaining and remunerative. This activity needs to be encouraged and supported.
The Central Government and the North-Eastern Council must play a much more
proactive role in forest conservation and in the phasing out of shifting cultivation.
This would include greater financial allocations, more schemes for afforestation,
regeneration, eco-development, agriculture, animal husbandry and development
of local arts and crafts.
Village Councils and individuals have donated land for the setting up of parks
and sanctuaries, and in some instances have sold forestlands as well. Murlem and
Dampa in Mizoram, Mehow in Arunachal Pradesh and Nokrek in Meghalaya are
some examples. This trend must be encouraged and the local people should be
associated with the protected areas and must derive economic benefit from them
through tourism, etc. The people of Murlem are prepared to add another 50 sq
km to the Murlem National Park if an alternative road to the village was
developed for them and some eco-development activity was initiated.
Wherever possible, Community Reserves under the Wild Life (Protection) Act be
set up on community lands and sacred groves (called Lyngdohs in Meghalaya)
and the concerned tribal community should be involved in its conservation and
management and a sense of pride in these protected areas should be inculcated.
In this respect;
159

[201]

[202]

[203]
[204]

[205]

A complete inventory of sacred forests in the region should be undertaken. These
should be registered either with the Autonomous District Councils or with the
State Forest Department under the existing Acts and Rules.
The survey for different components of biodiversity in each sacred forest should
be completed on an urgent basis.
The sacred forests should be brought under the protected area network, including
Community Reserves, without altering the land ownership status.
The
interventions, if at all required, as in case of degraded ones, may be designed by
the government agencies jointly with the communities. Due approval must be
taken from the traditional institutions administering the sacred forests, before
initiating such interventions.
There should be an umbrella scheme of the government for conserving the
community forest areas including the sacred forests. Development of adjoining
community forests areas is essential to meet the biomass needs of the community,
thereby reducing the pressure on the sacred forests. Such schemes should be
implemented jointly by the Forest Department and the concerned traditional
institution. Under the scheme, provision should be made for incentives to the
tribal people, who are conserving/preserving the sacred forest
The sacred forests can no more be protected based only on religious beliefs.
Therefore, it is essential to educate the people about the scientific value of such
forests and the conservation ethos should be blended with the religious beliefs.
The diversity of ecosystem services derived from the sacred forests must be
recognized and valuation of such services must be done. The policy for adopting
the ‘user pay’ principle in respect of these services must be developed and the
benefits must be given to the people who are protecting the sacred forests.
In forests, prone to organized or large scale violations or insurgency, special
protection staff or para-military forces need to be deployed to prevent illicit
felling, encroachment, infiltrations, smuggling and poaching, especially on the
international borders and in insurgency affected areas.
The Forest Survey of India needs to be assigned the task of periodically
undertaking detailed remote-sensing of the forest areas and tree cover to assess
qualitative and quantitative changes, including extent of invasion of exotics and
changes in the type of tree cover.
The forest of the various communities, individuals and of the Forest Department
itself needs to be cadastrally surveyed and physically marked and mapped.
Disputed boundaries between the North-eastern States has created problems of
lack of control, resulting in encroachment and illicit felling. Boundary disputes
must be settled as urgently as possible, under the aegis of Government of India
There is illegal traffic of wood, wildlife and forest products between the Northeastern States and Myanmar on one side and Bangladesh on the other. This must
be stopped by the paramilitary forces on the borders.

160

