Chapter 2

Routing Protocols











Keywords Cisco Router RIP Dynamic routing EIGRP Autonomous
system Metric OSPF Single-area OSPF Multiple-Area OSPF ABR ASBR
Stub area IS–IS Integrated IS–IS Load balancing Per-packet load balancing























2.1 How to Configure RIP in a Cisco Router
When would you need this: When you need to implement a routing protocol for a
small network and you need the configuration to be simple. Routing Information
Protocol is the simplest that it can get.
Special Requirements: None.
1. The first thing to do is to enable the RIP protocol on the router.
Router(config)#router rip
2. Identify the networks to be advertised using the ‘network’ command. Using
this command, you need to identify only the networks that are directly
connected to the router.
Router(config-router)#network YOU.RNE.TWR.KID
If the network is subnetted, you will need to write the main network address
without the need to write the subnets. For example, if you have the following
subnets connected to the router (172.16.0.0/24, 172.16.1.0/24, and 172.16.2.0/
24), you can put them all in single ‘network’ command like this:
Router(config-router)#network 172.16.0.0
The router is intelligent enough to figure out which subnets are connected to the
router.

M. M. Alani, Guide to Cisco Routers Configuration, SpringerBriefs in Computer Science,
DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4471-4246-1_2, Ó Mohammed M. Alani 2012

5

6

2 Routing Protocols

3. If you need to adjust the timers (update, invalid, holddown, and flush timers)
use the ‘timers basic’ command. All the four parameters of this command,
update, invalid, holddown, and flush timer consequently, are in seconds.
Router(config-router)#timers basic 30 180 180 240
The example above is set with the default values of the RIP timers. Remember
to keep the relativity of the timer values. Always keep it as (n 6n 6n 8n). If, for
example, you set the update timer to 40, you need to make the other timers 240
240 320 consequently. It is highly recommended that you keep the timers on
their default values.
4. You will need to stop the updates from being broadcasted to the Internet, if one
of the router interfaces is connected to the Internet. For this purpose, use the
‘passive interface’ command. This command prevents the interface from
forwarding any RIP broadcasts, but keeps the interface listening to what others
are saying in RIP.
Router(config-router)#passive-interface
INTTYPE INTNUMBER
where,
INTTYPE is the type of the interface, such as Serial, Fastethernet, or Ethernet.
INTNUMBER is the number of the interface such as 0/0 or 0/1/0.
5. RIP, by nature, sends updates as broadcast. If the router is connected through
non-broadcast networks (like Frame Relay), you will need to tell RIP to send
the updates on this network as unicast. This is achieved by the ‘neighbor’
command.
Router(config-router)#neighbor NEI.GHB.ORA.DRS
where NEI.GHB.ORA.DRS is the IP address of the neighbor.
6. Cisco’s implementation of RIP Version 2 supports authentication, key
management, route summarization, classless inter-domain routing (CIDR), and
variable-length subnet masks (VLSMs). By default, the router receives RIP
Version 1 and Version 2 packets, but sends only Version 1 packets. You can
configure the router to receive and send only Version 2 packets. To do so, use
the ‘version’ command.
Router(config-router)#version 2
If you like to stick to version one, just replace the 2 in the command above with 1.
Furthermore, you can control the versions of the updates sent and received on
each interface to have more flexibility in support of both versions. This is
achieved by the ‘ip rip send version’ and ‘ip rip receive
version’ commands.

2.1 How to Configure RIP in a Cisco Router

7

Router(config-if)#ip rip send version 2
Router(config-if)#ip rip receive version 1
7. Check the RIP configuration using these commands:
Router#show ip route
Router#show ip protocols
Router#debug ip rip

2.2 How to Configure EIGRP on a Cisco Router
When would you need this: When you are implementing a routing protocol on a
large Internetwork and all the networking devices involved are Cisco devices or
devices supporting EIGRP.
Special Requirements: EIGRP is a Cisco proprietary protocol. So, either all the
routers in the Internetwork must be Cisco routers, or the routers should be EIGRP
capable.
Before we start, if you have not set the bandwidth of the interfaces, set them
now. For correct routing decisions, you need to set the bandwidth for the serial
interfaces depending on the WAN technologies that you are using. This is done
using the following command on each serial interface:
Router(config-if)#bandwidth BW
where BW is the bandwidth of the WAN connection in kilobits per second.
Next, you can start configuring EIGRP as in the following steps:
1. Enable EIGRP on the router with the command,
Router(config)#router eigrp AS
where AS is the Autonomous System number. The same AS number must be
used for all the routers that you want to exchange routing information.
2. Instruct the router to advertise the networks that are directly connected to it.
Router(config-router)#network NET.WOR.KAD.DRS
where NET.WOR.KAD.DRS is the network address of a network that is
directly connected to the router. Repeat this step for each network that is
directly connected to the specific router that you are configuring. For subnetted
networks, remember that you need only to write the original network address of
a group of subnets and the router will automatically identify the subnets.
For example, if the router is connected to the networks, 172.16.1.0/24,
172.16.2.0/24, and 172.16.3.0/24, you will need to do one ‘network’ command with the address 172.16.0.0.

8

2 Routing Protocols

3. Although it is not recommended, if you need to change the way the metrics of
the routes are calculated, you can set them using the command:
Router(config-router)#metric weights TOS K1 K2 K3 K4 K5
where,
tos is the type of service index and the values of k1–k5 are used to calculate
the metric using the following equation:


k2  bandwidth
k5
þ k3  delay 
metric ¼ k1  bandwidth þ
256  load
reliability þ k4
the default values are k1 = k3 = 1 and k2 = k4 = k5 = 0
if k5 = 0, the formula is reduces to,


k2  bandwidth
þ k3  delay
metric ¼ k1  bandwidth þ
256  load
It is highly recommended that you leave the metric in the default values unless
you are a highly experienced network designer.
4. By default, EIGRP packets consume a maximum of 50 % of the link bandwidth, as configured with the ‘bandwidth’ interface configuration command.
You might want to change that value if a different level of link utilization is
required or if the configured bandwidth does not match the actual link bandwidth (it may have been configured to influence route metric calculations). Use
the following command to set the percentage of bandwidth to be used on each
interface separately:
Router(config-if)#ip bandwidth-percent eigrp BP
where BP is the percentage of bandwidth to be used (ex: 70).
5. You can change the intervals of the hello packets and the holddown timer on
each interface using command:
Router(config-if)#ip hello-interval eigrp AS TIME
where AS is the autonomous system number and TIME is the new hello packet
interval time in seconds.
Router(config-if)#ip hold-time eigrp AS TIME
where AS is the autonomous system number and TIME is the new holddown
time in seconds.
6. Check your configuration on the routers after configuring all the routers in the
internetwork using the following commands:
To display information about interfaces configured for EIGRP.
Router#show ip eigrp interfaces INTYPE AS

2.2 How to Configure EIGRP on a Cisco Router

9

Display the EIGRP discovered neighbors.
Router#show ip eigrp neighbors
To display the EIGRP topology table for a given process.
Router#show ip eigrp topology AS
Or
Router#show
ip
SUB.NET.MAS.K00

eigrp

topology

NET.WOR.KAD.DRS

To display the number of packets sent and received for all or a specified EIGRP
process.
Router#show ip eigrp traffic AS
where,
INTYPE is the interface type
AS autonomous system number
NET.WOR.KAD.DRS and SUB.NET.MAS.K00 are the network address and
subnet mask.
Configuring EIGRP Route Authentication (Optional)
EIGRP route authentication provides MD5 authentication of routing updates
from the EIGRP routing protocol. The MD5 keyed digest in each EIGRP packet
prevents the introduction of unauthorized or false routing messages from
unapproved sources. Before you can enable EIGRP route authentication, you
must enable EIGRP.
The steps for setting the EIGRP route authentication are:
1. Identify a keychain to be used in the authentication,
Router(config)#key chain NAME
where NAME is the name of the keychain that will be created
2. Identify the key number,
Router(config-keychain)#key NO
where NO is the number of the key
3. Identify the key string,
Router(config-keychain)#key-string STRNG
where STRNG is the key string
4. You can stop here or set up a period in which the key will be effective,
Router(config-keychain)#accept-lifetime START-TIME {INFINITE| END-TIME | DURATION}

10

2 Routing Protocols

Router(config-keychain)#send-lifetime START-TIME {INFINITE |END-TIME | DURATION}
You can set a start time and either end time, or duration in seconds, or you can
leave the operation infinite.
EIGRP Implementation notes:
1. If you are using discontiguous networks, which is mostly the case, you should
turn off auto-summarization using the following command:
Router(config)#no ip auto-summary
2. You can set manual summary addresses using the following command:
Router(config-if)#ip summary-address AS MASK
where AS is the autonomous system number and MASK is the address mask.
3. When you are using non-broadcast networking technologies such as Frame
Relay and SMDS, you will need to turn off split-horizon to let EIGRP perform
efficiently and effectively
Router(config-if)#no ip split-horizon AS
where AS is the autonomous system number.
4. To clear the neighbor table use the command,
Router#clear ip eigrp neighbors

2.3 How to Configure Single-Area OSPF on a Cisco Router
When would you need this: When you need to set up dynamic routing.
Special Requirements: None.
OSPF is one of the most widely used dynamic routing protocols. Cisco’s
version of OSPF is compatible with non-Cisco routers. If your network is large,
jump into Sect. 2.4. Single-area OSPF is suitable for small-to-medium
internetworks. An area is a logical grouping of routers running OSPF. All routers
in the same area share the same topology database. Multiple-Area OSPF is used
for large networks to prevent their topology databases from becoming out of the
capability of the router.
Single-area OSPF configuration is as follows:
1. Since OSPF best route calculations rely solely on bandwidth, you need to set up
the bandwidth of the serial interface involved in the routing process using the
following command on the interface:
Router(config-if)#bandwidth BW

2.3 How to Configure Single-Area OSPF on a Cisco Router

11

where BW is the bandwidth of the connection in kilobits per second.
Remember that this command does not change the actual bandwidth. It only
changes the bandwidth being seen by the routing protocol for the purpose of
best path calculation.
2. Instruct the router to activate the OSPF routing process:
Router(config)#router ospf PN
where PN is the process number of OSPF. This process number is of local
significance. It does not have to be the same on all routers.
3. Instruct the router to advertise the directly connected networks:
Router(config-router)#network NET.WOR.KAD.DRS WIL.DCA.RDM.ASK area 0
where,
NET.WOR.KAD.DRS is the network address of a directly connected network.
WIL.DCA.RDM.ASK is the wildcard mask of the network address.
Since we are setting a single-area OSPF, we will always use ‘‘area 0’’.
4. Repeat step 3 for every network that is
directly connected to the router.
If you finished the first fours steps on all the
routers involved in the process, everything
should work just fine. If you want to do more
configurations, there are a few optional advanced
steps to go through:
1. To change the selection process of the DR
(Designated Router) and BDR (Backup Designated Router) use the following command
to change the router’s OSPF priority on a
certain interface:

Note
If you are not familiar with
the wildcard mask, just
invert the subnet mask and
you will get the wildcard
mask (ex: S/N Mask of
255.255.255.0
becomes
Wildcard
Mask
of
0.0.0.255, S/N Mask of
255.255.255.192 becomes
0.0.0.63)

Router(config)#ip ospf priority PP
where PP is the priority (0–255). The router with the highest priority becomes
the DR. A priority of 0 means that this router will never be elected as DR.
2. To restart the whole process of DR and BDR elections use the command:
Router#clear ip ospf process *
3. To change the cost of a certain link in the OSPF process use the following
command:
Router(config-if)#ip ospf cost CC
where CC is the suggested cost (0–65,535)
For troubleshooting, you can use the following commands:

12

2 Routing Protocols

1. To show the OSPF processes information:
Router#show ip ospf
2. To show the OSPF database of the topology:
Router#show ip ospf database
3. To show the OSPF operation on the interfaces:
Router#show ip ospf interface
4. To show the OSPF neighbors table:
Router#show ip ospf neighbor
5. To debug all the OSPF process events:
Router#debug ip ospf events

2.4 How to Configure Multiple-Area OSPF on a Cisco Router
When would you need this: When you need to set up dynamic routing for a large
network and not all your routers are Cisco routers.
Special Requirements: None.
OSPF is one of the most widely used dynamic routing protocols. Cisco’s
version of OSPF is compatible with non-Cisco routers. If your network is not too
large, Sect. 2.3 describes the steps of configuring single-area OSPF.
As defined in the previous section, an area is a logical grouping of routers
running OSPF. All routers in the same area share the same topology database.
Multiple-Area OSPF is used for large networks to prevent their topology databases
from becoming out of the capability of the router.
When you design the areas and assign them IP addresses, remember to assign IP
addresses that can be summarized. Make sure that all IP addresses in an area can
be summarized into a single address with a different subnet mask. This is very
important in reducing the amount of routing information exchanged between
routers. (This, basically, is the idea behind creating multiple areas instead of one).
Area 0, or sometimes referred to as Backbone Area, will act as the center of the
universe for all the other areas. All areas must be connected to Area 0. On the edge
of each area, the router connected to another area is called Area Border Router
(ABR). If not all areas can be connected to Area 0, there is a solution called Virtual
Links that is discussed later in Sect. 2.5.
Let us move on to the configuration. For the sake of clearness, the ABR router
that you plan to put into area 0 will be called ‘‘Area 0 ABR’’. The ABR at the
border of other areas will be called ‘‘Area X ABR’’

2.4 How to Configure Multiple-Area OSPF on a Cisco Router

13

2.4.1 Configuration of Area 0 ABR
1. OSPF best route calculations rely solely on bandwidth. Hence, you need to set
up the bandwidth of the serial interface involved in the routing process using
the following command on the interface:
Router(config-if)#bandwidth BW
where BW is the bandwidth of the connection in kilobits per second.
Remember that this command does not change the actual bandwidth, it only
changes the bandwidth being seen by the routing protocol for the purpose of
best path calculation.
2. Instruct the router to activate the OSPF routing process:
Router(config)#router ospf PN
where PN is the process number of OSPF. This process number is of local
significance. It does not have to be the same on all routers.
3. Instruct the router to advertise the directly connected networks of area 0
Router(config-router)#network NET.WOR.KAD.DRS
WIL.DCA.RDM.ASK area 0
where,
NET.WOR.KAD.DRS is the network address
of a directly connected network.
WIL.DCA.RDM.ASK is the wildcard mask of
the network address.
4. Repeat step 3 for every network that is directly
connected to the router and is part of Area 0
5. Instruct the router to advertise the directly
connected network of area X
Router(config-router)#network
NET.WOR.KAD.DRS WIL.
DCA.RDM.ASK area X

Note
If you are not familiar
with the wildcard mask,
just invert the subnet
mask and you will get
the wildcard mask (ex:
S/N Mask of 255.255.
255.0 becomes Wildcard
Mask of 0.0.0.255, S/N
Mask of 255.255.255.192
becomes 0.0.0.63)

where,
NET.WOR.KAD.DRS is the network address of the directly connected network
that connects area 0 to area X.
WIL.DCA.RDM.ASK is the wildcard mask of the network address.
X is the area number.
6. Configure the range of IP addresses for the whole area (similar to a summaryaddress):

14

2 Routing Protocols

Router(config-router)#area 0 range NNN.NNN.NNN.NNN SUB.
NET.MAS.K00
where,
NNN.NNN.NNN.NNN is the network address that summarizes all the networks
in the area 0
SUB.NET.MAS.K00 is the subnet mask for the summarized address
This command reduces the size of the topology database, which is important in
the backbone area.

2.4.2 Configuration of Area X ABR
1. As mentioned earlier, OSPF best route calculations relies solely on Bandwidth.
Hence, you need to set up the bandwidth of the serial interface involved in the
routing process using the following command on the interface:
Router(config-if)#bandwidth BW
where BW is the bandwidth of the connection in kilobits per second.
Remember that this command does not change the actual bandwidth. It only
changes the bandwidth being seen by the routing protocol for the purpose of
best path calculation.
2. Instruct the router to activate the OSPF routing process:
Router(config)#router ospf PN
where PN is the process number of OSPF. This process number is of local
significance. It does not have to be the same on all routers.
3. Instruct the router to advertise the directly connected networks of area X
Router(config-router)#network NET.WOR.KAD.DRS
WIL.DCA.RDM.ASK area X
where,
NET.WOR.KAD.DRS is the network address of the directly connected network
that is in Area X.
WIL.DCA.RDM.ASK is the wildcard mask of the network address.
X is the area number.
4. Repeat step 3 for every network that is directly connected to the router and is a
part of Area X
5. Instruct the router to advertise the directly connected network of area 0
Router(config-router)#network NET.WOR.KAD.DRS
WIL.DCA.RDM.ASK area 0

2.4 How to Configure Multiple-Area OSPF on a Cisco Router

15

where,
NET.WOR.KAD.DRS is the network address of a directly connected network
that connects area 0 and area X.
WIL.DCA.RDM.ASK is the wildcard mask of the network address.
X is the area number.
6. Configure the range of IP addresses for all the networks in area X (similar to a
summary-address):
Router(config-router)#area X range NNN.NNN.NNN.NNN
SUB.NET.MAS.K00
where,
NNN.NNN.NNN.NNN is the network address that summarizes all the networks
in the area X.
SUB.NET.MAS.K00 is the subnet mask for the summarized address.

2.4.3 Other Commands
You can use the following commands in troubleshooting:
1. To show the OSPF processes information:
Router#show ip ospf
2. To show the OSPF database of the topology:
Router#show ip ospf database
3. To show the OSPF operation on the interfaces:
Router#show ip ospf interface
4. To show the OSPF neighbors table:
Router#show ip ospf neighbor
5. To debug all the OSPF process events:
Router#debug ip ospf events
If you want more OSPF to configure, jump on to the next Sect. 2.5.

2.5 More about Multiple-Area OSPF Configuration
This article is a continuation of the previous section on Configuration of
Multiple-Area OSPF on Cisco Routers. Refer to the previous section for the
essential configuration of Multiple-Area OSPF.

16

2 Routing Protocols

1. ASBR
A router is called Autonomous System Boundary Router (ASBR) when it
connects the OSPF area to a different autonomous system. This router should be
configured with a summary-address to summarize routes received into OSPF
via redistribution:
Router(config-router)#summary-address
SUB.NET.MAS.K00

SUM.MAR.RYA.DRS

where
SUM.MAR.RYA.DRS is the summary-address for the summarized subnets
SUB.NET.MAS.K00 is the subnet mask of the summarized address.
This command is usually issued at the router connecting the internetwork to the
Internet.
2. Stub Areas
Stub areas in OSPF are areas where only one ABR is there, or where co-located
ABRs exist. For this kind of areas, the following configuration can be made to
reduce the routing traffic between the ABRs:
Router(config-router)#area X stub
where X is the area number.
This command should be issued on both ABR; the stub area ABR and the
Area 0 ABR that is connected to the stub area. If more than one router exists in
the stub area, the previous command needs to be issued on all routers of the
stub area.
Usually, if there is only one router in the stub area, instead of defining all
directly connected networks, the following command is used:
Router(config-router)#network 0.0.0.0 255.255.255.255
area X
where X is the area number.
3. Virtual-Links
By design, all OSPF areas must be connected to Area 0. If there is an area that
cannot be directly connected to Area 0, you will have to use a Virtual-Link.
Remember that despite the fact that configuration of the virtual-link is simple,
many things can go wrong in a virtual-link, and it is not a recommended
solution.
To implement a virtual-link between Area 0 ABR and Area X ABR (where
Area X is not directly connected to Area 0), we need to create logical loopback
interfaces on both routers and link them together:
On Area 0 ABR:

2.5 More about Multiple-Area OSPF Configuration

17

Router(config)#int loopback 0
Router(config-if)#ip address ARE.A0L.OOP.BCK SUB.NET.
MAS.K00
Router(config-if)#exit
Router(config)#router ospf PP
Router(config)#area X virtual-link ARE.AXL.OOP.BCK
where,
ARE.A0L.OOP.BCK is an IP address that you assign to the logical interface of
Area 0 ABR. This address will be used by the Area X ABR to connect virtually.
SUB.NET.MAS.K00 is the subnet mask that you assign to the logical interface.
PP is the process-id of OSPF on the Area 0 ABR.
ARE.AXL.OOP.BCK is the IP address that you assign to the logical interface
of the Area X ABR.
On Area X ABR:
Router(config)#int loopback 0
Router(config-if)#ip address ARE.AXL.OOP.BCK SUB.NET.
MAS.K00
Router(config-if)#exit
Router(config)#router ospf PP
Router(config)#area X virtual-link ARE.A0L.OOP.BCK
where,
ARE.AXL.OOP.BCK is an IP address that you assign to the logical interface of
Area X ABR. This address will be used by the Area 0 ABR to connect virtually.
SUB.NET.MAS.K00 is the subnet mask that you assign to the logical interface.
PP is the process-id of OSPF on the Area X ABR.
ARE.A0L.OOP.BCK is the IP address that you assigned to the logical interface
of the Area 0 ABR.
4. Some additional show commands to show the virtual-links currently configured
the ABRs information, respectively:
Router#show ip ospf virtual-links
Router#show ip ospf border-routers

2.6 How to Configure Integrated IS–IS on a Cisco Router
When would you need this: When you need to set up dynamic routing for a large
network and not all your routers are Cisco routers. It is being currently used to
support MPLS routing and IPv6 routing.

18

2 Routing Protocols

Special Requirements: None.
IS–IS is an old interior gateway protocol. It is a routing protocol that was aimed to
replace TCP/IP, but failed to. Anyway, why are we discussing this old protocol?
Because new interest in it has appeared over the past few years. This interest is
caused by the fact that IS–IS protocol is independent, ToS-supporting, and really
scalable.
The cornerstone of IS–IS operation is having a properly addressed internetwork
for IS–IS. This means that your subnets must be addressed in a summarizable way
such that you can express the LANs connected to the router as a summarized
address.
Let us move on to the configuration:
1. Create an LoopBack interface (logical interface) on the router and give it an IP
address of your choice. Remember that this IP address will be part of the
Network Entity Title (NET) address.
Router(config)#int loopback 0
Router(config-if)#ip address IPA.DDR.ESS.LO0 SUB.NET.
MAS.K00
where,
IPA.DDR.ESS.LO0 is the IP address you want to assign to the loopback
interface.
SUB.NET.MAS.K00 is the subnet mask that you want to assign to the loopback
interface.
2. Write down the NET address that you will assign to the router. There are many
ways of creating NET address. We will not discuss them now. We will use the
router’s loopback address as the system ID as follows:
AA.BBBB.CCCC.DDDD.EEEE.FF
where,
AA is the AFI. We will use ‘‘49’’ here as the AFI. This ‘‘49’’ means that we are
making up our own NET address.
BBBB is the area number (ex: 0001, or 0002). Remember that no more than 3
routers can operate in a single IS–IS area. You should start from 1.
CCCC.DDDD.EEEE is the loopback IP address of the router. Previously defined
as IPA.DDR.ESS.LO0, here it should be rewritten as IPAD.DRES.SLO0
(ex: 172.16.0.254 becomes 172.016.000.254 which becomes 1720.1600.0254)
FF is the SEL. We will use ‘‘00’’ here. This ‘‘00’’ value means that this whole
identifier is the NET of the device.
A quick example: For a router with loopback address of 192.168.0.1, and the
area is 1, the NET can be written as 49.0001.1921.6800.0001.00

2.6 How to Configure Integrated IS–IS on a Cisco Router

19

3. Enable the IS–IS routing process on the router:
Router(config)#router isis
4. Configure the NET that you have written down earlier:
Router(config-router)#net AA.BBBB.CCCC.DDDD.EEEE.FF
where AA.BBBB.CCCC.DDDD.EEEE.FF is the NET you have assigned to the
router.
5. Configure route summarization only on the routers connected to other areas:
Router(config-router)#summary-address
SUB.NET.MAS.K01

SUM.MAR.YAD.RES

where,
SUM.MAR.YAD.RES is the address summarizing all the networks of the area.
SUB.NET.MAS.K01 is the subnetmask used for the summarization.
6. Enable IS–IS for IP on the serial interfaces that will be involved in the routing
process:
Router(config-if)#ip router isis
7. Repeat this configuration on all the routers that you want to involve in the IS–IS
routing process. Remember that each router must have its own NET address
and a maximum of three routers in each area.
What we have introduced here is a very
simplified introduction to the configuration of IS–IS. There are many other configuration scenarios that need to be
tackled in order to use IS–IS in a large
network such as configure IS–IS for
NBMA networks, or configuring different
IS–IS levels.
For troubleshooting, you can use the following commands:
Router#show clns neighbor
Router#show clns interface

Note
If you are wondering why this
protocol is called ‘‘Intermediate-System-to-IntermediateSystem’’, it was because a PC
is thought of as an End-System, and the router as an
Intermediate-System.
Since
this protocol is aimed to provide routing
information
exchange between routers, it
was named ‘‘IS–IS’’ protocol.

Router#show isis database
Router#show isis database detail

20

2 Routing Protocols

2.7 How to Configure Load Balancing in a Cisco Router
When would you need this: When you are using a dynamic routing protocol, and
have more than one path to destination networks.
Special Requirements: None
The first fact to be set is that all router platforms support load balancing. In a short
description, load balancing is the operation in which the router forwards packets in
different routes to the same destination. This happens when there is more than one
path available for the same destination network.
There are two types of load balancing:
1. Multiple entries to the same destination with equal metrics.
In this situation, protocols such as RIP, RIPv2, IGRP, EIGRP, and OSPF
automatically does the operation and no configuration is needed.
2. Multiple entries to the same destination with different metrics.
With a complex metric calculation method, like the ones used in IGRP and
EIGRP, it is rare to get equal metrics for different paths to the same destination.
In this case, configuration is needed.
You can configure something called variance. The variance value determines
the percentage that you are willing tolerate in choosing a secondary path. If the
value of the variance is chosen to be 1, this means that only the paths with equal
best metric will be used. And a value of 1.2, for example, means that the best
path as well as the paths with a metric up to 1.2 of best path’s metric will be
used.
A numerical example is,
For a variance of 1.3, if the best path’s metric is 1000, paths of metric in the
range of 1,000–1,300 will also be used. Keep in mind that we are talking about
multiple paths to the same destination.
One more important note is that we are talking about paths derived from the
same routing protocol, i.e., paths with the same administrative distance.
The configuration of unequal path load balancing for IGRP and EIGRP is done
with a single command:
Router(config-router)#variance X
where X represents the value of the variance that you want to use.

2.7.1 Per-Packet and Per-Destination Load Balancing
There are two types of load balancing; Per-Packet and Per-Destination. In PerPacket load balancing, packets going to the same destination are sent over different paths. This way you will guarantee that all paths to the destination network

2.7 How to Configure Load Balancing in a Cisco Router

21

are being used. But using this method causes increased load on the routers’
resources and low-end routers may crash. Also, the packets may arrive out of order
because of different network latencies in different paths.
Using the Per-Destination load balancing, packets going to one destination
pass through one path. This way you will lower the load on the router. But the
different paths will not be utilized to the best.
To activate Per-Destination load balancing issue the following command on the
interface that you want to use this method of load balancing,
Router(config-if)#ip route-cache
And to activate Per-Packet load balancing use,
Router(config-if)#no ip route-cache
Newer switching schemes such as Cisco Express Forwarding (CEF) allow you
to do per-packet and per-destination load balancing more quickly. However, this
method requires some extra resources to deal with maintaining CEF entries and
adjacencies.

http://www.springer.com/978-1-4471-4245-4

