2

What Is Sustainability? A Review of
the Concept and Its Applications
Elena Giovannoni and Giacomo Fabietti

Abstract

Whereas the concept of sustainability is broadly acknowledged as being multidimensional, its various dimensions have brought to light different discourses
over time and have often been treated separately. In some cases, this separation
has limited the actual implementation of sustainability to its mere rhetoric.
By relying upon a review of the relevant literature which addresses the notion
of sustainability (or of sustainable development), the present chapter aims to
explore this notion by identifying its key dimensions and the intertwining
relationships between them. In so doing, the challenges and opportunities
brought out by an integrated approach towards sustainability are also
emphasised, together with the role played by governance structures, business
models, management, measurement and reporting systems in implementing
‘integrated sustainability’ within organizations. In this context, the contribution
of integrated reporting is explored.

2.1

Introduction

In recent years, the growing concerns for environmental and climate change,
together with issues of poverty, increasing disparity between societies and the
tensions brought by social inequalities, have placed sustainable development
under the spotlight. National and international institutions, policy makers and
cross-country initiatives (see, for instance, the Sustainable Development Solutions
Network—SDSN—of the United Nations launched in 2012), as well as
practitioners (see, for instance, KPMG 2011) and academics (see, among others,
Joseph 2012), have increased the attention given to social and environmental
sustainability worldwide. As emphasised by Gray (2010), whereas everyone
E. Giovannoni (*) • G. Fabietti
Department of Business and Law, University of Siena, Siena, Italy
e-mail: elena.giovannoni@unisi.it; giacomo.fabietti@unisi.it
C. Busco et al. (eds.), Integrated Reporting, DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-02168-3_2,
# Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2014

21

22

E. Giovannoni and G. Fabietti

seems to agree on the importance of sustainable development, its very nature and
meaning is rarely discussed and analysed in an explicit way1. As a result, the actual
implementation of sustainability risks to be limited by the vagueness and ubiquity
of its definition (Dixon and Fallon 1989). For instance, due to the ubiquity of the
notion of sustainability, different discourses have emerged over time, thereby
associating this concept with social responsibility, environmental management, or
business sustainability, which are often treated in separated ways. These different
discourses have also revealed their appeal over corporations, whose role and
responsibility for sustainable development have been questioned.
In response to the increasing pressures coming from national and international
regulations, and from society in general, corporations are gradually pushed towards
the adoption of principles of both social and environmental responsibility within
their strategies, structures and management systems (Werbach 2009). In this context, a sort of ‘sustainability rhetoric’ is emerging in mission statements, internal
codes and external reporting systems. As argued by Gond et al. (2012), in some
cases, this rhetoric was used in the attempt to reconstruct the eroded legitimacy of
companies and did not necessarily involve the actual implementation of (or participation in) sustainable development. Otherwise, such active implementation and
participation would require organizations to alter their existing practices and to
allow a concrete strategic move towards sustainability (Hopwood 2009).
In the attempt to move beyond the sustainability rhetoric and to pursue an actual
search for sustainable development, a clear definition of this concept and of its key
dimensions is needed, together with the adoption of an integrated approach towards
the notion of sustainability. This need has been advocated by both academics (see
Gray 2010) and cross-country initiatives (such as the SDSN) to overcome the limits
resulting from the separation between social, environmental, and financial
concerns, as well as from an individualistic approach to sustainability. In fact,
sustainable development cannot be achieved through isolated initiatives, but rather
requires an integrated effort at various levels, comprising social, environmental and
financial aspects. As addressed by recent studies on the very nature of
sustainability, “any foreseeable sustainable state will be the result of interactions
between organizations, individuals, societies and states” (Gray 2010, p. 57). From
this point of view, an integrated approach towards sustainability would require
realising the potentials of its key (financial, social and environmental) dimensions
simultaneously, as well as managing the tensions, trade-offs and synergies between
these dimensions (we will define this approach as ‘integrated sustainability’). More
importantly, in managing the tensions of sustainability, a key role can be played by
ad hoc governance structures, business models, management, measurement and
reporting systems, which could be purposefully designed according to an integrated

1
In line with Gray (2010), in this chapter we will use the expressions ‘sustainability’ and
‘sustainable development’ as two analogues. In so doing, we also acknowledge a slight difference
between the two expressions, in which ‘sustainability’ refers to a state, while ‘sustainable
development’ refers to the process for achieving this state (see Gray 2010).

2

What Is Sustainability? A Review of the Concept and Its Applications

23

approach. In this context, the recent debate on integrated reporting is likely to play a
relevant role.
By relying on the previous premises, this chapter aims to explore the concept of
sustainability by identifying its key dimensions and the intertwining relationships
between them. The aim is to identify the challenges and opportunities arising from
an integrated approach towards sustainability, and the role of this approach in
enabling organizations to actually implement sustainability beyond its mere rhetoric. In so doing, particular attention will be given to the perspective of companies
and to management systems, practices and processes which could help integrate
social and environmental concerns with the more commercial and financial needs of
the business. As we will see subsequently, whereas these (social, environmental and
financial) dimensions are all part of a broader and integrated notion of
sustainability, their co-existence implies tensions and challenges which need to
be addressed and managed in an attempt to actually implement sustainability.
In order to achieve the goal described above, this chapter relies upon the analysis
of the relevant literature which has addressed the concept of sustainability from the
perspective of companies. By reconstructing the evolution of this debate over time
(see Sect. 2.2), the evolving discourses on sustainability are drawn upon in Sect. 2.3
to identify the key dimensions of this concept and the need for an integrated
approach. Next, in Sect. 2.4, the synergies and tensions between these dimensions
are discussed to outline the challenges and opportunities resulting from integration.
In this context, the potential roles of governance structures, business models,
management, measurement and reporting systems in implementing sustainability
are suggested in Sect. 2.5. In particular, the contribution of integrated reporting is
explored. The main messages of this chapter are then summarised in Sect. 2.62.

2.2

Changing Discourses on Sustainability: Insights from the
Literature

As emphasised by Kidd (1992), the concept of sustainability is not new, it has a
rather long history and it has evolved over time. Importantly, this evolution has
been affected by different “intellectual and political streams of thought that have
molded concepts of sustainability” (Kidd 1992, p. 3). In this section we will rely
upon the relevant literature which has addressed the concept of sustainability
according to different streams of thoughts. The review of these studies permits
the identification of three main discourses that have shaped and characterised the
2
Although this chapter is the result of the joint efforts and collaboration of the two authors, Elena
Giovannoni is the author of Sects. 2.1, 2.4, 2.5 and 2.6; Giacomo Fabietti is the author of Sects. 2.2
and 2.3. This chapter is based on the outcomes of a broader research project entitled “From
governance and risk management rules to performance: roles, tools and enabling conditions in
Italian firms”. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support of this research project
provided by national funding within PRIN 2009.

24

E. Giovannoni and G. Fabietti

evolving debate on sustainability3. We will label these as ‘environmental’, ‘social’
and ‘business’ discourses.

2.2.1

The Environmental Discourse

One of the prevailing discourses regarding the concept of sustainability has referred
this concept to the relationships between men and nature (we will label this
discourse as the ‘environmental discourse’). Although the multidimensionality of
sustainability has never been neglected, over the past 30 years it has been often
compartmentalized as an environmental issue (Drexhage and Murphy 2010). In
particular, during the 1970s, the term sustainability began to be widely used in
relation to environmental problems. As shown by Kidd (1992), a number of books
addressing issues of sustainability from an environmental point of view were
published during that period (see, e.g., Meadows et al. 1972). In this context,
growing concern on global environmental problems, and scepticism about the
possibility for reducing industrial pollution significantly, pushed the United Nations
(UN) to address these problems as a “barrier to development” (Kidd 1992, p. 16).
One of the key steps in this direction was the UN Conference on Human
Environment, which took place in Stockholm in 1972. The conference led to the
development of 26 principles, most of which addressed environmental concerns; in
particular, by relying on the concept of carrying capacity (see e.g. Riddell 1981;
WRI/IIED 1986), the third principle stated that “the capacity of the Earth to
produce vital renewable resources must be maintained and, wherever practicable,
restored or improved” (UN 1972, p. 4). The Stockholm conference acted as a
vehicle for the creation of the UN Environmental Programme (UNEP), as well as
for the creation of a number of national environmental protection agencies. Within
UNEP the term sustainability appeared for the first time in the context of the UN
(Kidd 1992). Since its foundation, in 1972, one of the most important aims of UNEP
was the promotion of cooperation and strong leadership in the care of the environment. In this context, UNEP also stressed the importance of eco-development
(Sachs 1984), defined as the yield of renewable resources and the simultaneous
monitoring of the depletion of non-renewables. UNEP retrieved the concept of
sustainable yield (Tivy and O’Hare 1982) in its definition of eco-development.
In 1980, the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), World
Wildlife Fund (WWF) and UNEP set up the World Conservation Strategy (WCS).
3
Given the numerous theoretical streams which have approached the concept of sustainability
from different perspectives, it would be impossible to provide a comprehensive review of the
literature which has addressed this notion in only one chapter. More generally, as argued by Kidd
(1992, p. 3) “the literature relating to sustainability is so voluminous that full analysis were not
practical. And if it were practical it would probably not be worth the effort”. Far from attempting
to provide an exhaustive review, in this section we draw on some key studies which have addressed
the concept of sustainability from different perspectives in order to outline some of the key
discourses which have informed the debate regarding this concept.

2

What Is Sustainability? A Review of the Concept and Its Applications

25

The WCS referred to ‘development that is sustainable’ in terms of both
improvements in human life and conservation of natural resources. The primary
aim of the WCS was to promote sustainable development through the identification
of priority conservation issues (Drexhage and Murphy 2010). In this context, the
term conservation stands for “management of human use of the biosphere so that it
may yield the greatest sustainable benefit to present generations while maintaining
its potential to meet the needs and aspirations of future generations” (IUCN, WWF
and UNEP 1980, introduction). In 1987 the final report of the World Commission
on Environment and Development (WCED), titled Our Common Future4, provided
an overview on the state of the environment, as well as the most popular definition
of Sustainable development, as “development that meets the needs of the present
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their own needs”
(p. 45). The report of WCED represented the “momentum for the landmark 1992
Rio Summit” (Drexhage and Murphy 2010, p. 8). Importantly, the UN Conference
on Environment and Development (UNCED) in 1992, referred to as the Rio Earth
Summit, produced a global action plan for sustainable development. Its
outputs were the Rio Declaration, Agenda 21 and the Commission on Sustainable
Development. Particularly, Agenda 21 provided advice and good practices for the
achievement of sustainable development, by posing major emphasis on environmental aspects (Drexhage and Murphy 2010). Nevertheless, during the subsequent
Kyoto Conference on Climate change in 1997, the poor progress in the achievement
of Agenda 21 goals emerged.
The debate described above was not ignored by corporations. As argued by
Berry and Rondinelli (1998), in the 1960s and 1970s, corporations acted in a
‘reactive’ way when faced with environmental issues, waiting for environmental
crises to occur and then trying to mitigate their evil effects. During the 1980s, given
the growing regulation on environmental protection, in many cases corporations
limited their efforts to the mere compliance with laws and requirements. In the
1990s corporations began to adopt a more ‘proactive’ approach, through which they
started to try to anticipate the environmental effects of their operations and to obtain
a business advantage from the management of environmental performance. Since
then, corporations have gradually attempted to embed environmental issues into
their business culture and management processes by introducing Environmental
Management Systems (EMSs). According to Melnyk et al. (2003, p. 332) an EMS is
“a system and database which integrates procedures and processes for training of
personnel, monitoring, summarizing, and reporting of specialized environmental
performance information to internal and external stakeholders of a firm”. EMSs are
conceived as important for complying with regulations and for waste reduction.
Among these systems, the voluntary environmental management tool (labeled EcoManagement and Audit Scheme - EMAS), developed by the European Commission
in 1993, embraced a broad range of indicators, including energy efficiency, material
efficiency, biodiversity, emissions, water consumption and waste.

4

This report is also known as the Brundtland Report.

26

E. Giovannoni and G. Fabietti

As illustrated above, from the 1970s to the 1990s, sustainability has been
primarily related to environmental concerns. In parallel, as we will see in the
following sections, the social discourse was also emerging.

2.2.2

The Social Discourse

Whereas the environmental discourse was developing within the sustainable development debate, social aspects were not neglected. For example, the WCED’s
definition of Sustainable Development (WCED 1987) focuses on the reconciliation
of the needs of present and future generations. According to Dempsey et al. (2011),
the attention given to inter-generational equity by the WCED definition stresses
social aspects, and particularly the key determinants of social equity, such as social
justice, distributive justice and equality of conditions. In this context, exclusion
from participation in the social, economic and political life of a community was
considered to be at the core of the concept of social equity, since it could lead to
racism and discrimination (e.g. Pierson 2002; Ratcliffe 2000).
In addition to this debate, the social discourse has also developed in the context
of corporations and has been particularly associated with the notion of social
responsibility. Already in 1953, Howard Bowen’s Social Responsibilities of the
Businessman defined the social responsibility of businessmen as “the obligations of
businessmen to pursue those policies, to make those decisions, or to follow those
lines of action which are desirable in terms of the objectives and values of our
society” (p. 6). While Bowen’s contribution represented a milestone in the debate
on social responsibility, during the 1960s, definitions of Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) began to spread: Davis (1960), for example, argued that CSR refers
to “businessmen’s decisions and actions taken for reasons at least partially beyond
the firm’s direct economic or technical interest” (p. 70). In so doing, he also
suggested that some socially responsible business decisions could be justified by
the long-run economic gains of the firm; Frederick (1960), instead, argued that
“social responsibility in the final analysis implies a public posture toward society’s
economic an human resources, as a willingness to see that those resources are used
for broad social ends and not simply for the narrowly circumscribed interests of
private persons and firms” (p. 60). During the 1980s and 1990s, alternative
approaches to CSR were elaborated, such as stakeholder theory (Freeman 1984),
corporate citizenship (Andriof and McIntosh 2001) and business ethics (Kilcullen
and Ohles Kooistra 1999).
From a UN perspective, after the 1997 Kyoto Conference on Climate change, a
key milestone for addressing social concerns was represented by the Millennium
Development Goals (MDGs) established in 2000 for the period 2000–2015. The
MDGs focused on a set of rights and needs encompassing themes such as poverty,
health and discrimination. Subsequently, according to Drexhage and Murphy
(2010), the following 2002 Johannesburg World Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD) “demonstrated a major shift in the perception of sustainable
development—away from environmental issues toward social and economic

2

What Is Sustainability? A Review of the Concept and Its Applications

27

development” (p. 8). By integrating MDGs with additional socio-economic aspects,
WSSD “did make a constructive change by focusing considerably more attention
on development issues” (Drexhage and Murphy 2010, p. 9).
Importantly, a 20-year follow-up to the 1992 Earth Summit took place in Rio de
Janeiro in 2012 through the United Nations Conference on Sustainable Development (UNCSD). The Conference is also known as Rio+20 and was aimed at
securing renewed political commitment for sustainable development, assessing
the progress and implementation gaps in meeting previous commitments, and
addressing new and emerging challenges. Within Rio +20 the UN agreed on the
need for Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) by emphasising the importance of
both social and environmental concerns and the need for a more comprehensive
definition of the role of business for sustainable development.

2.2.3

The Business Discourse

A third main discourse which has emerged within the debate on sustainability
concerns the relationships between modern corporations and both social and environmental matters (we will label this discourse as the ‘business discourse’). As
argued by Gray (2010, p. 57), “Capitalism and its destructive tendencies are
manifest through its greatest creation—the corporation”. Given the depletion of
natural resources that is caused through their activities, corporations are required to
move towards a state in which they “use only resources that are consumed at a rate
below the natural reproduction, or at a rate below the development of substitutes.
They do not cause emissions that accumulate in the environment at a rate beyond
the capacity of the natural system to absorb and assimilate these emissions. Finally
they do not engage in activity that degrades eco-system services” (Dyllick and
Hockerts 2002, p. 133). This situation encompasses not only eco-efficiency
(WBCSD 2000) but also eco-effectiveness (Braungart and McDonough 1998) and
sufficiency (Schumacher 1973).
Moreover, from a business perspective, sustainability has been referred to as the
capability of a corporation to last in time, both in terms of profitability, productivity
and financial performance, as well as in terms of managing environmental and
social assets that compose its capitals. In one sentence, business sustainability is the
business of staying in business (Doane and MacGillivray 2001). Dyllick and
Hockerts (2002) define business sustainability as “meeting the needs of a firm’s
direct and indirect stakeholders [. . .] without compromising its ability to meet the
needs of future stakeholders as well” (p. 131). In this respect, the business discourse
on sustainability has also revealed an inherent paradox between corporations and
sustainability (Gray 2010). On the one hand, given the power of corporations to
exert control over society and to produce large scale innovations, they are increasingly regarded by governments as an unavoidable means through which (social and
environmental) sustainability can be implemented (Hawken et al. 1999; Gray
2010). On the other hand, they are placed at the heart of concerns about the
deterioration of natural resources and the production of social inequalities. This

28

E. Giovannoni and G. Fabietti

(apparent) paradox requires further understanding regarding the relationships
between social, environmental and business discourses.

2.3

Conceptualising the Key Dimensions of Sustainability:
Towards an Integrated Approach

The literature reviewed in the previous section, as well as the three evolving
(environmental, social and business) discourses make it possible to identify and
conceptualise the key dimensions of the concept of sustainability, as well as to
emphasise the need for an integrated approach among the three dimensions. This
need has also been acknowledged by Drexhage and Murphy (2010): we need to take
“sustainable development out of the environment “box” and considering wider
social, economic, and geopolitical agendas” (p. 20). In other words “sustainable
development embodies integration, and understanding and acting on the complex
interconnections that exist between the environment, economy, and society” (p. 6).
The multidimensionality of sustainability has also been reiterated by Rio+20. In
fact, the Rio+20 outcome document, The Future We Want, refers to three
dimensions of sustainable development: economic, social and environmental. It
also refers to good governance as the basis for sustainable development. This idea is
embraced by SDSN, which refers to four dimensions: economic development
(including the end of extreme poverty), social inclusion, environmental
sustainability, and good governance (including peace and security). Also SDSN
stresses the need for an integrated approach to sustainability: this is clearly
expressed by the document entitled An Action Agenda for Sustainable Development
(SDSN 2013), according to which “the challenges addressed by the proposed SDGs
are inherently integrated” (p. x).
The initiatives and documents mentioned above have highlighted the need for an
integrated approach towards sustainability at a systems level. This need has also
been emphasized at the level of the corporation. For instance, in providing
guidelines to companies for sustainability reporting, the Global Reporting Initiative
(GRI) has highlighted various dimensions of sustainability (i.e. economic, social
and environmental dimensions) to be included and disclosed within reporting
activities. In this respect, sustainability reporting should provide reliable information on the progress towards sustainability in all its different dimensions. The idea
of sustainability as a multidimensional concept emerges clearly from GRI’s G4
Sustainability Reporting Guidelines—Reporting Principles and Standard Disclosure (2013), which highlights that “a sustainability report conveys disclosures on
an organization’s impacts—be they positive or negative—on the environment,
society and the economy” (p. 3). The multidimensional nature of sustainability
reporting and the need for integration have also been emphasized by the International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC). According to the Consultation Draft of
The International IR Framework of 2013 (CD), integrated reporting “is a process
that results in communication by an organization, most visibly a periodic integrated
report, about value creation over time” (p. 8); furthermore, the integrated report is

2

What Is Sustainability? A Review of the Concept and Its Applications

29

defined as “a concise communication about how an organization’s strategy, governance, performance and prospects, in the context of its external environment, lead
to the creation of value over the short, medium and long term” (p. 8). The CD points
out that the integrated report aims to “enhance accountability and stewardship with
respect to the broad base of capitals (financial, manufactured, intellectual, human,
social and relationship, and natural) and promote understanding of the
interdependencies between them” (p. 8). In this way, the CD stresses not only the
need to preserve the various capitals, but also hints at the aim of integration. In fact,
as emphasized within the CD, the integrated report supports “integrated thinking,
decision-making and actions that focus on the creation of value over the short,
medium and long term” (p. 8).
By relying upon the initiatives and documents mentioned above, as well as upon
the analysis of the main discourses which have informed the debate on
sustainability, next we will refer to the concept of integrated sustainability at the
company level. This approach towards sustainability requires that organizations
address all main dimensions of sustainability simultaneously. In simple terms, these
dimensions include: the Financial dimension, in terms of ensuring long term
economic and financial performance; the Social dimension, by creating value for
the society; the Environmental dimension, through a responsible management and
re-construction of natural resources. As we will see in the following section,
integrated sustainability implies the effective management of the inherent tensions
between these different dimensions.

2.4

The Challenges of Integrated Sustainability

Whereas the need for an integrated approach towards sustainability has been
recently advocated by academics, institutions and cross country initiatives, the
implications and challenges involved in implementing this integration have
received little attention. As argued by Gray (2010, p. 53), “Sustainability is not
only a complex and elusive notion, but one which is fraught with potential
contradictions”. Some of these ‘potential contradictions’ stem from the tensions
between the different dimensions of sustainability, which may occur when
attempting to implement all dimensions simultaneously, according to an integrated
approach.
For example, if we consider the financial and social dimensions of sustainability
from the company perspective, whereas some studies have demonstrated that
addressing social performance is good for financial performance, other studies
highlight that conflicts between the two dimensions do exist in numerous
circumstances (see Boyd et al. 2009; Orlitzky et al. 2003). These mixed results
offered by the literature can be explained in light of the tensions between the social
and financial dimensions of company performance. Social performance requires
freedom and flexibility from financial constraints and business logics, in order to
find solutions to social problems. Whereas the pursuit of social performance should
aim at creating value primarily for society as a whole rather than for the individual

30

E. Giovannoni and G. Fabietti

company, the search for financial performance works in the opposite way (Pache
and Santos 2011). Tensions between social and financial performance are also
related to various institutional pressures and stakeholders that converge within
corporations, in which customers, employees, suppliers, beneficiaries, partners,
and investors address multiple social or financial needs (Coda 1988). These
tensions increase during scale-up processes, when social performance has to be
considered while taking into account the financial needs of a larger number of
stakeholders.
Similarly, if we consider the environmental and financial dimensions of
sustainability from the company perspective, several studies have argued that
effective environmental management may lead to increased production efficiency,
cost reduction and improved market reputation with benefits for financial performance (see Molina-Azorı́n et al. 2009; Ambec and Lanoie 2008; Miles and Covin
2000). Simultaneously, the search for environmental performance may imply high
costs of compliance (Jaffe et al. 1995), huge investments for re-constructing the
consumed resources and may limit opportunities for growth and for competitive
improvement, at the detriment of financial performance (see, for example, Hull and
Rothenberg 2008). Also, on a large scale, financial performance and commercial
needs may imply the use of technologies for increasing resource consumption, to
the detriment of environmental performance.
Finally, the social and environmental dimensions of sustainability may also
reveal inherent tensions. For instance, a new solution for a more effective management of environmental resources may conflict with social needs. In contrast, new
solutions to social problems may conflict with the need to preserve natural
resources. In this context, Gray (2010) draws on Dresner (2002) to suggest the
existence of a ‘sustainability continuum’ between strong and weak sustainability.
On one hand, weak sustainability relies upon the idea that human-made resources
can compensate for the consumption of natural resources. On the other end of the
continuum, very strong sustainability suggests that human life is incompatible with
sustainability. Within this continuum, organizations are likely to play a role in
contributing to weak sustainability to the extent in which they search for solutions
to compensate for the consumption of natural resources.
Far from constituting paradoxes which need to be solved, the relationships
between social, financial and environmental dimensions (highlighted above) represent tensions which need to be adequately managed when implementing integrated
sustainability. The management of these tensions does not necessarily mean achieving a stable proportion between all dimensions, but rather addressing all (financial,
environmental and social) dimensions simultaneously and through an integrated
approach. In so doing, the management of tensions becomes crucial for avoiding the
drift in favour of one single dimension to the detriment of the others and to fully
realize the potentials of all dimensions at the same time. As we will argue next, in
implementing integrated sustainability within organizations, a key role should be
played by governance systems, business models, as well as management, measurement and reporting systems. All these systems need to be adequately designed and
practiced within organizations according to an integrated approach.

2

What Is Sustainability? A Review of the Concept and Its Applications

31

Fig. 2.1 Implementing
integrated sustainability: key
levels

Integrated
Governance

Strategy & Business
models

Management, measurement
& reporting systems

2.5

Implementing Integrated Sustainability Beyond Rhetoric:
From Governance to Integrated Reporting Systems

In this section, we suggest that the actual implementation of integrated
sustainability should take place at different organizational levels, ranging from
the level of corporate governance to the strategic and business model level, while
also including the level of management, measurement and reporting (see Fig. 2.1).
At these various levels, structures, processes and systems should be designed and
practiced according to an integrated approach. Far from providing an extensive
analysis of the levels mentioned above, in this section we build on some recent, key
studies which have addressed governance issues, business models, management
and measurement systems according to an integrated and multidimensional
approach. The aim is to suggest how these studies could be extended to include
broader issues of sustainability from an integrated perspective.

2.5.1

Implementing Integrated Governance: Compliance,
Integrated Sustainability, Risk and Knowledge Management

Within the debate on sustainability, governance issues have acquired increasing
relevance. For example, the holistic framework on sustainability proposed by the
Rio+20 outcome document considers good governance as a key element for
sustainable development. This view is embraced by the SDSN, that includes good
governance among the key dimensions of sustainability.
The need to align governance systems to sustainability is also acknowledged at
the company level (Cartwright and Craig 2006). Following recent corporate

32

E. Giovannoni and G. Fabietti

scandals and episodes of managerial misconduct, the corporate governance debate
has pointed to certain corporations whose ways of doing business have been too
profit-oriented and overly focused on the financial aspects of organisational performance (see Abdel-khalik 2002; Benston and Hartgraves 2002). In particular, it has
been broadly acknowledged that creating value only for shareholders is not enough
(see, among others, Charreaux and Desbrières 2001; Catturi 2007; Coda 1988).
Rather, value creation is an integrated process that is rooted around a broad
perspective of governance, encompassing the interest of multiple stakeholders. In
the attempt to ensure effective accountability towards different stakeholders,
national and international regulations have largely proliferated. Simultaneously,
following the increasing attention given to compliance issues within the corporate
governance debate, some studies have emphasised that, in order to implement
effective governance, compliance is not enough. In this context, a broader perspective on governance is suggested; one that combines compliance with the achievement of financial and non-financial objectives, ethical behaviour, environmental
concerns, and risk awareness (see Seal 2006; Bhimani and Soonawalla 2005; Fahy
et al. 2004). Such a broadened perspective also suggests going beyond formal
structures of governance to consider the actual processes and mechanisms through
which governance principles and practices are operationalised (Mouritsen and
Thrane 2006).
Within this debate, recent studies have suggested an integrated approach to
governance (labelled as ‘integrated governance’); one which encompasses four
main dimensions, namely, compliance, performance, risk and knowledge (see
Busco et al. 2005). From this point of view, integrated governance includes:
compliance to rules and regulations; the achievement of the company’s performance; effective risk management; and knowledge management. These dimensions
are strongly related to each other and, as such, should be sought out and managed
simultaneously. For example, actual compliance to laws, rules and
recommendations requires effective knowledge management, which implies the
management of skills, competencies, cultural and ethical underpinnings of the
individuals that comprise the organization. Furthermore, whereas the achievement
of the company’s performance should take place within the boundaries provided by
compliance issues, within the integrated governance system these boundaries
should enable rather than constrain value creation processes. Finally, risk management should be based on both compliance to recommendations (see, for instance,
COSO 2004), as well as on effective knowledge management in order to actually
support value creation and the strategic management of company performance.
Although it is within the compliance-driven corporate governance debate that risk
management has acquired growing relevance, regulatory power and legitimacy
(Mikes 2008), risk management should also be considered as a system for
strategizing and performance management (Collier and Berry 2002; Collier et al.
2004). Therefore, a key role is played not only by formal prescriptions and
frameworks for risk management, but also by the relationships between risk
management (compliance) and the effective knowledge management of the different groups of experts (accountants, risk managers, internal auditors, directors, top

2

What Is Sustainability? A Review of the Concept and Its Applications

Compliance

33

Social,
environmental and
financial
performance

Integrated
Sustainability

Integrated
Governance

Integrated governance

Strategy & Business
models
Knowledge

Risk

Management, measurement
& reporting systems

Fig. 2.2 Integrated governance [source: adapted from Busco et al. (2005)]

managers, etc.) that comprise the various parts of the organization and of its
governance systems.
The integrated approach to governance described above (and proposed by Busco
et al. 2005) is meant to assist the actual implementation of governance beyond
simple issues of compliance and beyond the mere search for external legitimization
and consensus, which have catalysed the recent debate on corporate governance. In
the attempt to align this approach with the concept of integrated sustainability, the
dimensions of integrated governance could be further developed to include social,
environmental and financial dimensions of sustainability (see Fig. 2.2). In so doing,
integrated governance would result from the simultaneous search for:
– compliance to national and international rules, regulations and
recommendations;
– integrated sustainability, which combines social, environmental and financial
performance dimensions;
– risk management, broadened through a holistic approach to include both quantifiable and non-quantifiable risks, providing managers with a more strategic
perspective, and improving accountability towards all stakeholders within the
strategic decision-making process;
– knowledge management, which should provide the subtle links for combining all
of the previous dimensions by embracing the development of the skills,
competencies, cultural and ethical underpinnings needed to ensure integration.

34

2.5.2

E. Giovannoni and G. Fabietti

(Hybrid) Business Models for Integrated Sustainability

In addition to an integrated approach to the governance system, the implementation
of integrated sustainability requires the definition of ad hoc strategies and business
models that should capture social, environmental and financial dimensions, as well
as their intertwining relationships.
Although new strategies have been recently emerging from the adoption of the
founding principles of sustainable development from corporations, in the resulting
business models charity and social programs have often been merely added to forprofit models. In this context, sustainability and business performance are managed
separately and represent the objects of two distinct strategies carried out by an
organization. The separation between sustainability and business strategies can
undermine the actual implementation of sustainability, relegating it to ineffective
solutions or to the mere ‘sustainability rhetoric’ in the search for legitimization.
This situation calls for the definition and implementation of new, more effective
business models, in which to ensure an integrated strategic move towards
sustainability beyond its mere rhetoric.
In general, a business model should capture the internal and external patterns of
interactions that shape a company’s value chain, value proposition and value
system. Given the tensions between the business needs of corporations and the
social and environmental dimensions of sustainability highlighted in the previous
sections, the definition and implementation of sustainable business models is a
challenging process. Despite these challenges, new business models have emerged
as forms of ‘hybrid organizations’ (or ‘hybrid business models’), in which social
(and/or environmental) and commercial performance are sought after simultaneously through a single, unified strategy (Battilana et al. 2012; see also Battilana
and Dorado 2010—see Fig. 2.3)5. According to recent studies, hybrid business
models are experiencing a rapid growth in a number of sectors (Porter and Kramer
2011; Battilana et al. 2012). Many hybrid organizations originated as forms of
social entrepreneurship and, then they turned into hybrids by searching for autonomy from donations and subsidies, as well as by attempting to scale up in order to
reach a larger market. More recently, hybrid business models are growing in new
(and for-profit) sectors, such as consulting, retail, consumer products and IT
(information technology). Hybrid organizations are also emerging among high
tech R&D firms, as a result of the joint efforts and collaboration between industry
and academia (Lamb and Davidson 2004).
As is similar to any hybrid species, hybrid business models face both the
challenges and opportunities that come from the integration of diverse elements
within the same strategy (Phills et al. 2008). On one hand, this diversity is
interpreted as a unique source of innovation. With an approach that is different
from pure social or pure commercial models, in hybrid organizations managers do

5
In general, hybrids have been defined as new phenomena (practices, tools, organizations, etc.)
produced out of two or more elements that are normally found separately (Miller et al. 2008).

2

What Is Sustainability? A Review of the Concept and Its Applications

Integrated
Governance

Focus on the value
created for society
Need for ﬁnancially
sustainable models

35

Social (and
environmental)
only

Strategy & Business
models
Management, measurement
& reporting systems

Focus on the value
created for the company
Need for social and
environmental
performance (beyond
compliance)

Financial
only

Fig. 2.3 Hybrid business models [source: adapted from Battilana et al. (2012)]

not have to choose between social (or environmental) and financial/commercial
performance. The co-existence of different performance dimensions may allow a
virtuous cycle of long term financial results and reinvestment in the social mission
(Battilana et al. 2012). On the other hand, this co-existence can create tensions
which may challenge the very nature of hybrids by causing a mission drift towards
one dimension to the detriment of the other and of the hybrid nature itself. As
argued by Battilana et al. (2012, p. 51), “Hybrid must also strike a delicate balance
between social and economic objectives, to avoid ‘mission drift’—in this case, a
focus on profits to the detriment of social good”. As a result, hybrid business models
are said to be characterized by an ubiquitous and unstable nature (Miller et al.
2008), which does not allow one-off solutions to take place but rather requires the
continuous search for the ‘hybrid ideal’. According to Battilana et al. (2012, p. 51),
“When organizations combine social mission with commercial activities, they
create unfamiliar combinations of activities for which a supportive ecosystem
may not yet exist”.
Whereas hybrid business models may address some of the challenges of
integrated sustainability, still the management of tensions between the different
dimensions of sustainability, which co-exist within the hybrid, is a critical process.
Similarly, as emphasized in the previous subsection, the relationships between the
different dimensions of integrated governance requires ad hoc management
systems. As we will see later, to support an integrated approach to sustainability,
governance systems and business models need to be assisted by adequate management, measurement and reporting systems.

36

2.5.3

E. Giovannoni and G. Fabietti

The Role of Integrated Management, Measurement
and Reporting Systems

The role of management and measurement systems in addressing different (social,
environmental and financial) performance dimensions have been the object of
numerous studies that have, nevertheless, provided mixed results. Some studies
have emphasised that traditional management control systems are limited in the
pursuit of social or environmental performance because they focus managers’
attention on financial concerns (Gond et al. 2012). Other studies have highlighted
that, if designed to include social and environmental matters, management control
systems can help to address social and environmental performance (Henri and
Journeault 2010; Gond et al. 2012). The reasons for such mixed results can be
related to the fact that these studies have mainly concentrated on isolated and
fragmented elements or systems, without considering the broader spectrum of
management controls, which can be involved in the management of different
dimensions of sustainability.
The need for overcoming the fragmentation highlighted above has been
advocated also in the recent debate on integrated reporting. The CD calls for an
‘integrated thinking’ to overcome the traditional ‘silo thinking’ within the performance measurement and reporting system, as well as in managing the overall value
creation process. According to the CD, such integrated thinking should encompass
all ranges of factors (from the firm’s capitals, to governance structures, business
models, as well as performance drivers and outcomes) which take part in the value
creation process, as well as the interactions between them. From this point of view,
integrated thinking should be a guiding logic of the (integrated) reporting system.
The logic of integrated thinking described in the CD displays potentials for
providing integrated reporting with a key role in implementing integrated
sustainability beyond compliance. In fact, integrated thinking does not imply the
mere sum or systematization of financial, social and environmental reporting
systems. Nor does it require adding an isolated measurement system for integrated
reporting. Rather, the adoption of integrated reporting should provide an opportunity for a broader re-thinking of all pre-existing systems by suggesting how to
overcome the isolation between them for the purpose of implementing and
practicing integrated sustainability beyond compliance. Therefore, rather than
representing an isolated element disconnected from the other management and
measurement systems, and responding mainly to compliance and legitimizing
needs, the integrated report should be aligned with other measurement systems
(such as the business plan, the balanced scorecard, the budgeting system, the quality
and production efficiency management systems, etc.) and should be conceived of as
an active and constructive element within the process of planning, enacting,
monitoring and communicating integrated sustainability on an ongoing basis and
throughout all organizational levels (see Fig. 2.4).

2

What Is Sustainability? A Review of the Concept and Its Applications

Integrated
reporng beyond
compliance

Integrated
Governance

Strategy & Business
models

37

Integrated
performance
management and
measurement
systems –
Business planning

Management, measurement
& reporting systems
Connuous monitoring
and learning to avoid
‘mission dris’

Enacng processes of
hybridizaon and
integraon among
social, environmental
and ﬁnancial
performance dimensions

Fig. 2.4 Implementing integrated sustainability: which role for integrated reporting?

Summary and Conclusions

In this chapter we have highlighted the practical implications of exploring the
key dimensions of sustainability, as well as their interconnections, going beyond
the sustainability rhetoric. By relying upon the evolving debate regarding
sustainability, and upon the different discourses which have informed this
debate, we have emphasised the multidimensional and integrated nature of
sustainability, as well as the tensions between its different dimensions. Rather
than eliminating tensions, effective integration requires a full realisation of the
potentials of all dimensions simultaneously. This process is challenging and, if
we take the perspective of organizations, it should happen at various organizational levels. In this context, we have built on various studies that have explored
governance, business models and performance management, measurement and
reporting systems through integrated approaches, in order to highlight the
opportunities that these approaches offer for incorporating the different
dimensions of sustainability, and for understanding their management process.
In so doing, rather than offering prescriptive solutions, we have outlined the
following key elements and levels which we believe should be taken into
account in the implementation of integrated sustainability:
– the integrated governance system, whose actual implementation requires the
effective management of compliance; financial, social and environmental
performance; risk management; and knowledge management;

38

E. Giovannoni and G. Fabietti

– the definition of adequate (hybrid) business models, which are required to
address social, financial and environmental performance dimensions
simultaneously;
– integrated management, measurement and reporting systems, which may
allow an integrated approach to sustainability through planning, execution,
monitoring and communication.
Importantly, by drawing upon the elements mentioned above, our analysis
highlights the potential role played by integrated reporting in the implementation
of integrated sustainability. Given the driving principles and content elements
for integrated reporting provided by the CD, we argue that, if adequately
designed and implemented, integrated reporting can play an active and constructive role in managing sustainability beyond compliance. Therefore, integrated
reporting should be conceived beyond mere issues of compliance and legitimization and should be framed within a broader approach. This approach requires
that companies actually alter their existing practices beyond mere rhetoric and
allow a concrete strategic move towards sustainable development.

References
Abdel-khalik A (2002) Reforming corporate governance post Enron: Shareholders Board of
Trustees and the auditor. J Account Public Pol 21:97–103
Ambec S, Lanoie P (2008) Does it pay to be green? A systematic overview. Acad Manage Perspect
22(4):45–62
Andriof J, McIntosh M (eds) (2001) Perspectives on corporate citizenship. Greenleaf, Sheffield
Battilana J, Dorado S (2010) Building sustainable hybrid organizations: the case of commercial
microfinance organizations. Acad Manage J 53(6):2010
Battilana J, Lee M, Walker J, Dorsey C (2012) In search of the hybrid ideal. Stanfor Soc Innov Rev
Summer:51–55
Benston G, Hartgraves A (2002) Enron: what happened and what we can learn from it. J Account
Public Pol 21:105–127
Berry MA, Rondinelli DA (1998) Proactive corporate environmental management: a new industrial revolution. Acad Manage Exec 12:38–50
Bhimani A, Soonawalla K (2005) From conformance to performance: the corporate responsibilities continuum. J Account Public Pol 24:165–174
Bowen HR (1953) Social responsibilities of the businessman. Harper & Row, New York, NY
Boyd B, Henning N, Reyna E, Wang DE, Welch MD (2009) Hybrid organizations: new business
models for environmental leadership. Greenleaf, Sheffield
Braungart M, McDonough W (1998) The next industrial revolution. The Atlantic Monthly.
October 282(2):82–92
Busco C, Frigo M, Giovannoni E, Riccaboni A, Scapens RW (2005) Beyond compliance: why
integrated governance matters today, Strategic Finance, August, pp. 35–43
Cartwright W, Craig JL (2006) Sustainability: aligning corporate governance, strategy and
operations with the planet. Bus Process Manag J 12(6):741–750
Catturi G (2007) La valorialità aziendale, vol 1. Cedam, Padova
Charreaux G, Desbrières P (2001) Corporate governance: stakeholder value versus shareholder
value. J Manag Gov 5:107–128
Coda V (1988) L’orientamento strategico dell’impresa. UTET, Torino
Collier PM, Berry AJ (2002) Risk in the process of budgeting. Manag Account Res 13(3):273–297

2

What Is Sustainability? A Review of the Concept and Its Applications

39

Collier PM, Berry AJ, Burke G (2004) Risk and control: drivers, practices and consequences.
Chartered Institute of Management Accountant
COSO (2004) Enterprise risk management—Integrated framework, Executive summary. Committee of Sponsoring Organisation of the Treadway Commission
Davis K (1960) Can business afford to ignore social responsibilities? Calif Manag Rev 2:70–76
Dempsey N, Bramley G, Power S, Brown C (2011) The social dimension of sustainable development: defining urban social sustainability. Sustain Dev 19:289–300
Dixon JA, Fallon LA (1989) The concept of sustainability: origins, extensions and usefulness for
policy. Soc Natur Resour 2:73–84
Doane D, MacGillivray A (2001) Economic Sustainability-the business of staying in business,
New Economics Foundation, London. http://www.projectsigma.co.uk/RnDStreams/RD_eco
nomic_sustain.pdf
Dresner S (2002) The principles of sustainability. Earthscan, London
Drexhage J, Murphy D (2010) Sustainable development: from Brundtland to Rio 2012, Background paper for the high level panel on global sustainability, United Nations, New York.
http://www.un.org/wcm/webdav/site/climatechange/shared/gsp/docs/GSP1-6_Background%
20on%20Sustainable%20Devt.pdf
Dyllick T, Hockerts K (2002) Beyond the case for corporate sustainability. Bus Strat Environ
11:130–141
Fahy M, Roche J, Weiner A (2004) Beyond corporate governance: creating corporate value
through performance, conformance and responsibility. Wiley, Chichester
Frederick WC (1960) The growing concern over business responsibility. Calif Manag Rev
2:54–61
Freeman RE (1984) Strategic management: a stakeholder approach. Pitman, Boston, MA
Global Reporting Initiative (GRI) (2013) G4 sustainability reporting guidelines—reporting
principles and standard disclosure. https://www.globalreporting.org/resourcelibrary/GRIG4Part1-Reporting-Principles-and-Standard-Disclosures.pdf
Gond J, Grubnic S, Herzig C, Moon J (2012) Configuring management control systems.
Theorizing the integration of strategy and sustainability. Manage Account Res 23:205–223
Gray R (2010) Is accounting for sustainability actually accounting for sustainability. . . and how
would we know? An exploration of narratives of organisations and the planet. Account Org Soc
35(1):47–62
Hawken P, Lovins A, Lovins LH (1999) Natural capitalism: creating the next industrial revolution.
Little, Brown, Boston, MA
Henri J, Journeault M (2010) Eco-control: the influence of management control systems on
environmental and economic performance. Account Org Soc 35:63–80
Hopwood AG (2009) Accounting and the environment. Account Org Soc 34(3–4):433–439
Hull C, Rothenberg S (2008) Firm performance: the interactions of corporate social performance
with innovation and industry differentiation. Strateg Manag J 29(7):781–789
International Integrated Reporting Council (IIRC) (2013) Consultation draft of the international IR
framework.
http://www.theiirc.org/wp-content/uploads/Consultation-Draft/ConsultationDraft-of-the-InternationalIRFramework.pdf
International Union for Conservation of Nature/United Nations Environment Programme/World
Wildlife Fund (IUCN/UNEP/WWF) (1980) World conservation strategy: living resource
conservation for sustainable development. http://data.iucn.org/dbtw-wpd/edocs/WCS-004.pdf
Jaffe A, Peterson S, Portney P, Stavins R (1995) Environmental regulation and the competitiveness
of US manufacturing: what does the evidence tell us? J Econ Lit 33(1):132–163
Joseph G (2012) Ambiguous but tethered: an accounting basis for sustainability reporting. Crit
Perspect Account 23:93–106
Kidd CV (1992) The evolution of sustainability. J Agr Environ Ethic 5(1):1–26
Kilcullen M, Ohles Kooistra J (1999) At least do no harm: sources on the changing role of business
ethics and corporate social responsibility. Ref Serv Rev 27(2):158–178

40

E. Giovannoni and G. Fabietti

KPMG (2011) KPMG international survey of corporate responsibility reporting 2011. http://www.
kpmg.com/PT/pt/IssuesAndInsights/Documents/corporate-responsibility2011.pdf
Lamb R, Davidson E (2004) Hybrid organization in high-tech enterprise. Paper presented at the
17th Bled eCommerce Conference, Slovenia, 21–23 June 2004, pp. 1–14
Meadows DH, Meadows DL, Randers J, Behrens WW III (1972) The limits to growth. Universe
Books, New York, NY
Melnyk SA, Sroufe RP, Calantone R (2003) Assessing the impact of environmental management
systems on corporate and environmental performance. J Oper Manag 21:329–351
Mikes A (2008) Chief risk officers at crunch time: compliance champions or business partners? J
Risk Manag Financ Inst 2(1):7–25
Miles M, Covin J (2000) Environmental marketing: a source of reputational, competitive and
financial advantage. J Bus Ethic 23(3):299–311
Miller P, Kurunmäki L, O’Leary T (2008) Accounting hybrids and the management of risk.
Account Org Soc 33:942–967
Molina-Azorı́n JF, Claver-Cortés E, López-Gamero MD, Tarı́ JJ (2009) Green management and
financial performance: a literature review. Manag Decis 47(7):1080–1100
Mouritsen J, Thrane S (2006) Accounting network complementarities and the development of
inter-organisational relations. Account Org Soc 31:241–275
Orlitzky M, Schmidt FL, Rynes SL (2003) Corporate social and financial performance: a metaanalysis. Organ Stud 24(3):403–441
Pache AC, Santos F (2011) Inside the hybrid organization-an organizational level view of
responses to conflicting institutional. ESSEC Working Paper 11001. http://www.essec.edu/
faculty/showDeclFileRes.do?declId¼9761&key¼__workpaper__
Phills JA Jr, Deiglmeier K, Miller DT (2008) Rediscovering social innovation. Stanfor Soc Innov
Rev Fall:35–43
Pierson J (2002) Tackling social exclusion. Routledge, London
Porter ME, Kramer MR (2011) Creating shared value. Harvard Bus Rev January–February:1–17
Ratcliffe P (2000) Is the assertion of minority identity compatible with the idea of a socially
inclusive society? In: Askonas P, Stewart A (eds) Social inclusion: possibilities and tensions.
Macmillan, Basingstoke, pp 169–185
Riddell R (1981) Ecodevelopment: economics, ecology, and development: an alternative to
growth imperative models. Gower, London
Sachs I (1984) The strategies of ecodevelopment. FAO Ceres 17:17–21
Schumacher EF (1973) Small is beautiful: economics as if people mattered. Harper & Row,
New York, NY
Seal W (2006) Management accounting and corporate governance: an institutional interpretation
of the agency problem. Manag Account Res 17:389–408
Tivy J, O’Hare G (1982) Human impact on the eco-system. Oliver and Boyd, Edinburgh
United Nations (UN) (1972) Report of the United Nations Conference on the human environment.
http://www.un-documents.net/aconf48-14r1.pdf
United Nations Sustainable Development Solutions Network (UNSDN) (2013) An action agenda
for sustainable development. http://www.unsdsn.org/files/2013/06/130613-SDSN-An-ActionAgenda-for-Sustainable-Development-FINAL.pdf
Werbach A (2009) Strategy for sustainability: a business manifesto. Harvard Business, Boston,
MA
World Business Council for Sustainable Development (WBCSD) (2000) Eco-efficiency: creating
more value with less impact. World Business Council for Sustainable Development, Geneva
World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED) (1987) Our common future.
Oxford University Press, Oxford
World Resources Institute/ International Institute for Environment and Development (WRI/IIED)
(1986) World resources 1986. Basic Books, New York, NY

http://www.springer.com/978-3-319-02167-6

