 

United Nations 
General Assembly 

 

A/HRC/17/27

Distr.: General 
16 May 2011 
 
Original: English 

Human Rights Council 
Seventeenth session 
Agenda item 3 
Promotion and protection of all human rights, civil,  
political, economic, social and cultural rights, 
including the right to development 
 

  Report of the Special Rapporteur on the 

promotion and protection of the right to freedom 
of opinion and expression, Frank La Rue* 

Summary 
 
This report explores key trends and challenges to the right of all individuals to seek, 
receive  and  impart  information  and  ideas  of  all  kinds  through  the  Internet.  The  Special 
Rapporteur  underscores  the  unique  and  transformative  nature  of  the  Internet  not  only  to 
enable individuals to exercise their right to freedom of opinion and expression, but also a 
range of other human rights, and to promote the progress of society as a whole. Chapter III 
of the report underlines the applicability of international human rights norms and standards 
on  the  right  to  freedom  of  opinion  and  expression  to  the  Internet  as  a  communication 
medium,  and  sets  out  the  exceptional  circumstances  under  which  the  dissemination  of 
certain types of information may be restricted. Chapters IV and V address two dimensions 
of  Internet  access  respectively:  (a)  access  to  content;  and  (b)  access  to  the  physical  and 
technical infrastructure required to access the Internet in the first place. More specifically, 
chapter  IV  outlines  some  of  the  ways  in  which  States  are  increasingly  censoring 
information  online,  namely 
through:  arbitrary  blocking  or  filtering  of  content; 
criminalization of legitimate expression; imposition of intermediary liability; disconnecting 
users from Internet access, including on the basis of intellectual property rights law; cyber-
attacks; and inadequate protection of the right to privacy and data protection. Chapter V 
addresses the issue of universal access to the Internet. The Special Rapporteur intends to 
explore this topic further in his future report to the General Assembly. Chapter VI contains 
the Special Rapporteurs conclusions and recommendations concerning the main subjects 
of the report.   

 

 

 

*  Late submission. 

GE.11-13201 

 
The first addendum to the report comprises a summary of communications sent by 
the  Special  Rapporteur  between  20  March  2010  and  31  March  2011,  and  the  replies 
received  from  Governments.  The  second  and  third  addenda  contain  the  findings  of  the 
Special Rapporteurs missions to the Republic of Korea and Mexico respectively. 

A/HRC/17/27 

 

 

2 

Contents 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

I. 
Introduction............................................................................................................. 
II.  Activities of the Special Rapporteur ....................................................................... 
  A.  Communications............................................................................................. 
  B.  Participation in meetings and seminars........................................................... 
  C.   Country visits.................................................................................................. 

 

 

III.  General principles on the right to freedom of opinion and expression and  

the Internet  ............................................................................................................. 
IV.   Restriction of content on the Internet...................................................................... 
  A.  Arbitrary blocking or filtering of content ....................................................... 
  B.   Criminalization of legitimate expression........................................................  
  C. 
Imposition of intermediary liability................................................................ 
  D.  Disconnecting users from Internet access, including on the basis of  
 
violations of intellectual property rights law .................................................. 
  E.   Cyber-attacks..................................................................................................  
Inadequate protection of the right to privacy and data protection................... 
 
V.  Access to the Internet and the necessary infrastructure........................................... 
VI.  Conclusions and recommendations......................................................................... 
  A.  Restriction of content on the Internet ............................................................. 
  B.  Access to the Internet and the necessary infrastructure  ................................. 

F.  

A/HRC/17/27 

Paragraphs 

Page 

13 
418 
4 
510 
1118 

1927 
2859 
2932 
3337 
3848 

4950 
5152 
5359 
6066 
6788 
6984 
8588 

4 
5 
5 
5 
5 

6 
9 
9 
10 
11 

14 
14 
15 
16 
19 
19 
22 

3 

A/HRC/17/27 

 

I.  Introduction 

to 

the 

life,  has  been  unprecedented.  According 

1. 
The  present  report  is  submitted  to  the  Human  Rights  Council  by  the  Special 
Rapporteur  on  the  promotion  and  protection  of  the  right  to  freedom  of  opinion  and 
expression pursuant to Human Rights Council resolution 7/36. In particular, the resolution 
requests the Special Rapporteur to continue to provide his/her views, when appropriate, on 
the  advantages  and  challenges  of  new  information  and  communication  technologies, 
including the Internet and mobile technologies, for the exercise of the right to freedom of 
opinion and expression, including the right to seek, receive and impart information and the 
relevance of a wide diversity of sources, as well as access to the information society for 
all.1 On this basis, the report expands upon the previous mandate holders reports on topics 
related to the Internet,2 taking into account recent developments and information gathered 
through five regional consultations organized by the Special Rapporteur in 2010 and 2011.3 
2.  While the Internet has been in existence since the 1960s, its current use throughout 
the  world  across  different  age  groups,  and  incorporation  into  virtually  every  aspect  of 
modern  human 
International 
Telecommunication  Union,  the  total  number  of  Internet  users  worldwide  is  now  over  2 
billion.4 Active users of Facebook, an online social networking platform, grew from 150 
million to 600 million between 2009 and 2011. The Special Rapporteur believes that the 
Internet  is  one  of  the  most  powerful  instruments  of  the  21st  century  for  increasing 
transparency  in  the  conduct  of  the  powerful,  access  to  information,  and  for  facilitating 
active  citizen  participation  in  building  democratic  societies.  Indeed,  the  recent  wave  of 
demonstrations in countries across the Middle East and North African region has shown the 
key role that the Internet can play in mobilizing the population to call for justice, equality, 
accountability  and  better  respect  for  human  rights.  As  such,  facilitating  access  to  the 
Internet for all individuals, with as little restriction to online content as possible, should be a 
priority for all States.  
3. 
In  this  regard,  the  Special  Rapporteur  would  like  to  underscore  that  access  to  the 
Internet has two dimensions: access to online content, without any restrictions except in a 
few limited cases permitted under international human rights law; and the availability of the 
necessary  infrastructure  and  information  communication  technologies,  such  as  cables, 
modems,  computers  and  software,  to  access  the  Internet  in  the  first  place.  The  first 
dimension  is  addressed  in  Chapter  IV  of  the  report,  which  outlines  some  of  the  ways  in 
which  States  are  restricting  the  flow  of  information  online  through  increasingly 
sophisticated  means.  The  second  dimension  is  examined  in  Chapter  IV.  The  Special 
Rapporteur  intends  to  explore  the  latter  issue  further  in  his  future  report  to  the  General 
Assembly.   

 

 

1  Human Rights Council resolution 7/36, para. 4(f). 
2  E/CN.4/1998/40; E/CN.4/1999/64; E/CN.4/2000/63; E/CN.4/2001/64; E/CN.4/2002/75; 

 
 

 
 

4 

E/CN.4/2005/64; E/CN.4/2006/55; A/HRC/4/27; A/HRC/7/14.  

3  See para. 5 for further information.  
4  International Telecommunication Union, StatShot No.5, January 2011 Available from: 

http://www.itu.int/net/pressoffice/stats/2011/01/index.aspx.  

A/HRC/17/27 

 

 

 

II.  Activities of the Special Rapporteur 

A.   Communications 

4. 
Between  20  March  2010  and  31  March  2011,  the  Special  Rapporteur  sent  195 
communications,  188  of  which  were  submitted  jointly  with  other  special  procedures 
mandate holders. The geographical distribution of the communications was as follows: 29 
per cent for Asia and the Pacific; 26 per cent for the Middle East and North Africa; 16 per 
cent  for  Africa;  15  per  cent  for  Latin  America  and  the  Caribbean;  and  14  per  cent  for 
Europe, Central Asia and North America. The summary of communications sent and replies 
received  from  Governments  can  be  found  in  the  first  addendum  to  this  report 
(A/HRC/17/27/Add.1). 

B.   Participation in meetings and seminars  

From 14 to 17 September 2010, the Special Rapporteur attended the Fifth Internet 

5. 
The Special Rapporteur, with the support of local organizations, organized a series 
of  expert  regional  consultations,  beginning  in  March  2010  in  Stockholm,  followed  by 
Buenos  Aires  (18-19  October  2010),  Bangkok  (18-19  November  2010),  Cairo  (11-13 
January  2011),  Johannesburg  (15-16  February  2011),  and  Delhi  (2-3  March  2011).  The 
regional consultations concluded on 30 March 2011 with an expert meeting in Stockholm, 
organized by the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Sweden. These meetings brought together 
experts  and  human  rights  defenders  working  on  a  range  of  Internet  and  freedom  of 
expression-related issues in order to better understand their experience, needs and priorities 
in different countries and regions for the purposes of this report.  
6. 
Governance Forum in Vilnius. 
7. 
On 30 November 2010, the Special Rapporteur participated in an expert round table 
entitled  Equality,  Non-discrimination  and  Diversity:  Challenge  or  Opportunity  for  the 
Mass Media? in Geneva, organized by the Office of the High Commissioner for Human 
Rights (OHCHR).  
8. 
On  9  and  10  February  2011  and  on  6  and  7  April  2011,  the  Special  Rapporteur 
participated as an expert in the regional expert workshops on the prohibition of incitement 
to  national,  racial  or  religious  hatred  organized  by  OHCHR  in  Vienna  and  Nairobi 
respectively.   
9. 
On  16  March  2011,  the  Special  Rapporteur  shared  his  views  regarding  the 
compatibility  of blocking child pornography on the Internet with the right to freedom of 
expression  in  the  context  of  discussions  on  the  proposal  for  a  directive  of  the  European 
Parliament  and of  the  Council  on  combating  the  sexual abuse  and  sexual  exploitation of 
children and child pornography.  
10. 
The  Special  Rapporteur  also  participated  in  a  series  of  academic  events  in  other 
countries,  including  Guatemala,  Mexico,  the  Philippines,  South  Africa,  Sweden  and  the 
United States of America.  

 

C.   Country visits  

11. 
The  Special  Rapporteur  notes  that  country  visits  remain  central  to  his  mandate. 
Requests sent to Governments to undertake a country mission are based on several factors, 
such as visits undertaken and requested by the former mandate holders, trends that emerge 
from  communications  sent  on  alleged  violations  of  the  right  to  freedom  of  opinion  and 

5 

A/HRC/17/27 

expression, and consideration of geographical balance. The Special Rapporteur hopes that 
visit requests will be favourably received by the Governments concerned. 

 

1.   Missions undertaken in 2010 and 2011  

to 

this 

report 

is 

included  as  an  addendum 

From 5 to 15 May 2010, the Special Rapporteur undertook a mission to the Republic 
report 

12. 
of  Korea.  The  mission 
(A/HRC/17/27/Add.2).  
13. 
From 10 to 21 August 2010, the Special Rapporteur undertook a mission to Mexico, 
together  with  the  Special  Rapporteur  for  Freedom  of  Expression  for  the  Inter-American 
Commission  on  Human  Rights,  Catalina  Botero.  The  mission  report  is  included  as  an 
addendum to this report (A/HRC/17/27/Add.3).  
14. 
From 3 to 5 April 2011, the Special Rapporteur visited the Republic of Hungary, at 
the  invitation  of  the  Government,  to  provide  expert  advice  to  the  Government  regarding 
Hungarian media legislation. The press release with his conclusions and recommendations 
can be found on the OHCHR website.5 
15. 
From 10 to 17 April 2011, the Special Rapporteur undertook a mission to Algeria. 
The mission report will be presented at a future session of the Human Rights Council in 
2012. The press release with his initial conclusions and recommendations can be found on 
the OHCHR website.6 

  2.   Upcoming missions 

16. 
The  visit  to  Israel  and  the  occupied  Palestinian  territory,  which  was  scheduled  to 
take  place  in  May  2011,  has  been  postponed.  The  new  dates  of  the  visit  have  yet  to  be 
agreed upon.  
17. 
The  Special  Rapporteur  would  like  to  thank  the  Italian  Government  for  its  letter 
dated  6  August  2010  in  response  to  his  request  for  a  visit.  He  hopes  that  a  mutually 
convenient set of dates can be agreed upon for a visit in 2011. 

3.   Pending requests 

18.  As of March 2011, the following visit requests from the Special Rapporteur were 
pending: the Islamic Republic of Iran (requested in February 2010), Sri Lanka (requested in 
June  2009),  Tunisia  (requested  in  2009),  and  the  Bolivarian  Republic  of  Venezuela 
(requested in 2003 and 2009). 

III.  General principles on the right to freedom of opinion and 

expression and the Internet 

19.  Very  few  if  any  developments  in  information  technologies  have  had  such  a 
revolutionary  effect  as  the  creation  of  the  Internet.  Unlike  any  other  medium  of 
communication,  such  as  radio,  television  and  printed  publications  based  on  one-way 
transmission  of  information,  the  Internet  represents  a  significant  leap  forward  as  an 
interactive medium. Indeed, with the advent of Web 2.0 services, or intermediary platforms 
that facilitate participatory information sharing and collaboration in the creation of content, 
individuals are no longer passive recipients, but also active publishers of information. Such 

 

 
5  Available from: 

http://www.ohchr.org/en/NewsEvents/Pages/DisplayNews.aspx?NewsID=10916&LangID=E.  

6  Ibid.   

 

 

 

 

 

6 

(c) 

(d) 
(e) 

(a) 
(b) 

for respect of the rights or reputations of others;  
for the protection of national security or of public order (ordre public), or of 

platforms  are  particularly  valuable  in  countries  where  there  is  no  independent  media,  as 
they  enable  individuals  to  share  critical  views  and  to  find  objective  information. 
Furthermore, producers of traditional media can also use the Internet to greatly expand their 
audiences at nominal cost. More generally, by enabling individuals to exchange information 
and  ideas  instantaneously  and  inexpensively  across  national  borders,  the  Internet  allows 
access  to  information  and  knowledge  that  was  previously  unattainable.  This,  in  turn, 
contributes to the discovery of the truth and progress of society as a whole.  
20. 
Indeed, the Internet has become a key means by which individuals can exercise their 
right  to  freedom  of  opinion and  expression,  as guaranteed by  article 19 of  the  Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights and the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. 
The latter provides that:  
Everyone shall have the right to hold opinions without interference;  
 
 
Everyone  shall  have  the  right  to  freedom  of  expression;  this  right  shall 
include freedom to seek, receive and impart information and ideas of all kinds, regardless 
of  frontiers,  either  orally,  in  writing  or  in  print,  in  the  form  of  art,  or  through  any  other 
media of his choice;  
 
The exercise of the rights provided for in paragraph 2 of this article carries 
with it special duties and responsibilities. It may therefore be subject to certain restrictions, 
but these shall only be such as are provided by law and are necessary:  
 
 
public health or morals.  
21.  By explicitly providing that everyone has the right to express him or herself through 
any media, the Special Rapporteur underscores that article 19 of the Universal Declaration 
of  Human  Rights  and  the  Covenant  was  drafted  with  foresight  to  include  and  to 
accommodate  future  technological  developments  through  which  individuals  can  exercise 
their right to freedom of expression. Hence, the framework of international human rights 
law remains relevant today and equally applicable to new communication technologies such 
as the Internet.  
22. 
The right to freedom of opinion and expression is as much a fundamental right on its 
own  accord  as  it  is  an  enabler  of  other  rights,  including  economic,  social  and  cultural 
rights, such as the right to education and the right to take part in cultural life and to enjoy 
the benefits of scientific progress and its applications, as well as civil and political rights, 
such as the rights to freedom of association and assembly. Thus, by acting as a catalyst for 
individuals to exercise their right to freedom of opinion and expression, the Internet also 
facilitates the realization of a range of other human rights.  
23. 
The vast potential and benefits of the Internet are rooted in its unique characteristics, 
such  as  its  speed,  worldwide  reach  and  relative  anonymity.  At  the  same  time,  these 
distinctive  features  of  the  Internet  that  enable  individuals  to  disseminate  information  in 
real  time  and  to  mobilize  people  has  also  created  fear  amongst  Governments  and  the 
powerful.  This  has  led  to  increased  restrictions  on  the  Internet  through  the  use  of 
increasingly sophisticated technologies to block content, monitor and identify activists and 
critics,  criminalization  of  legitimate  expression,  and  adoption  of  restrictive  legislation  to 
justify  such  measures.  In  this  regard,  the  Special  Rapporteur  also  emphasizes  that  the 
existing international human rights standards, in particular article 19, paragraph 3, of the 
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights, remain pertinent in determining the 
types  of  restrictions  that  are  in  breach  of  States  obligations  to  guarantee  the  right  to 
freedom of expression.  

A/HRC/17/27 

7 

A/HRC/17/27 

(c) 

(a) 

(b) 

It  must  be  proven  as  necessary  and  the  least  restrictive  means  required  to 

It  must  be  provided  by  law,  which  is  clear  and  accessible  to  everyone 

24.  As set out in article 19, paragraph 3, of the Covenant, there are certain exceptional 
types of expression which may be legitimately restricted under international human rights 
law,  essentially  to  safeguard  the  rights  of  others.  This  issue  has  been  examined  in  the 
previous annual report of the Special Rapporteur.7 However, the Special Rapporteur deems 
it appropriate to reiterate that any limitation to the right to freedom of expression must pass 
the following three-part, cumulative test:  
 
(principles of predictability and transparency); and  
 
It must pursue one of the purposes set out in article 19, paragraph 3, of the 
Covenant, namely (i) to protect the rights or reputations of others, or (ii) to protect national 
security or of public order, or of public health or morals (principle of legitimacy); and  
 
achieve the purported aim (principles of necessity and proportionality). 
Moreover, any legislation restricting the right to freedom of expression must be applied by 
a body which is independent of any political, commercial, or other unwarranted influences 
in  a  manner  that  is  neither  arbitrary  nor  discriminatory,  and  with  adequate  safeguards 
against  abuse,  including  the  possibility  of  challenge  and  remedy  against  its  abusive 
application. 
25.  As  such,  legitimate  types  of  information  which  may  be  restricted  include  child 
pornography (to protect the rights of children),8 hate speech (to protect the rights of affected 
communities),9  defamation  (to  protect  the  rights  and  reputation  of  others  against 
unwarranted attacks), direct and public incitement to commit genocide (to protect the rights 
of others),10 and advocacy of national, racial or religious hatred that constitutes incitement 
to discrimination, hostility or violence (to protect the rights of others, such as the right to 
life).11  
26.  However, in many instances, States restrict, control, manipulate and censor content 
disseminated  via  the  Internet  without  any  legal  basis,  or  on  the  basis  of  broad  and 
ambiguous laws, without justifying the purpose of such actions; and/or in a manner that is 
clearly unnecessary and/or disproportionate to achieving the intended aim, as explored in 
the following sections. Such actions are clearly incompatible with States obligations under 
international human rights law, and often create a broader chilling effect on the right to 
freedom of opinion and expression.  
27. 
In addition, the Special Rapporteur emphasizes that due to the unique characteristics 
of  the  Internet,  regulations  or  restrictions  which  may  be  deemed  legitimate  and 
proportionate for traditional media are often not so with regard to the Internet. For example, 
in  cases  of  defamation  of  individuals  reputation,  given  the  ability  of  the  individual 
concerned to exercise his/her right of reply instantly to restore the harm caused, the types of 
sanctions  that  are  applied  to  offline  defamation  may  be  unnecessary  or  disproportionate. 

 

 

7   A/HRC/14/23, paras. 72 - 87. 
8   Dissemination of child pornography is prohibited under international human rights law, see e.g. 

Optional Protocol to the Convention on the Rights of the Child on the sale of children, child 
prostitution and child pornography, art. 3, para. 1(c). 

9  See for example Faurisson v. France, United Nations Human Rights Committee, communication 

550/1993, views of 8 November 1996. The issue of hate speech has also been addressed in previous 
reports, see inter alia E/CN.4/1999/64; E/CN.4/2000/63; E/CN.4/2002/75; and A/HRC/4/27. 

10   See for example article 3(c) of the Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of 

Genocide.  

11  See for example article 20, paragraph 2, of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.  

 
 

 

 

 

8 

A/HRC/17/27 

Similarly,  while  the  protection  of  children  from  inappropriate  content  may  constitute  a 
legitimate aim, the availability of software filters that parents and school authorities can use 
to control access to certain content renders action by the Government such as blocking less 
necessary, and difficult to justify.12 Furthermore, unlike the broadcasting sector, for which  
registration or licensing has been necessary to allow States to distribute limited frequencies, 
such requirements cannot be justified in the case of the Internet, as it can accommodate an 
unlimited number of points of entry and an essentially unlimited number of users.13  

 

IV.   Restriction of content on the Internet     

28.  As outlined under Chapter III, any restriction to the right to freedom of expression 
must meet the strict criteria under international human rights law. A restriction on the right 
of  individuals  to  express  themselves  through  the  Internet  can  take  various  forms,  from 
technical measures to prevent access to certain content, such as blocking and filtering, to 
inadequate guarantees of the right to privacy and protection of personal data, which inhibit 
the dissemination of opinions and information. The Special Rapporteur is of the view that 
the  arbitrary  use  of  criminal  law  to  sanction  legitimate  expression  constitutes  one  of  the 
gravest forms of restriction to the right, as it not only creates a chilling effect, but also 
leads  to  other  human  rights  violations,  such  as  arbitrary  detention  and  torture  and  other 
forms of cruel, inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment.  

 

A.   Arbitrary blocking or filtering of content  

29.  Blocking refers to measures taken to prevent certain content from reaching an end-
user. This includes preventing users from accessing specific websites, Internet Protocol (IP) 
addresses,  domain  name  extensions,  the  taking  down  of  websites  from  the  web  server 
where they are hosted, or using filtering technologies to exclude pages containing keywords 
or other specific content from appearing. For example, several countries continue to block 
access to YouTube,14 a video-sharing website on which users can upload, share and view 
videos. China, which has in place one of the most sophisticated and extensive systems for 
controlling information on the Internet, has adopted extensive filtering systems that block 
access to websites containing key terms such as democracy and human rights.15 The 
Special  Rapporteur  is  deeply  concerned  that  mechanisms  used  to  regulate  and  censor 
information on the Internet are increasingly sophisticated, with multi-layered controls that 
are often hidden from the public.  
30. 
The Special Rapporteur is also concerned by the emerging trend of timed (or just-
in-time)  blocking  to  prevent  users  from  accessing  or  disseminating  information  at  key 
political moments, such as elections, times of social unrest, or anniversaries of politically or 
historically  significant  events.  During  such  times,  websites  of  opposition  parties, 
independent  media,  and  social  networking  platforms  such  as  Twitter  and  Facebook  are 

 

 

 

 

 

 

12  Center for Democracy & Technology, Regardless of Frontiers: The International Right to Freedom 

of Expression in the Digital Age, version 0.5 - Discussion draft (April 2011), p.5.  

13   However, this does not apply to registration with a domain name authority for purely technical 

reasons or rules of general application which apply without distinction to any kind of commercial 
operation. 

14  See OpenNet Initiative, YouTube Censored: A Recent History. Available from: 

http://opennet.net/youtube-censored-a-recent-history.  

15   Reporters without Borders, Enemies of the Internet, March 2010. Available from: 

http://en.rsf.org/IMG/pdf/Internet_enemies.pdf, pp. 8-12. 

9 

A/HRC/17/27 

blocked, as witnessed in the context of recent protests across the Middle East and North 
African region. In Egypt, users were disconnected entirely from Internet access.  
31. 
States  use  of  blocking  or  filtering  technologies  is  frequently  in  violation  of  their 
obligation to guarantee the right to freedom of expression, as the criteria mentioned under 
chapter  III  are  not  met.  Firstly,  the  specific  conditions  that  justify  blocking  are  not 
established in law, or are provided by law but in an overly broad and vague manner, which 
risks content being blocked arbitrarily and excessively. Secondly, blocking is not justified 
to pursue aims which are listed under article 19, paragraph 3, of the International Covenant 
on Civil and Political Rights, and blocking lists are generally kept secret, which makes it 
difficult  to  assess  whether  access  to  content  is  being  restricted  for  a  legitimate  purpose. 
Thirdly, even where justification is provided, blocking measures constitute an unnecessary 
or disproportionate means to achieve the purported aim, as they are often not sufficiently 
targeted  and  render  a  wide  range  of  content  inaccessible  beyond  that  which  has  been 
deemed  illegal.  Lastly,  content  is  frequently  blocked  without  the  intervention  of  or 
possibility for review by a judicial or independent body.  
32. 
The Special Rapporteur notes that child pornography is one clear exception where 
blocking measures can be justified, provided that the national law is sufficiently precise and 
there are effective safeguards against abuse or misuse, including oversight and review by an 
independent and impartial tribunal or regulatory body. However, he is also concerned that 
States frequently rely heavily on blocking measures, rather than focusing their efforts on 
prosecuting those responsible for the production and dissemination of child pornography. 
Additionally, as child pornography is often a by-product of trafficking and prostitution of 
children, the Special Rapporteur urges States to take holistic measures to combat the root 
problems that give rise to child pornography. 

 

B.   Criminalization of legitimate expression  

33. 
The types of action taken by States to limit the dissemination of content online not 
only include measures to prevent information from reaching the end-user, but also direct 
targeting  of  those  who  seek,  receive  and  impart  politically  sensitive  information  via  the 
Internet.  Physically  silencing  criticism  or  dissent  through  arbitrary  arrests  and  detention, 
enforced  disappearance,  harassment  and  intimidation  is  an  old  phenomenon,  and  also 
applies to Internet users. This issue has been explored in the Special Rapporteurs report to 
the General Assembly under the section on protection of citizen journalists (A/65/284). 
Such  actions  are  often  aimed  not  only  to  silence  legitimate  expression,  but  also  to 
intimidate a population to push its members towards self-censorship.  
34. 
The Special Rapporteur remains concerned that legitimate online expression is being 
criminalized in contravention of States international human rights obligations, whether it is 
through  the  application  of  existing  criminal  laws  to  online  expression,  or  through  the 
creation of new laws specifically designed to criminalize expression on the Internet. Such 
laws  are  often  justified  on  the  basis  of  protecting  an  individuals  reputation,  national 
security  or  countering  terrorism,  but  in  practice  are  used  to  censor  content  that  the 
Government and other powerful entities do not like or agree with.  
35.  One  clear  example  of  criminalizing  legitimate  expression  is  the  imprisonment  of 
bloggers around the world. According to Reporters without Borders, in 2010, 109 bloggers 
were in prison on charges related to the content of their online expression.16 Seventy-two 

 

 

16   Available from: http://en.rsf.org/press-freedom-barometer-journalists-killed.html?annee=2010.   

 

10 

individuals were imprisoned in China alone, followed by Viet Nam and Iran, with 17 and 
13 persons respectively.17   
36. 
Imprisoning individuals for seeking, receiving and imparting information and ideas 
can  rarely  be  justified  as  a  proportionate  measure  to  achieve  one  of  the  legitimate  aims 
under article 19, paragraph 3, of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. 
The Special Rapporteur would like to reiterate that defamation should be decriminalized, 
and  that  protection  of  national  security  or  countering  terrorism  cannot  be  used  to  justify 
restricting  the  right  to  expression  unless  the  Government  can  demonstrate  that:  (a)  the 
expression is intended to incite imminent violence; (b) it is likely to incite such violence; 
and  (c)  there  is  a  direct  and  immediate  connection  between  the  expression  and  the 
likelihood or occurrence of such violence.18  
37.  Additionally,  the  Special  Rapporteur  reiterates  that  the  right  to  freedom  of 
expression  includes  expression  of  views  and  opinions  that  offend,  shock  or  disturb. 
Moreover, as the Human Rights Council has also stated in its resolution 12/16, restrictions 
should  never  be  applied,  inter  alia,  to  discussion  of  Government  policies  and  political 
debate; reporting on human rights, Government activities and corruption in Government; 
engaging  in  election  campaigns,  peaceful demonstrations  or  political  activities,  including 
for peace or democracy; and expression of opinion and dissent, religion or belief, including 
by persons belonging to minorities or vulnerable groups.19 

 

C.   Imposition of intermediary liability    

38.  One of the unique features of the Internet is that the way in which information is 
transmitted  largely  depends  on  intermediaries,  or  private  corporations  which  provide 
services  and  platforms  that  facilitate  online  communication or  transactions between  third 
parties,  including  giving  access  to,  hosting,  transmitting  and  indexing  content.20 
Intermediaries thus range from Internet service providers (ISPs) to search engines, and from 
blogging  services  to  online  community  platforms.  With  the  advent  of  Web  2.0  services, 
individuals can now publish information without the centralized gateway of editorial review 
common in traditional publication formats. The range of services offered by intermediaries 
has  flourished  over  the  past  decade,  mainly  due  to  the  legal  protection  that  they  have 
enjoyed  from  liability  for  third-party  content  that  Internet  users  send  via  their  services. 
However, the Special Rapporteur notes that in recent years, intermediaries protection from 
liability has been eroding.  
39.  Many States have adopted laws which impose liability upon intermediaries if they 
do  not  filter,  remove  or  block  content  generated  by  users  which  is  deemed  illegal.  For 
example, in Turkey, Law 5651 on the Prevention of Crime Committed in the Information 
Technology  Domain,  which  was  enacted  in  2007,  imposes  new  obligations  on  content 
providers,  ISPs  and  website  hosts.  It  also  grants  authority  to  an  agency  to  issue 
administrative orders to block websites for content hosted outside of Turkey, and to take 
down eight broad types of unlawful content,21 including crimes against Ataturk, which 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

17  Reporters without Borders, Enemies of the Internet, March 2010. Available from: 

http://en.rsf.org/IMG/pdf/Internet_enemies.pdf.  

18   Johannesburg Principles on National Security, Freedom of Expression and Access to Information, 

Principle 6, as endorsed in E/CN.4/1996/39.  

19  Human Rights Council resolution 12/16, para. 5(p). 
20   Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development, The Economic and Social Role of Internet 

Intermediaries (April 2010).    

21  Law 5651, art. 8. 

A/HRC/17/27 

11 

A/HRC/17/27 

includes  insulting  the  founder  of  the  Republic  of  Turkey,  Mustafa  Kemal  Ataturk.  In 
Thailand,  the  2007  Computer  Crimes  Act  imposes  liability  upon  intermediaries  that 
transmit  or  host  third-party  content  and  content  authors  themselves.22  This  law  has  been 
used to prosecute individuals providing online platforms, some of which are summarized in 
the first addendum.  
40. 
In other cases, intermediary liability is imposed through privacy and data protection 
laws.  For  example,  a  court  in  Italy  convicted  three  Google  executives  for  violating  the 
Italian data protection code after a video depicting cruelty to a disabled teenager was posted 
by a user on the Google video service. Even though the video was taken down within hours 
of notification by Italian law enforcers, the judge found the Google executives guilty.23 The 
Government  of  China  requires  ISPs  and  web  platforms  to  conduct  surveillance  on  their 
users, and they are also held directly responsible for content posted by users.24 Companies 
that  fail  to  comply  with  this  obligation  risk  losing  their  business  licences.  Holding 
intermediaries  liable  for  the  content  disseminated  or  created  by  their  users  severely 
undermines  the  enjoyment  of  the  right  to  freedom  of  opinion  and  expression,  because  it 
leads to self-protective and over-broad private censorship, often without transparency and 
the due process of the law.  
41. 
Several States have sought to protect intermediaries through adopting variations on 
what is known as a notice-and-takedown regime. Such a system protects intermediaries 
from liability, provided that they take down unlawful material when they are made aware of 
its  existence.  For  example,  under  the  European  Union-wide  E-Commerce  Directive,  a 
provider of hosting services for user-generated content can avoid liability for such content 
if it does not have actual knowledge of illegal activity and if it expeditiously removes the 
content in question when made aware of it.25 Similarly, the Digital Millennium Copyright 
Act of the United States of America also provides safe harbour for intermediaries, provided 
that they take down the content in question promptly after notification.26  
42.  However, while a notice-and-takedown system is one way to prevent intermediaries 
from actively engaging in or encouraging unlawful behaviour on their services, it is subject 
to abuse by both State and private actors. Users who are notified by the service provider 
that their content has been flagged as unlawful often have little recourse or few resources to 
challenge the takedown.27 Moreover, given that intermediaries may still be held financially 
or in some cases criminally liable if they do not remove content upon receipt of notification 
by users regarding unlawful content, they are inclined to err on the side of safety by over-
censoring potentially illegal content. Lack of transparency in the intermediaries decision-
making process also often obscures discriminatory practices or political pressure affecting 
the  companies  decisions.  Furthermore,  intermediaries,  as  private  entities,  are  not  best 
placed to make the determination of whether a particular content is illegal, which requires 
careful balancing of competing interests and consideration of defences.  

 

 

22   Computer Crimes Act B.E.2550 (2007), sections 14 and 15.   
23   Reporters without Borders, Google conviction could lead to prior control over videos posted online, 

24 February 2010. 

 
 

 

 
 
 

12 

24   Reporters without Borders, Enemies of the Internet, March 2010. Available from: 

http://en.rsf.org/IMG/pdf/Internet_enemies.pdf, pp. 8-12.  

25  E/Commerce Directive, 2000/31/EC, art. 14. 
26  Digital Millennium Copyright Act, Section 512.  
27  N. Villeneuve, Evasion Tactics: Global Online Censorship is Growing, but so are the Means to 

challenge it and Protect Privacy, Index on Censorship Vol. 36 No. 4, (November 2007); Center for 
Democracy and Technology, Campaign takedown troubles: how meritless copyright claims threaten 
online political speech (September 2010).  

43. 
The Special Rapporteur believes that censorship measures should never be delegated 
to a private entity, and that no one should be held liable for content on the Internet of which 
they are not the author. Indeed, no State should use or force intermediaries to undertake 
censorship on its behalf, as is the case in the Republic of Korea with the establishment of 
the Korea Communications Standards Commission, a quasi-State and quasi-private entity 
tasked  to  regulate  online  content  (see  A/HRC/17/27/Add.2).  The  Special  Rapporteur 
welcomes  initiatives  taken  in  other  countries  to  protect  intermediaries,  such  as  the  bill 
adopted in Chile, which provides that intermediaries are not required to prevent or remove 
access to user-generated content that infringes copyright laws until they are notified by a 
court order. 28 A similar regime has also been proposed in Brazil.29  

 

  Responsibility of intermediaries  

44.  Given that Internet services are run and maintained by private companies, the private 
sector has gained unprecedented influence over individuals right to freedom of expression 
and access to information. Generally, companies have played an extremely positive role in 
facilitating the exercise of the right to freedom of opinion and expression. At the same time, 
given  the pressure  exerted upon  them  by  States,  coupled with  the fact  that  their  primary 
motive  is  to  generate  profit  rather  than  to  respect  human  rights,  preventing  the  private 
sector from assisting or being complicit in human rights violations of States is essential to 
guarantee the right to freedom of expression.   
45.  While  States  are  the  duty-bearers  for  human  rights,  private  actors  and  business 
enterprises  also  have  a  responsibility  to  respect  human  rights.  In  this  regard,  the  Special 
Rapporteur  highlights  the  framework  of  Protect,  Respect  and  Remedy  which  has  been 
developed by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General on the issue of human 
rights and transnational corporations and other business enterprises. The framework rests 
on three pillars: (a) the duty of the State to protect against human rights abuses by third 
parties,  including  business  enterprises,  through  appropriate  policies,  regulation  and 
adjudication;  (b)  the  corporate  responsibility  to  respect  human  rights,  which  means  that 
business enterprises should act with due diligence to avoid infringing the rights of others 
and to address adverse impacts with which they are involved; and (c) the need for greater 
access by victims to effective remedy, both judicial and non-judicial.30  
46. 
The Special Rapporteur notes that multi-stakeholder initiatives are essential to deal 
effectively with issues related to the Internet, and the Global Network Initiative serves as a 
helpful  example  to  encourage  good  practice  by  corporations.31  Although  only  three 
corporations, namely Google, Microsoft, and Yahoo!, have participated in this initiative so 
far, the Special Rapporteur welcomes their commitment to undertake a human rights impact 
assessment  of  their  decisions,  including  before  entering  a  foreign  market,  and  to  ensure 
transparency  and accountability when confronted with situations that  may undermine  the 
rights to freedom of expression and privacy. Googles Transparency Report32 is an outcome 
of  such  work,  and  provides  information  on  Government  inquiries  for  information  about 
users  and  requests  for  Google  to  take  down  or  censor  content,  as  well  as  statistical 
information on traffic to Google services, such as YouTube. By illustrating traffic patterns 
for a given country or region, it allows users to discern any disruption in the free flow of 
information, whether it is due to Government censorship or a cable cut.  

 

 

28  Ley No. 20435, Modifica La Ley No.17.336 Sobre Propiedad Intelectual, chap. III, art. 85-L  art. 85-

 

 
 
 
 

U, adopted on 4 May 2010.  

29   New Draft Bill Proposition: Available for Download, Marco Civil da Internet, 21 May 2010.  
30   A/HRC/17/31, para. 6.  
31  See http://www.globalnetworkinitiative.org/principles/index.php.   
32   See www.google.com/transparencyreport.   

A/HRC/17/27 

13 

A/HRC/17/27 

47. 
The Special Rapporteur commends such initiatives to enhance the responsibility of 
Internet intermediaries to respect human rights. To avoid infringing the right to freedom of 
expression and the right to privacy of Internet users, the Special Rapporteur recommends 
intermediaries to: only implement restrictions to these rights after judicial intervention; be 
transparent to the user involved about measures taken, and where applicable to the wider 
public; provide, if possible, forewarning to users before the implementation of restrictive 
measures; and minimize the impact of restrictions strictly to the content involved. Finally, 
there  must  be  effective  remedies  for  affected  users,  including  the  possibility  of  appeal 
through the procedures provided by the intermediary and by a competent judicial authority. 
48.  More  generally,  the  Special  Rapporteur  encourages  corporations  to  establish  clear 
and  unambiguous  terms  of  service  in  line  with  international  human  rights  norms  and 
principles, increase transparency of and accountability for their activities, and continuously 
review the impact of their services and technologies on the right to freedom of expression 
of their users, as well as on the potential pitfalls involved when they are misused.   

D.   Disconnecting users from Internet access, including on the basis of 

violations of intellectual property rights law 

49.  While blocking and filtering measures deny access to certain content on the Internet, 
States  have  also  taken  measures  to  cut  off  access  to  the  Internet  entirely.  The  Special 
Rapporteur is deeply concerned by discussions regarding a centralized on/off control over 
Internet traffic.33 In addition, he is alarmed by proposals to disconnect users from Internet 
access if they violate intellectual property rights. This also includes legislation based on the 
concept  of  graduated  response,  which  imposes  a  series  of  penalties  on  copyright 
infringers  that  could  lead  to  suspension  of  Internet  service,  such  as  the  so-called  three-
strikes-law in France34 and the Digital Economy Act 2010 of the United Kingdom.35 
50.  Beyond  the  national  level,  the  Anti-Counterfeiting  Trade  Agreement  (ACTA)  has 
been  proposed  as  a  multilateral  agreement  to  establish  international  standards  on 
intellectual  property  rights  enforcement.  While  the  provisions  to  disconnect  individuals 
from  Internet  access  for  violating  the  treaty  have  been  removed  from  the  final  text  of 
December  2010,  the  Special  Rapporteur  remains  watchful  about  the  treatys  eventual 
implications for intermediary liability and the right to freedom of expression.  

E.   Cyber-attacks  

51.  Cyber-attacks, or attempts to undermine or compromise the function of a computer-
based system, include measures such as hacking into accounts or computer networks, and 
often take the form of distributed denial of service (DDoS) attacks. During such attacks, a 
group of computers is used to inundate a web server where the targeted website is hosted 
with requests, and as a result, the targeted website crashes and becomes inaccessible for a 
certain  period  of  time.  As  with  timed  blocking,  such  attacks  are  sometimes  undertaken 
during key political moments. The Special Rapporteur also notes that websites of human 

 

 

33  Reaching for the kill switch, The Economist, 10 February 2011. 
34  Decision 2009-580, Act furthering the diffusion and protection of creation on the Internet, (original: 

Loi favorisant la diffusion et la protection de la creation sur internet), Conseil Constitutionnel, 10 
June 2010. Available from: http://www.conseil-constitutionnel.fr/conseil-
constitutionnel/root/bank_mm/anglais/2009_580dc.pdf. 

35  Digital Economy Act 2010, sections 3-16. 

 

 

 
 

 

14 

A/HRC/17/27 

rights  organizations  and  dissidents  are  frequently  and  increasingly  becoming  targets  of 
DDoS attacks, some of which are included in the first addendum to this report.  
52.  When a cyber-attack can be attributed to the State, it clearly constitutes inter alia a 
violation  of  its  obligation  to  respect  the  right  to  freedom  of  opinion  and  expression. 
Although determining the origin of cyber-attacks and the identity of the perpetrator is often 
technically difficult, it should be noted that States have an obligation to protect individuals 
against interference by third parties that undermines the enjoyment of the right to freedom 
of opinion and expression. This positive obligation to protect entails that States must take 
appropriate  and  effective  measures  to  investigate  actions  taken  by  third  parties,  hold  the 
persons responsible to account, and adopt measures to prevent such recurrence in the future.  

 

F.   Inadequate protection of the right to privacy and data protection  

53. 
The right to privacy is essential for individuals to express themselves freely. Indeed, 
throughout history, peoples willingness to engage in debate on controversial subjects in the 
public  sphere  has  always  been  linked  to  possibilities  for  doing  so  anonymously.  The 
Internet  allows  individuals  to  access  information  and  to  engage  in  public  debate  without 
having  to  reveal  their  real  identities,  for  example  through  the  use  of  pseudonyms  on 
message boards and chat forums. Yet, at the same time, the Internet also presents new tools 
and  mechanisms  through  which  both  State  and  private  actors  can  monitor  and  collect 
information about individuals communications and activities on the Internet. Such practices 
can  constitute  a  violation  of  the  Internet  users  right  to  privacy,  and,  by  undermining 
peoples confidence and security on the Internet, impede the free flow of information and 
ideas online.  
54. 
The  Special  Rapporteur  is  deeply  concerned  by  actions  taken  by  States  against 
individuals communicating via the Internet, frequently justified broadly as being necessary 
to protect national security or to combat terrorism. While such ends can be legitimate under 
international  human  rights  law,  surveillance  often  takes  place  for  political,  rather  than 
security reasons in an arbitrary and covert manner. For example, States have used popular 
social networking sites, such as Facebook, to identify and to track the activities of human 
rights defenders and opposition members, and in some cases have collected usernames and 
passwords to access private communications of Facebook users.  
55.  A number of States are also introducing laws or modifying existing laws to increase 
their  power  to  monitor  Internet  users  activities  and  content  of  communication  without 
providing sufficient guarantees against abuse. In addition, several States have established a 
real-name identification system before users can post comments or upload content online, 
which  can  compromise  their  ability  to  express  themselves  anonymously,  particularly  in 
countries  where  human  rights  are  frequently  violated.  Furthermore,  steps  are  also  being 
taken in many countries to reduce the ability of Internet users to protect themselves from 
arbitrary surveillance, such as limiting the use of encryption technologies.  
56. 
The  Special  Rapporteur  also  notes  that  there  are  insufficient  or  inadequate  data 
protection laws in many States stipulating who is allowed to access personal data, what it 
can be used for, how it should be stored, and for how long. The necessity of adopting clear 
laws to protect personal data is further increased in the current information age, where large 
volumes of personal data are collected and stored by intermediaries, and there is a worrying 
trend of States obliging or pressuring these private actors to hand over information of their 
users. Moreover, with the increasing use of cloud-computing services, where information is 
stored on servers distributed in different geographical locations, ensuring that third parties 
also adhere to strict data protection guarantees is paramount.  

15 

A/HRC/17/27 

57. 
The  right  to  privacy  is  guaranteed  by  article  12  of  the  Universal  Declaration  of 
Human Rights and article 17 of the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. 
The latter provides that (1) no one shall be subjected to arbitrary or unlawful interference 
with his privacy, family, home or correspondence, nor to unlawful attacks on his honour 
and  reputation;  (2)  everyone  has  the  right  to  the  protection  of  the  law  against  such 
interference  or  attacks.  Although  correspondence  primarily  has  been  interpreted  as 
written  letters,  this  term  today  covers  all  forms  of  communication,  including  via  the 
Internet.36 The right to private correspondence thus gives rise to a comprehensive obligation 
on the part of the State to ensure that e-mails and other forms of online communication are 
actually delivered to the desired recipient without interference or inspection by State organs 
or by third parties.37  
58. 
In addition, the protection of personal data represents a special form of respect for 
the right to privacy.38 States parties are required by article 17(2) to regulate, through clearly 
articulated laws, the recording, processing, use and conveyance of automated personal data 
and to protect those affected against misuse by State organs as well as private parties. In 
addition  to  prohibiting  data  processing  for  purposes  that  are  incompatible  with  the 
Covenant, data protection laws must establish rights to information, correction and, if need 
be, deletion of data and provide effective supervisory measures. Moreover, as stated in the 
Human Rights Committees general comment on the right to privacy, in order to have the 
most  effective  protection  of  his  private  life,  every  individual  should  have  the  right  to 
ascertain  in  an  intelligible  form,  whether,  and  if  so,  what  personal  data  is  stored  in 
automatic  data  files,  and  for  what  purposes.  Every  individual  should  also  be  able  to 
ascertain which public authorities or private individuals or bodies control or may control 
their files.39 
59. 
The Special Rapporteur notes that the right to privacy can be subject to restrictions 
or limitations under certain exceptional circumstances. This may include State surveillance 
measures  for  the  purposes  of  administration  of  criminal  justice,  prevention  of  crime  or 
combating  terrorism.  However,  such  interference  is  permissible  only  if  the  criteria  for 
permissible limitations under international human rights law are met. Hence, there must be 
a  law  that  clearly  outlines  the  conditions  whereby  individuals  right  to  privacy  can  be 
restricted under exceptional circumstances, and measures encroaching upon this right must 
be taken on the basis of a specific decision by a State authority expressly empowered by 
law to do so, usually the judiciary, for the purpose of protecting the rights of others, for 
example  to  secure  evidence  to  prevent  the  commission  of  a  crime,  and  must  respect  the 
principle of proportionality.40   

V.  Access to the Internet and the necessary infrastructure 

60. 
The  Internet,  as  a  medium  by  which  the  right  to  freedom  of  expression  can  be 
exercised,  can  only  serve  its  purpose  if  States  assume  their  commitment  to  develop 
effective policies to attain universal access to the Internet. Without concrete policies and 

 

 

36  Manfred Nowak, UN Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. CCPR Commentary (Kehl am Rhein, 

Engel, 2005), p. 401.  

37  Ibid. 
38  Ibid. 
39  Human Rights Committee, general comment No. 16 on article 17 of the International Covenant on 

40  Manfred Nowak, UN Covenant on Civil and Political Rights. CCPR Commentary (Kehl am Rhein, 

Civil and Political Rights, para. 10. 

Engel, 2005), pp. 401-402. 

 

 

 
 
 

 

16 

plans of action, the Internet will become a technological tool that is accessible only to a 
certain elite while perpetrating the digital divide. 
61. 
The term digital divide refers to the gap between people with effective access to 
digital and information technologies, in particular the Internet, and those with very limited 
or no access at all. In contrast to 71.6 Internet users per 100 inhabitants in developed States, 
there are only 21.1 Internet users per 100 inhabitants in developing States.41 This disparity 
is starker in the African region, with only 9.6 users per 100 inhabitants.42 In addition, digital 
divides also exist along wealth, gender, geographical and social lines within States. Indeed, 
with wealth being one of the significant factors in determining who can access information 
communication  technologies,  Internet  access  is  likely  to  be  concentrated  among  socio-
economic  elites,  particularly  in  countries  where  Internet  penetration  is  low.  In  addition, 
people in rural areas are often confronted with obstacles to Internet access, such as lack of 
technological  availability,  slower  Internet  connection,  and/or  higher  costs.  Furthermore, 
even  where  Internet  connection  is  available,  disadvantaged  groups,  such  as  persons  with 
disabilities and persons belonging to minority groups, often face barriers to accessing the 
Internet in a way that is meaningful, relevant and useful to them in their daily lives.  
62. 
The  Special  Rapporteur  is  thus  concerned  that  without  Internet  access,  which 
facilitates  economic  development  and  the  enjoyment  of  a  range  of  human  rights, 
marginalized  groups  and  developing  States  remain  trapped  in  a  disadvantaged  situation, 
thereby perpetuating inequality both within and between States. As he has noted previously, 
to combat situations of inequality it is critical to ensure that marginalized or disadvantaged 
sections of society can express their grievances effectively and that their voices are heard. 43 
The Internet offers a key means by which such groups can obtain information, assert their 
rights, and participate in public debates concerning social, economic and political changes 
to  improve  their  situation.  Moreover,  the  Internet  is  an  important  educational  tool,  as  it 
provides access to a vast and expanding source of knowledge, supplements or transforms 
traditional  forms  of  schooling,  and  makes,  through  open  access  initiatives,  previously 
unaffordable scholarly research available to people in developing States. Additionally, the 
educational benefits attained from Internet usage directly contribute to the human capital of 
States. 
63. 
The Special Rapporteur notes that several initiatives have been taken in an attempt 
to  bridge  the  digital  divide.  At  the  international  level,  Target  8f  of  the  Millennium 
Development Goals calls upon States, in consultation with the private sector, [to] make 
available  the  benefits  of  new  technologies,  especially  information  and  communications. 
The necessity of achieving this target was reiterated in the 2003 Plan of Action adopted at 
the Geneva World Summit on the Information Society, which outlines specific goals and 
targets to build an inclusive Information Society; to put the potential of knowledge and 
[information  communication  technologies]  (ICTs)  at  the  service  of  development;  to 
promote  the  use  of  information  and  knowledge  for  the  achievement  of  internationally 
agreed development goals.44 To implement this plan of action, in 2005, the International 
Telecommunication Union launched the Connect the World project.45 Another initiative 
to spread the availability of ICTs in developing countries is the One Laptop Per Child 

 

 

41  Key Global Telecom Indicators for the World Telecommunication Service Sector, International 

Telecommunication Union, 21 October 2010. 

42  Ibid. 
43  See A/HRC/14/23.  
44  WSIS-03/GENEVA/DOC/5-E, World Summit on the Information Society, 12 December 2003. 

Available from: http://www.itu.int/wsis/docs/geneva/official/poa.html. 

45  Connect the World, International Telecommunication Union. Available from: 

http://www.itu.int/ITU-D/connect. 

 

 
 
 

 

A/HRC/17/27 

17 

A/HRC/17/27 

project  that  has  been  supported  by  the  United  Nations  Development  Programme.  This 
project  distributes  affordable  laptops  that  are  specifically  customized  for  the  learning 
environment of children. Since this project was mentioned in the previous mandate holders 
report  in  2006,  2.4  million  laptops  have  been  distributed  to  children  and  teachers 
worldwide.46 In Uruguay, the project has reached 480,000 children, amounting to almost all 
children  enrolled  in  primary  school.47  States  in  Africa  lag  behind,  but  in  Rwanda,  over 
56,000 laptops have been distributed, with plans for the figure to reach 100,000 by June 
2011.48 
64.  At the national level, the Special Rapporteur notes that a number of initiatives have 
also been taken by States to address the digital divide. In India, Common Service Centres, 
or public e-Kiosks, have been established by the Government in collaboration with the 
private sector as part of the National E-Governance Plan of 2006. As of January 2011, over 
87,000 centres have reportedly been established,49 although the Special Rapporteur notes 
that the majority of the countrys population still remains without Internet access. In Brazil, 
the Government has launched a computers for all programme which offers subsidies for 
purchasing  computers.50  Additionally,  over  100,000  publicly  sponsored  Internet  access 
centres,  known  as  Local  Area  Network  (LAN)  Houses  with  fast  broadband  Internet 
connections, have been established.51 Such public access points are particularly important 
to facilitate access for the poorest socio-economic groups, as they often do not have their 
own personal computers at home.  
65. 
In  some  economically  developed  States,  Internet  access  has  been  recognized  as  a 
right. For example, the parliament of Estonia passed legislation in 2000 declaring Internet 
access  a  basic  human  right.52  The  constitutional  council  of  France  effectively  declared 
Internet  access  a  fundamental  right  in  2009,  and  the  constitutional  court  of  Costa  Rica 
reached a similar decision in 2010.53 Going a step further, Finland passed a decree in 2009 
stating  that  every  Internet  connection  needs  to  have  a  speed  of  at  least  one  Megabit  per 
second  (broadband  level).54  The  Special  Rapporteur  also  takes  note  that  according  to  a 

 

 

46  E/CN.4/2006/55, 30 December 2005, para. 34; Map, One Laptop per Child. Available from: 

http://one.laptop.org/map. 

47  Available from: http://laptop.org/en/children/countries/index.shtml.  
48  Frank Kanyesigye, OLPC Extends to Over 100 Schools, New Times, 11 February 2011. Available 

from:  
  http://www.newtimes.co.rw/index.php?issue=14533&article=38241. 
49  ICT Ministers meet tomorrow for speeding-up delivery of e-services, Press Information Bureau, 

Government of India, 26 October 2009; and E-Governance Initiatives-Changing Lives for the 
better, Press Information Bureau, Government of India, 24 January 2011. Available from: 
http://pib.nic.in/newsite/erelease.aspx?relid=69324. 

50  Ronaldo Lemos and Paula Martini, LAN Houses: A new wave of digital inclusion in Brazil, 21 

September 2009. Available from: 
http://publius.cc/lan_houses_new_wave_digital_inclusion_brazil/091509.  

51  Ibid.   
52  Colin Woodard, Estonia, where being wired is a human right, Christian Science Monitor, 1 July 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

18 

2003. 

53  Decision 2009-580, Act furthering the diffusion and protection of creation on the Internet. 
54  732/2009, Decree of the Ministry of Transport and Communications on the minimum rate of a 

functional Internet access as a universal service, (original: Liikenne- ja viestintaministerion asetus 
tarkoituksenmukaisen internet-yhtyeden vahimmaisnopeudesta yleispalvelussa), FINLEX, 22 October 
2009. Available from: http://www.finlex.fi/en/laki/kaannokset/2009/en20090732. 

survey by the British Broadcasting Corporation in March 2010, 79% of those interviewed 
in 26 countries believe that Internet access is a fundamental human right.55 
66.  Given that access to basic commodities such as electricity remains difficult in many 
developing  States,  the  Special  Rapporteur  is  acutely  aware  that  universal  access  to  the 
Internet for all individuals worldwide cannot be achieved instantly. However, the Special 
Rapporteur  reminds  all  States  of  their  positive  obligation  to  promote  or  to  facilitate  the 
enjoyment of the right to freedom of expression and the means necessary to exercise this 
right, including the Internet. Hence, States should adopt effective and concrete policies and 
strategies    developed  in  consultation  with  individuals  from  all  segments  of  society, 
including  the  private  sector  as  well  as  relevant  Government  ministries    to  make  the 
Internet widely available, accessible and affordable to all.  

  VI.  Conclusions and recommendations 

67.  Unlike any other medium, the Internet enables individuals to seek, receive and 
impart  information  and  ideas  of  all  kinds  instantaneously  and  inexpensively  across 
national borders. By vastly expanding the capacity of individuals to enjoy their right 
to freedom of opinion and expression, which is an enabler of other human rights, 
the Internet boosts economic, social and political development, and contributes to the 
progress of humankind as a whole. In this regard, the Special Rapporteur encourages 
other Special Procedures mandate holders to engage on the issue of the Internet with 
respect to their particular mandates.  
68.  The Special Rapporteur emphasizes that there should be as little restriction as 
possible  to  the  flow  of  information  via  the  Internet,  except  in  few,  exceptional,  and 
limited circumstances prescribed by international human rights law. He also stresses 
that the full guarantee of the right to freedom of expression must be the norm, and 
any  limitation  considered  as  an  exception,  and  that  this  principle  should  never  be 
reversed. Against this backdrop, the Special Rapporteur recommends the steps set out 
below. 

 

A.  Restriction of content on the Internet  

69.  The  Special  Rapporteur  is  cognizant  of  the  fact  that,  like  all  technological 
inventions,  the  Internet  can  be  misused  to  cause  harm  to  others.  As  with  offline 
content, when a restriction is imposed as an exceptional measure on online content, it 
must pass a three-part, cumulative test: (1) it must be provided by law, which is clear 
and accessible to everyone (principles of predictability and transparency); (2) it must 
pursue  one  of  the  purposes  set  out  in  article  19,  paragraph  3,  of  the  International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights , namely: (i) to protect the rights or reputations 
of others; (ii) to protect national security or public order, or public health or morals 
(principle  of  legitimacy);  and  (3)  it  must  be  proven  as  necessary  and  the  least 
restrictive means required to achieve the purported aim (principles of necessity and 
proportionality).  In  addition,  any  legislation  restricting  the  right  to  freedom  of 
expression  must  be  applied  by  a  body  which  is  independent  of  any  political, 
commercial,  or  other  unwarranted  influences  in  a  manner  that  is  neither  arbitrary 
nor  discriminatory.  There  should  also  be  adequate  safeguards  against  abuse, 
including the possibility of challenge and remedy against its abusive application.  

 

55  Four in five regard Internet access as a fundamental right: global poll, BBC News, 8 March 2010. 

Available from: http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/shared/bsp/hi/pdfs/08_03_10_BBC_internet_poll.pdf.  

 

 

A/HRC/17/27 

19 

A/HRC/17/27 

 

1.   Arbitrary blocking or filtering of content on the Internet 

70.  The  Special  Rapporteur  is  deeply  concerned  by  increasingly  sophisticated 
blocking  or  filtering  mechanisms  used  by  States  for  censorship.  The  lack  of 
transparency surrounding these measures also makes it difficult to ascertain whether 
blocking or filtering is really necessary for the purported aims put forward by States. 
As  such,  the  Special  Rapporteur  calls  upon  States  that  currently  block  websites  to 
provide  lists  of  blocked  websites  and  full  details  regarding  the  necessity  and 
justification  for  blocking  each  individual  website.  An  explanation  should  also  be 
provided  on  the  affected  websites  as  to  why  they  have  been  blocked.  Any 
determination on what content should be blocked must be undertaken by a competent 
judicial  authority  or  a  body  which  is  independent  of  any  political,  commercial,  or 
other unwarranted influences. 
71.  With regard to child pornography, the Special Rapporteur notes that it is one 
clear exception where blocking measures are justified, provided that the national law 
is sufficiently precise and there are sufficient safeguards against abuse or misuse to 
prevent any mission creep, including oversight and review by an independent and 
impartial  tribunal  or  regulatory  body.  However,  the  Special  Rapporteur  calls  upon 
States to focus their efforts on prosecuting those responsible for the production and 
dissemination of child pornography, rather than on blocking measures alone.  

 

2.   Criminalization of legitimate expression  

72.  The Special Rapporteur remains concerned that legitimate online expression is 
being criminalized in contravention of States international human rights obligations, 
whether it is through the application of existing criminal laws to online expression, or 
through the creation of new laws specifically designed to criminalize expression on the 
Internet.  Such  laws  are  often  justified  as  being  necessary  to  protect  individuals 
reputation, national security or to counter terrorism. However, in practice, they are 
frequently used to censor content that the Government and other powerful entities do 
not like or agree with. 
73.  The  Special  Rapporteur  reiterates  the  call  to  all  States  to  decriminalize 
defamation.  Additionally,  he  underscores  that  protection  of  national  security  or 
countering  terrorism  cannot  be  used  to  justify  restricting  the  right  to  expression 
unless it can be demonstrated that: (a) the expression is intended to incite imminent 
violence; (b) it is likely to incite such violence; and (c) there is a direct and immediate 
connection between the expression and the likelihood or occurrence of such violence. 

Imposition of intermediary liability  
74. 
Intermediaries play a fundamental role in enabling Internet users to enjoy their 
right to freedom of expression and access to information. Given their unprecedented 
influence  over  how  and  what  is  circulated  on  the  Internet,  States  have  increasingly 
sought to exert control over them and to hold them legally liable for failing to prevent 
access to content deemed to be illegal.  
75.  The Special Rapporteur emphasizes that censorship measures should never be 
delegated  to  private  entities,  and  that  intermediaries  should  not  be  held  liable  for 
refusing  to  take  action  that  infringes  individuals  human  rights.  Any  requests 
submitted to intermediaries to prevent access to certain content, or to disclose private 
information  for  strictly  limited  purposes  such  as  administration  of  criminal  justice, 
should  be  done  through  an  order  issued  by  a  court  or  a  competent  body  which  is 
independent of any political, commercial or other unwarranted influences.  

 

3.  

20 

76. 
In  addition,  while  States  are  the  primary  duty-bearers  of  human  rights,  the 
Special Rapporteur underscores that corporations also have a responsibility to respect 
human rights, which means that they should act with due diligence to avoid infringing 
the rights of individuals. The Special Rapporteur thus recommends intermediaries to: 
only implement restrictions to these rights after judicial intervention; be transparent 
to the user involved about measures taken, and, where applicable, to the wider public; 
provide,  if  possible,  forewarning  to  users  before  the  implementation  of  restrictive 
measures;  and  minimize  the  impact  of  restrictions  strictly  to  the  content  involved. 
Finally, there must be effective remedies for affected users, including the possibility of 
appeal  through  the  procedures  provided  by  the  intermediary  and  by  a  competent 
judicial authority. 
77.  The Special Rapporteur commends the work undertaken by organizations and 
individuals  to  reveal  the  worldwide  status  of  online  impediments  to  the  right  to 
freedom of expression. He encourages intermediaries in particular to disclose details 
regarding  content  removal  requests  and  accessibility  of  websites.  Additionally,  he 
recommends corporations to establish clear and unambiguous terms of service in line 
with international human rights norms and principles and to continuously review the 
impact of their services and technologies on the right to freedom of expression of their 
users, as well as on the potential pitfalls involved when they are misused. The Special 
Rapporteur believes that such transparency will help promote greater accountability 
and respect for human rights.  

4.   Disconnecting users from Internet access, including on the basis of intellectual 

property rights law 
78.  While blocking and filtering measures deny users access to specific content on 
the Internet, States have also taken measures to cut off access to the Internet entirely. 
The Special Rapporteur considers cutting off users from Internet access, regardless of 
the justification provided, including on the grounds of violating intellectual property 
rights law, to be disproportionate and thus a violation of article 19, paragraph 3, of 
the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights.   
79.  The Special Rapporteur calls upon all States to ensure that Internet access is 
maintained at all times, including during times of political unrest. In particular, the 
Special  Rapporteur  urges  States  to  repeal  or  amend  existing  intellectual  copyright 
laws which permit users to be disconnected from Internet access, and to refrain from 
adopting such laws.  

5.   Cyber-attacks  

80.  The  Special  Rapporteur  is  deeply  concerned  that  websites  of  human  rights 
organizations,  critical  bloggers,  and  other 
individuals  or  organizations  that 
disseminate  information  that  is  embarrassing  to  the  State  or  the  powerful  have 
increasingly become targets of cyber-attacks.  
81.  When a cyber-attack can be attributed to the State, it clearly constitutes, inter 
alia,  a  violation  of  its  obligation  to  respect  the  right  to  freedom  of  opinion  and 
expression. Although determining the origin of cyber-attacks and the identity of the 
perpetrator  is  often  technically  difficult,  it  should  be  noted  that  States  have  an 
obligation to protect individuals against interference by third parties that undermines 
the  enjoyment  of  the  right  to  freedom  of  opinion  and  expression.  This  positive 
obligation to protect entails that States must take appropriate and effective measures 
to investigate actions taken by third parties, hold the persons responsible to account, 
and adopt measures to prevent such recurrence in the future. 

 

 

A/HRC/17/27 

21 

A/HRC/17/27 

 

6.  

Inadequate protection of the right to privacy and data protection  
82.  The  Special  Rapporteur  is  concerned  that,  while  users  can  enjoy  relative 
anonymity  on  the  Internet,  States  and  private  actors  have  access  to  technology  to 
monitor and collect information about individuals communications and activities on 
the  Internet.  Such  practices  can  constitute  a  violation  of  Internet  users  right  to 
privacy,  and  undermine  peoples  confidence  and  security  on  the  Internet,  thus 
impeding the free flow of information and ideas online.  
83.  The Special Rapporteur underscores the obligation of States to adopt effective 
privacy  and  data  protection  laws  in  accordance  with  article  17  of  the  International 
Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the Human Rights Committees general 
comment No. 16. This includes laws that clearly guarantee the right of all individuals 
to ascertain in an intelligible form whether, and if so what, personal data is stored in 
automatic data files, and for what purposes, and which public authorities or private 
individuals or bodies control or may control their files. 
84.  He  also  calls  upon  States  to  ensure  that  individuals  can  express  themselves 
anonymously  online  and  to  refrain  from  adopting  real-name  registration  systems. 
Under certain exceptional situations where States may limit the right to privacy for 
the purposes of administration of criminal justice or prevention of crime, the Special 
Rapporteur  underscores  that  such  measures  must  be  in  compliance  with  the 
international human rights framework, with adequate safeguards against abuse. This 
includes ensuring that any measure to limit the right to privacy is taken on the basis of 
a specific decision by a State authority expressly empowered by law to do so, and must 
respect the principles of necessity and proportionality.  

 

B.  Access to the Internet and the necessary infrastructure  

85.  Given that the Internet has become an indispensable tool for realizing a range 
of  human  rights,  combating  inequality,  and  accelerating  development  and  human 
progress, ensuring universal access to the Internet should be a priority for all States. 
Each State should thus develop a concrete and effective policy, in consultation with 
individuals  from  all  sections  of  society,  including  the  private  sector  and  relevant 
Government  ministries,  to  make  the  Internet  widely  available,  accessible  and 
affordable to all segments of population.  
86.  At the international level, the Special Rapporteur reiterates his call on States, 
in particular developed States, to honour their commitment, expressed inter alia in the 
Millennium Development Goals, to facilitate technology transfer to developing States, 
and to integrate effective programmes to facilitate universal Internet access in their 
development and assistance policies.  
87.  Where the infrastructure for Internet access is present, the Special Rapporteur 
encourages  States  to  support  initiatives  to  ensure  that  online  information  can  be 
accessed in a meaningful way by all sectors of the population, including persons with 
disabilities and persons belonging to linguistic minorities.  
88. 
States  should  include  Internet  literacy  skills  in  school  curricula,  and  support 
similar  learning  modules  outside  of  schools.  In  addition  to  basic  skills  training, 
modules should clarify the benefits of accessing information online, and of responsibly 
contributing  information.  Training  can  also  help  individuals  learn  how  to  protect 
themselves  against  harmful  content,  and  explain  the  potential  consequences  of 
revealing private information on the Internet. 

 

 

 

 

22 

