IS THERE A COST TO PRIVACY BREACHES? 

AN EVENT STUDY1  

Alessandro Acquisti 

Carnegie Mellon University 
acquisti@andrew.cmu.edu 

 

Allan Friedman 
Harvard University 

allan_friedman@ksgphd.harvard.edu 

 

 
 

 
 
 

Rahul Telang 

Carnegie Mellon University 
rtelang@ andrew.cmu.edu 

Twenty Seventh International Conference on Information Systems, Milwaukee 2006 

and Workshop on the Economics of Information Security 2006 

 

Pre-proceeding draft version 

 

Abstract 

While the literature on information security economics has begun to investigate the stock market impact of 
security  breaches  and  vulnerability  announcements,  little  more  than  anecdotal  evidence  exists  on  the  effects  of 
privacy breaches.  In this paper we present the first comprehensive analysis of the impact of a companys privacy 
incidents on its market value. We compile a broad data set of instances of exposure of personal information due to 
failures of some security mechanism (hacking, stolen or lost equipment, poor data handling processes, and others) 
and we present the results of various empirical analyses, including event study analysis. We show that there exists a 
negative and statistically significant impact of data breaches on a companys market value on the announcement 
day for the breach. The cumulative effect increases in magnitudes over the day following the breach announcement, 
but then decreases and loses statistical significance. We also present regression analyses that aim at disentangling 
the effects of a number of factors on abnormal stock returns due to reported breaches. Finally, we comment on the 
differences between the impact of the security breaches already described in the literature, and the privacy breaches 
described here.  

 
Keywords:  Privacy, Information Security, Economics, Finance, Event Studies 

 

                                                           
1  This  research  was  supported  by  CMU  Berkman  Faculty  Development  Fund  and  by  CMU  CyLab.  The  authors 
would like to thank Steve Frank, Jutta Williams, and Franklin Ho for their research assistantship, and participants to 
workshops at ETRICS and WEIS for useful feedback. 

Introduction 
A common motivation for organizations to invest in information security is to safeguard their confidential data as 
well  as  their  customers  personal  information.  Over  the  past  few  years,  privacy  incidents  have  been  announced 
frequently  enough  to  question  whether  organizations  have  the  necessary  incentives  to  safeguard  consumer 
information.  This  paper  moves  towards  an  understanding  of  these  incentives  by  measuring  market  reaction  to 
privacy breaches. Several recent studies (Campbell et al. [2003], Hovava and DArcy [2003], Cavusoglu, Mishra, 
and  Raghunathan.  [2002],  Kannan,  Rees,  and  Sridhar  [2004],  and  Telang  and  Wattal  [2006])  have  explored  the 
impact that announcements of various security breaches have on a companys market value. Such announcements 
have oftenbut not alwaysa significant and negative impact. Much less explored is the link between a companys 
stock price and incidents that affect the privacy of its customers, employees, or partners. These incidents may be 
related to security vulnerabilities in a companys server, but extend well beyond the events already studied in that 
literature:  they  may  include  the  intentional  but  illegal  sale  of  consumer  data;  the  loss  of  equipment  containing 
sensitive  consumers  or  employees  information;  or  other  instances  in  which  companies  were  found  in  flagrant 
intrusions or violation of other parties private data. Little is known about the more general consequences of such 
incidents on other measures of a companys performance - such as sales, revenues, or profitability.  
Currently,  there  is  only  scattered  evidence  about  the  price  companies  pay  for  their  privacy  debacles.    In  a  few 
notable  but  rare  instances  the  offending  company  was  subject  to  public  outrage  and  hard  to  quantify  reputation 
losses (consider, for instance, the Amazon price discrimination experiment - see Acquisti and Varian [2005]; or 
the RealNetworks case - see Acquisti [2004]). In the case of Choicepoint, after involuntary allowing criminals to 
access over 163,000 consumer  credit reports,  the  company  was forced  to pay  a $15 million  in  penalties  (against 
$143 million 2005 earnings; Choicepoint [2006]). In other cases, companies have been punished harshly by the stock 
market: ChoicePoints own stock tumbled in a few weeks after the incident from $46.01 to $37.64; while Internet 
advertising company DoubleClick lost 20% of its market value in March 2000 after the storm generated by privacy 
concerns  associated  with  its  acquisition  of  Abacus  Direct,  an  offline  consumer  data  company  specialized  in 
purchasing habits (Sakalosky [2002]).  
Such  extreme  market  consequences  however  are  not  common  and  often  short-lived.  A  year  after  the  incident, 
ChoicePoint stock was trading at pre-breach levels. Data collection, processing, and retention continue to grow as 
business  activities.  Although  recent  surveys  report  a  negative  attitude  among  consumers  against  firms  that  have 
exposed  their  information  (Ponemon  [2005]),  there  is  little  field  evidence  that  the  professed  retaliation  against 
offending companies has actually taken place.  
The complex chain of consumers data manipulation further complicates attempts to understand the consequences of 
privacy  incidents.  Some  companies  that  have  compromised  consumers  data  do  not  interact  directly  with  those 
consumers;  they  are  intermediaries  or  infomediaries  (Hagel  and  Rayport  [1997]),  shielded  from  immediate 
consumer reaction. In addition, as news of privacy invasions and data breaches become more and more common, no 
related noticeable spike has yet been detected among identity theft and frauds (see Cate [2005]). Claims to the FTC 
about identity theft have held steady from 2004 to 2005. Moreover, the daily bulletin of data exposure may have 
started generating audience fatigue and reduced attention. Finally, announcements of privacy breaches in the media 
are often scattered and vague, often exhibiting a progression of articles and wires that slowly clarify the nature and 
scope of the breach.  
This paper identifies a set of privacy incidents that stem from various forms of security, policy, or business failures, 
and discusses their possible consequences. We focus our empirical analysis on a specific type of violation - data 
breaches - and on available stock market data, although we have also gathered and analyzed data related to privacy 
breaches in organizations that are not traded (from government entities to universities). Specifically, we perform 
cross-tabulations, event study analyses, and regression analyses on the stock prices of public companies involved in 
data  breaches.  We  show  that  there  exists  a  negative  and  statistically  significant  impact  of  data  breaches  on  a 
companys market value on the announcement day for the breach. However, we also show that such impact is lower 
than those observed in the literature for security vulnerabilities (from viruses, to hacking, to exploits discovered in 
applications). This dichotomy implies a different market perception, and possibly a discounting of the consequences 
of  incidents  that  directly  compromise  consumers  data  compared  to  those  that  affect  consumers  or  corporations 
through viruses, denial-of-service attacks, and software vulnerabilities. 
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. In Section 2, ,we discuss the relationship between privacy and security, 
as well as the possible consequences of a privacy incident for a firms profitability and performance. In Section 3 we 

 
 

Acquisti et. al. / Cost of Privacy Breaches 
 

lay  out  the  hypotheses  that  drive  our  research.  In  Section  4,  we  focus  on  a  particular  form  of  privacy  incident, 
consisting of breaches of consumers privacy - be it stolen, hacked, illegally sold, or unscrupulously handled data. In 
that section we presents the results of various empirical analyses, including an event study approach. In Section 5 , 
we analyze our initial results and present some basic regression models. In Section 6 we discuss current paths of 
analysis. 
 
Theory of Privacy incidents 
As the amount of personal data stored and processed by organizations increases, so too does the complexity of the 
information systems required for its safe-keeping. Such data trend is correlated with an increase in the number of 
privacy  incidents.  We  broadly  define  a  privacy  incident  as  an  event  involving  misuse  of  individuals  personal 
information. This misuse can consist of illegal sale, or usage, or lack of protection. It can be criminal, commercial, 
or ultimately innocuous. It can be intentional or unintentional. It can involve customers, partners, or employees 
data.  
Privacy  incidents  add  a  unique  dimension  to  discussions  of  privacy.  As  noted  in  countless  articles,  attempts  to 
precisely define the concept of privacy have only given mixed results  the concept and its definition often remain 
ambiguous, changing with the perspective of the observer. Introna and Pouloudi (1999) subsume many definitions 
under the idea of freedom from judgment of others, but data disclosure does not always create such a potential. 
The unifying feature of privacy incidents is the violation of certain expectations about how data will be handled. 
Moor (1997) unifies several privacy theories into a concept of control/restricted access where an individual has an 
expectation  of  being  able  to  control  the  flow  of  personal  information,  and  restrict  access  where  appropriate. 
Similarly, Smith, Milberg, and Burke (1996) show that unauthorized access and secondary use are two of the four 
primary factors in the concern for information privacy, a finding that remains robust across time (Stewart and Segars 
[2002]).  Proper treatment of consumer information is part of an implied social contract with the customer (Milne 
and  Gordon  [1993]).    A  promise  of  fair  information  practice  can  override  strong  consumer  preferences  against 
sharing  information  (Culnan  and  Artmstrong  [1999])  so  a  violation  of  that  promise  is  a  breach  of  the  privacy 
conceptualization of control/restricted access. 
Violations of the above implie social contracts and expected information practices can take many forms. In 1999, 
RealNetworks admitted that it monitored the listening habits of its users, despite failing to mention this in its privacy 
policy. This incident was a violation of the understanding users had about what the company termed legitimate use: 
since it was not in the policy, their monitoring was a form of misuse. When DoubleClick (an internet marketing firm 
that tracks users across websites) moved to purchase Abacus Direct (an offline purchasing data company), many 
objected; the point of contention was the linking of online and offline identities. Amazons brief attempt to offer 
differential prices based on tracked consumer data was also met with strong opposition; here the problem was an 
application of data for price discrimination, which many people inherently find objectionable (Kahneman, Knetsch, 
and Thaler [1986]). Choicepoints misuse was blatant, as the company authenticated untrustworthy parties to access 
credit  reports.  Failure  to  protect  data  can  be  less  severe,  such  as  the  recent  spate  of  lost  backup  tapes  by  Time-
Warner and others, but still evinces a significant gap between the expectations of data protection and the execution 
by the controlling party.  
Each of these privacy incidents has different cause and can have a different set of effects. The common theme is the 
misuse of personal information. A subset of privacy incidents can be attributed to a failure of information security. 
Here,  a  privacy  incident  is  security  motivated  when  one  of  many  mechanisms  designed  to  protect  personal 
information fails. This failure could be technical (a direct attack by malicious actors), managerial (failure to patch a 
known  vulnerability),  organizational  (incomplete  protections),  or  human  (data  left  on  a  stolen  laptop).  In  the 
examples above, DoubleClick and Amazon took active steps to misuse information which they saw as legitimate, so 
these incidents would not be examples of security failure; Choicepoint and Time-Warner had a failure of protection, 
where  the  security  of  personal  information  was  inadequate  or  incomplete.  Note  that  not  all  the  incidents  are  the 
result of an intentional attacks by malicious entities on data or systems - in fact, those (which are the focus of the 
current information security economics literature and existing event study approaches) tend to be the minority.  
 

Consequences of incidents  

Later in this paper we examine a particular consequence of a privacy incident: the effect of announcement of data 
breaches on stock value. However, each incident can have numerous consequences, with complex repercussions. To 
date,  there  exists  little  solid  research  on  the  effects  of  privacy  incidents,  although  anecdotal  evidence  can  be 
combined with basic surveys to highlight some ramifications. Of course, every incident will be different, and will 
affect the firm and the consumer accordingly.  
Even if the consequences of a violation are significant for a firm, the cost to consumers may not be fully considered 
by the firm as part of its risk. In this case, a privacy incident is a negative externality that natural incentives do not 
correct.  Moreover,  a  lack  of  complete  information  about  how  companies  protect  personal  information  provides 
insufficient signals for consumers to correct this imbalance themselves.  
Consumers  

The predominant harm for consumers following a breach is the risk of impersonation, fraud, or identity theft. A full 
exploration of this topic is outside the scope of this paper. One often-cited Federal Trade Commission (FTC) survey 
puts the number of victims in 2003 near 10 million and the total economic losses in the billions of dollars (Federal 
Trade Commission [2003]). However, as Cate (2005) points out, these figures include a wide range of activities and 
may not be accurately sampled or reported. The Identity Theft Resource Center (2005) follows a sample of self-
reported victims and reports very high costs in terms of time and money. Apart from the issues of sample bias, this 
survey claims that less than 50% of the perpetrators were unknown to the victims, indicating that corporate privacy 
incidents may not play the largest role in this type of fraud. Nonetheless, even when no actual fraud directly follows 
from a breach, the victim may be at an increased risk of phishing (Reilly [2006]), a form of spam attack intended to 
gain the victims personal data. In addition, the standard precautions that experts advise consumers to take to avoid 
or following a privacy incident (Privacy Rights Clearinghouse [2006]) impose nontrivial costs in time and effort - 
and do not guarantee protection or reparation.  
Consumers suffer less tangible harms as well. Perceived privacy risk can be as important as real privacy risks, and 
demand commensurate protection (Raab and Bennett [1998]), so even the fear of privacy harms can be counted as a 
negative  consequence  of  the  loss  of  control  and  access  restriction  discussed  above.  Expectations  matter,  and  the 
consumer  suffers  when  they  are  violated.  In  his  taxonomy  of  privacy,  Solove  (2006)  notes  the  legal  and  ethical 
distinction between mere data disclosure and a breach of confidentiality; the latter marks a violation of trust that 
entitles the victim to some recompense. 
Firms 

While responsibility for a privacy incident can rest with any data-controlling entity (see below), the analysis in this 
paper focuses largely on for-profit firms (other institutions may have a similar subset of consequences). The most 
immediate punishment for a privacy incident is a direct penalty from a governing institution. In the US, the Federal 
Trade Commission has jurisdiction in this area. The FTC can fine a firm responsible for breaches, or recommend 
expensive process overhauls to prevent future incidents. Choicepoint was forced to pay a $15 million fine (Federal 
Trade  Commission  [2006]).  Often,  however,  the  FTC  does  not  fine  the  responsible  firm  (such  as  in  the  case  of 
Petco,  following  a  2003  breach    -  Federal  Trade  Commission  [2004]).  Settlements  usually  do  not  require  the 
company  to  admit  responsibility,  saving  it  from  further  liability.  Yet,  liability  is  another  consequence  of  privacy 
incidents that can become significant. After a 2003 incident, BJs Inc. did not face fines, but several civil suits from 
affected banks, for a total of $13 million. BJs Inc itself sued IBM. In this case and others, the privacy incident 
affected  client  or  partner  firms  and  could,  in  the  worst  case,  terminate  the  relationship.  Finally,  notification  of 
affected consumers and accompanying recovery assistance such as a hotline represents non trivial expenses.  
 
Beyond  the  immediate  costs,  a  privacy  incident  can  create  long  term  indirect  consequences.  Privacy  has  been 
identified  as  a  principle  component  of  trust  (Camp  [2003])  and  vice  versa  (Ponemon  [2003]).  An  incident  can 
damage  a  customer  or  partner  relationship  built  on  trust.  Rhee  and Haunschild  (2006)  show  that  when  company 
admits  a  mistake  (e.g..  through  a  product  recall),  public  trust  can  be  lost,  and  that  reputation  loss  can  have 
measurable ramifications for the companys market share. Ponemon (2005) notes that consumers retain a negative 
impression  of  responsible  firms  and  will  alter  their  consumption  patterns,  although  it  must  be  verified  whether 

 
 

Acquisti et. al. / Cost of Privacy Breaches 
 

survey data of this sort can capture actual behavior. Still, a firm might face higher insurance premia for liability after 
a breach, and future business partners might be less inclined to trust the firm.  
 
Quantifying Privacy Consequences  
Identifying consequences of a privacy incident is difficult enough, but quantifying these consequences is remarkably 
complex. Gellman (2002) argues that studies of privacy losses tend to understate the effects of privacy losses, while 
Lenard and Rubin (2005) and Cate (2005) argue that many estimates are overstated. There is no, in short, consensus 
about  estimated  costs,  or  even  the  best  method  (Svensson  [2003]).  None  of  the  above-mentioned  calculations 
includes the costs of preventing a privacy incident: the net effect of a breach remains an open question.  
A common simplifying tool employed throughout the literature is to use stock price as a proxy for the consequences 
of various events for a company. A potential decline in stock price is itself an adverse consequence of a privacy 
incident. Notwithstanding the known limitations of analyses based on such valuations of stock market prices (from 
the  debated  efficiencies  of  stock  market,  to  the  actual  consequences  of  market  oscillation  that  may  be  only 
temporary), it is of interest to contrast how the market reacts to privacy breaches, to its reaction to security breaches. 
The earlier examples of DoubleClick and ChoicePoint offer anecdotal evidence that stock price can reflect news of 
privacy incidents: in the two studies that are closest to ours, Garg et al. (2003) use eight incidents to show that a 
breach of credit card information has a large negative effect on stock price, while a theft of customer information 
has a negligible impact; while Campbell et al. (2003) find that 11 instances of attacks on confidential data (of which 
9 involved consumers data) have a statistically significant impact on a companys evaluation.  
 
Consequences of security vs. privacy incidents  
While there is little work on economic costs of privacy breaches, more work has been done on economics costs of 
security breaches. Prior event study analyses on information security have focused on the change in market value of 
firms  whose  systems  are  breached  (Cavusoglu  et  al.  [2002]  and  Kannan  et  al.  [2004]).  These  studies  show  that 
announcements  of  a  security  breach  negatively  impact  the  CAR  (Cumulative  Abnormal  Return)  of  firms  whose 
information systems have been breached. Campbell et al. (2003), quoted above, conduct a similar event study and 
find that only the impact of confidentiality related security breaches is negative and significant, while the impact of 
non-confidentiality  related  security  breaches  is  not  significantly  different  from  zero.  Hovava  and  DArcy  (2003) 
show similar results by finding that Denial of Service (DoS) type attacks are not associated with any significant loss 
in value for firms. Telang and Wattal (2006) show that software vendors suffer when vulnerabilities in their products 
are published in major newspapers.  
 
The  motivation  and  results  of  this  paper  differ  from  the  above  work  in  three  ways.  First,  the  focus  is  explicitly 
centered  on  personal  information,  rather  than  the  security  product  or  corporate  networks.  Second,  security  and 
privacy  are  only  partially  overlapping  sets:  in  this  paper  we  use  focus  on  privacy  breaches,  extending  outside 
conventional  security  breaches,  to  include  organizational  and  human  failures    and  therefore  also  policy  and 
business violations. Finally, we compile the largest dataset yet used to examine the economic effects of security 
risks,  spanning  many  industrial  sectors  and  including  responsible  third  parties.  This  allows  us  to  build  a  clearer 
model of the cost of privacy breaches. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Hypotheses 
 
The previous literature on event studies and security breaches has shown that certain types of breaches negatively 
affect a companys stock market valuation. Since privacy breaches can be associated with liability, fines, reputation, 
and other costs, we expect a similar impact: 
H1: A company suffers a loss in market value whenever a privacy breach is announced  

It is also possible to forecast, following Telang and Wattal (2006)s findings, that in the case of privacy breaches the 
source of the announcement has an influence on the magnitude of the effect: 

H2: The magnitude of the negative CAR (Cumulative Abnormal Return) will be larger whenever a privacy breach is 
reported in national media rather than local or industry outlets 

Because  a  companys  privacy  costs  may  also  depend  on  the  number  of  individuals  whose  information  has  been 
compromised, we expect a monotonic relation between the number of affected parties and the stock market impact: 

H3: The magnitude of the negative CAR will be increasing with the number of individuals affected by the privacy 
breach 

In  addition  to  the  above  hypothesis,  there  are  other  aspects  of  the  relation  between  privacy  breaches  and  stock 
market valuations that we intend to study. In particular: 

 

1.  Whether  a  privacy  fatigue  is  emerging,  as  the  number  of  breaches  grows  and  consumers  attention 
possibly diminishes (in ongoing regression, we test whether breaches that took place after the ChoicePoint 
debacle are met by similar or different severity in the stock market) 

2.  Whether privacy breaches determine similar or different reactions in the market place as security breaches. 

 
Privacy breaches: Data and analysis 
In  order  to  study  somewhat  homogenous  and  comparable  data,  we  focused  our  attention  on  data  breaches  for 
publicly  traded  companies,  defined  as  instances  in  which  the  data  of  consumers,  employers,  or  third  parties 
associated with a company traded on a public market was exposed through:2 

o  Bad security practices 
o  Hacker attacks 
o 
Insider attacks 
o  Computer or data thefts 
o  Lost data or equipment 

                                                           
2 We have, however, also gathered and analyzed data about privacy breaches affecting other, non-publicly traded 
organizations  -  such  as  government  entities  and  universities.  In  the  Appendix  we  present  additional  tables  about 
privacy breaches for such organizations. That additional data, while of interest, cannot of course be used in an event 
study approach. 

 
 

Acquisti et. al. / Cost of Privacy Breaches 
 

o  Other (e.g. illegal sale or handling of individual data) 

The  exposure  in  question  may  have  been  caused  by  insider  attacks,  hacking,  stolen  or  lost  equipment,  or  by 
voluntary  but  illegal  sale  of  data.  To  compile  as  complete  a  list  of  privacy  incidents  as  possible,  we  mined  and 
search for announcements of privacy breach events in news databases like Lexis-Nexis and ProQuest, as well as 
online  compilations  (Choicepoint,  Inc  [2006],  Wall  [2006],  and  mailing  lists  and  dedicated  blogs  such  as  Adam 
Shostack and Chris Walshs http://www.emergentchaos.com and http://attrition.org).  
We considered each event case by case, searching the several outlets discussed above. For each event, we had to 
determine the precise date announcement in order to look for a market response. Given the complex nature of the 
news cycle and how information propagates, it is not always immediately clear when a breach was announced. This 
is  further  complicated  by  the  pattern  of  disclosure,  where  new  developments  sometimes  modify  (almost  always 
increase)  the  scope  of  the  initial  announcement.  When  several  companies  were  involved  in  a  data  breach,  each 
company was treated as a separate event. Several events had to be discarded because the sequence of publication 
dates or news propagation did not allow us to be confident about a certain events data. Since the model assumes 
that the event is the primary change in stock value during the event period, we abandoned a few event data when 
unrelated  major  announcements  (such  as  earning  projections  or  mergers)  for  the  company  of  interest  fell  in  a 
window of days close to the event day.  
After this cleaning, we were left with 79 breach events. Each event in our data set was coded for a number of data 
type available in most announcements. The mean number of individuals affected by a breach was around 1 million, 
while the median breach disclosed 95,000 subjects data. Tables 1 to 4 provide some aggregate statistics about our 
dataset. 
 

Table 1: Distribution of privacy breaches in publicly traded companies (NYSE and NASDAQ) by year.  

Year 
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 

2006 (until March 1st) 

Number of incidents 

4 
4 
1 
3 
3 
51 
13 

 
 

Table 2: Distribution of privacy breaches in publicly traded companies by subject exposed. 

Type of subject 

Customers 
Employees 

Third party data 

Other/undetermined 

 
 Table 1 shows the distribution of reported occurrences across time. Note the sharp increase in 2005: a California 
state law mandating the report of data breaches affecting residents went into effect on January 1, 2005 (California 
SB1386/AB-700). The sudden increase of announced incidents suggests that the rate public disclosure rose, rather 
than  the  number  of  actual  breaches.  We  also  distinguish,  in  Table  2,  among  the  subjects  of  the  data  disclosed  - 

Number 

49 
10 
18 
2 

 

whether  it  referred  to  a  firms  customers,  employees,  or  if  the  company  had no direct  relationship with  the data 
subject.  The majority of breaches involve customer data, which could magnify reputation consequences. 
We further separate the announcements by cause of data breach.  Of course, these classifications are necessarily 
artificial, since each event has its own detail, and we must use the information provided in the initial announcement.   
When  a  trusted  party  or  an  outside  attacker  is  specifically  mentioned, we  label  it  as  an  insider  or hacker  attack, 
respectively. If the data was lost on stolen hardware, we note that as a separate attack, since the attacker could have 
valued the equipment rather than the data. When no evidence of theft is available, we simply note that the data is 
lost.  The category of bad security practices comprises a wide range of internal mistakes that allowed data to be 
accessed, whether faxing account data to a wrong number or failing to secure a sensitive web page adequately. Most 
of the breaches are due to mishandling of security practices or data, or inappropriate physical defense against thieves 
(see Table 3). By themselves hackers attacks do not appear to be the main source of data problems in our sample.  
Gleaning the exact amount of personal data leaked in each breach from breach announcements is also often hard, 
although most announcements offer some details. Social security numbers are the data more often compromised in 
these breaches, followed by credit card information (Table 4).   

Table 3: Distribution of privacy breaches in publicly traded companies (NYSE and NASDAQ) by type. 

Type of breach 

Bad security practices 

Hacker 

Insider attack 

Computer or hardware theft 

Lost data 

Other/undetermined 

 

Number 

24 
9 
8 
18 
12 
8 

Table 4: Distribution of privacy breaches in publicly traded companies (NYSE and NASDAQ) by type of 

information exposed. 

Type of information 

SSN 

Credit card 

Complete credit record 

Other personal information 

Other/undetermined 

 
 
Event studies  

Number 

41 
18 
9 
10 
1 

To  measure  the  economic  costs  of  privacy  breaches  to  a  firm,  we  adopted  an  event  study  methodology.  Our 
methodology follows closely from prior event study analysis. The implicit assumption in this methodology is that 
the financial markets respond to news that affect a securitys value, so change in stock price is a good proxy for the 
impact of a given event. Campbell et al. (2003) present an useful summary of the event study analysis highlighting 
the  history  as  well  as  the  commonly  followed  methodologies.  Event  study  methodologies  are  well  accepted  for 
studying the implications of public announcements on stock prices. Hendricks and Singhal (1996) study the impact 
of  quality  award  winning  announcements  on  the  market  value  of  firms  and  observe  positive  abnormal  returns 
generated  by  winning  a  quality  award.  They  further  note  that  awards  given  by  independent  organizations  and 
announcements by small firms are more likely to have a significant impact on the firms market value.  
 

 
 

Acquisti et. al. / Cost of Privacy Breaches 
 

In an event study approach, the stock price of the firm is explained by the event after controlling for trends and 
volatility. In particular, if a firm suffers from privacy breach then it may incur financial losses (fines and penalty, 
loss of reputation) which should reflect in its stock price. Thus, stock prices on the days surrounding the event can 
capture the impact of that event and measure the economic cost of such privacy incidents.  
 
Models  

An event study assumes that returns on a stock are significantly impacted by an event of interest (in our case, the 
event  of  interest  is  the  vulnerability  disclosure  announcement).  The  period  of  interest  for  which  we  observe  the 
event is known as the event window. The smallest event window is one day (day of the announcement or day 0).3 In 
practice, the event window is often expanded to include two days (day 0 and day 1)4 to capture the effect of price 
announcements made after the close of the markets on a particular day. Sometimes researchers include a day before 
the announcements to incorporate any information leaks about the event.  
 
In our study we focus on a one-day event window (day 0). Hendricks and Singhal (1996) cite two reasons to use a 
one-day event period. First, a shorter event period permits a better estimation of the effects of information of stock 
prices since it reduces the possibility of other confounding factors not related to the announcement. Second, it also 
increases the power of the statistical tests. Abnormal returns are defined as the difference between the actual return 
of the stock over the event window minus the expected return of the stock over the event window. To compensate 
for a delay in the news cycle and to understand the long term effects, we also examine a short period following the 
event day.  
 
The expected return on the stock is calculated in several ways. We focus on the market model, which assumes a 
stable linear relation between the market return and the return on the stock. We also verify our results using other 
methods, such as the market-adjusted method and the mean-adjusted method. The coefficients of the linear model 
are calculated by choosing a portion of the data as the estimation window. The estimation window closely precedes 
the event window. In our case, we use standard estimation window of 92 actual trading days (more than 120 solar 
days), from day -100 to day -8. There are three main methods followed in the event study methodology (Campell et 
al. [1997], Hendricks and Singhal [1996]) to estimate the abnormal returns.  
 
The Market Model  
In the market model, the abnormal returns are estimated as follows:  
 
ARit = Rit  i  iRmt (1)  
 
Rit for a stock is the percent change in the stock price at time t, (Pit Pit1)/Pit1, where i denotes the event (i=1,2, 
...N),  m  denotes  the  market,  and  t  denotes  the  day  of  the  event  (e.g.,  t  =  0  denotes  the  day  of  the  vulnerability 
announcement.). ARit denotes the abnormal return of event i at time t, Rit denotes the actual return and Rmt denotes 
the market return at time period t. The abnormal return is defined as the difference between the actual return and the 
normal return. This is the part of the actual return that cannot be explained by market movements and captures the 
effect of the event. Depending on whether the stock of interest was traded on NASDAQ or NYSE, we used the 
appropriate  market  index.  We  use  ordinary  least  squares  regression  to  estimate  the  coefficients  for  the  above 
regression.  
                                                           
3 If an announcement is made on a day when the markets are closed, we consider the next day when the markets 
open as day 0. 
4 Day 1 is the day after the announcement. 

 
The quantities of interest for general analysis are the day-specific average returns and aggregate returns over time. 
The mean abnormal return is the mean across all observations on day t of the event. The cumulative abnormal return 
for the event CAR is defined as the sum of the abnormal returns over the event window.  
 
The Market Adjusted Model  
In  this  model,  the  event  window  returns  are  compared  to  an  expected  return  of  the  market  only  over  the  event 
period, so the abnormal returns are given as:  
 
ARit = Rit  Rmt (2)  
 
where the terms have the usual meaning as in the Market Model.  
 
The Mean Adjusted Model  
In this case, the returns are compared to the mean market return over the event period. Abnormal returns are now 
given as:  
 
ARit = Rit  Ri (3)  
 
where Ri  is the mean return on the stock which made a vulnerability announcement during event i, over the duration 
of the estimation period (in our study,  that means 92 days).  
 
Test statistics  
Brown and Warner (1985) have presented a comprehensive analysis of suitable test statistics for the abnormal mean 
return. Similarly to the security case, since data breaches may have been disclosed by more than one company on a 
given day, our statistics should allow for event day clustering. A t statistic proposed by Brown and Warner (1985) 
takes in to account event day clustering and cross-sectional dependence in the security specific excess returns (see 
also Telang and Wattal [2006]):  

t =

A
t
S
2
A

  

 

 

where 

S

2
A

=

1






1

T

T



s

1
=

(

A
s



A

)

 

 

 

 

 

(4) 

 and T is the number of days in the estimation period and 

A

 





T

1
= 
T





1
=

s

sA

  





The null hypothesis is that the abnormal returns are not significantly different from zero. Under the null hypothesis, 
the abnormal returns are independent and identically distributed and normal with a mean of zero and the variance 
given by the variance of abnormal returns over the estimation period.   
 
 Event study results  

We present here the results of the event study on the 79 events met the independence conditions discussed above. 
We used an estimation window from t 100 to t 8. We used a forecast window from t 7 to t +10.  

 
 

0.008

0.006

0.004

0.002

0

-0.002

-0.004

-0.006

AR_-7

Acquisti et. al. / Cost of Privacy Breaches 
 

 

AR_-3

AR_-2

AR_-4

AR_-5

AR_-6
Figure 1: Mean abnormal returns from 7 days before the event through 10 days after   

AR_-1

AR_-0

AR_1

AR_5

AR_2

AR_3

AR_4

AR_9

AR_10

AR_6

AR_7

AR_8

 

To strengthen our results, we tested all the three models discussed above (market model, market adjusted, and mean 
adjusted) and we calculated both mean and median values as well as percentages of negative abnormal returns on 
event day. We performed parametric and non parametric tests to evaluate our results.  
Figure 1 summarizes the abnormal return values over the t 7 to t +10 window (CAR_-0, represents the event day - 
the day when the data breach was announced). The negative values on  day 0 are the largest and most significant in 
the window considered. After that, the values start increasing and the abnormal return become positive on day 3.  
Table 5 pins down specific values for the abnormal return on event day (which is identical to the abnormal returns 
on  that  day).  The  different  models  give  comparable  results  highlighting  the  mild  (around  half  percent)  negative 
impact of breaches announcements on the companies stock prices.  
Figure 2 presents the actual cumulative results, or the accumulated difference between the breached companies and 
the projected market returns, starting at t -5. From this figure, the sudden drop in returns from the event  
 

Table 5: Cumulative abnormal returns on event day (t values in parentheses)  

 

AR t=0  
Mean Abnormal Return  
Median Abnormal Return  
Percentage below zero  

Market Model   Market Adjusted Model  

0.41 (1.97)  

0.52 (2.45)  

0.22  
58%  

0.26  
58%  

Mean Model 
0.35 (1.62) 
0.15  
59%  

 
is more evident. Starting on day 2, however, positive abnormal returns increase the CAR. The values after that point 
become positive but no longer significant (see also Table 6).   
 
 
 
 

Table 6: Cumulative abnormal returns over different periods. Double star represents significance at the 0.05 

level. 

-1 

0.03 

0 

0 to 1 

0 to 2 

-0.41** 

-0.58** 

-0.46 

0 to 5 

0.21 

0 to 10 

1.3 

Day 

CAR 

 

Discussion  
Data breaches seem to have a moderate but statistically significant negative impact on a firm's stock value. The day 
prior to the event the mean abnormal return is positive. On the even day and the day after, the mean abnormal return 
is  negative  and  reaches  cumulatively  a  value  close  to  -0.6%.  These  values  are  robust  under  different  model 
specifications. The mean single day loss of 0.4% represents a large expected drop in market value, as the average 
firm loses 0.4% of its value from day t -1. 
The differences between the mean and median abnormal return values deserves further attention. On the event day, 
both the statistics are negative and significant. However, the mean values tend to be systematically higher than the 
median ones. This suggests the presence of strong outliers that are driving some of the negative performance after 
the  announcement  of  a  breach.  However,  the  percentage  of  negative  abnormal  return  for  a  firm  object  of  such 
announcements is well above 50% (from 58% to 59% depending on the model adopted).  
 

Figure 2: Cumulative Abnormal Returns from 5 days before through 10 days after the event 

 

 
 

Acquisti et. al. / Cost of Privacy Breaches 
 

In theory, this should be a net loss of over $140 million. However, looking at each companys abnormal returns and 
applying that difference to each firms' market value produce an estimate of only $9,953,968. Clearly, some firms 
with  large  market  capitalizations  do  not  suffer  as  strong  adverse  effects  from  an  announcement.  This  somewhat 
surprising  finding  suggests  that  the  penalty  for  a  privacy  breach  may  be  an  anticipation  of  an  absolute  value  of 
consequences, which would hurt smaller companies more. A preliminary exploration does not strongly support this 
hypothesis,  since  AR  is  barely  correlated  with  capitalization  value  (Pearson  product-moment  correlation 
coefficient=0.08), even when compared to the correlation between AR and stock price (cc=0.18). Future work to 
explore this question is discussed below.  
An  aspect  of  this  study  that  deserves  more  attention  is  how  the  impact  of  announcements  changes  over  time. 
Anecdotally, companies like ChoicePoint and DoubleClick have suffered well after the first initial day following the 
announcement, and some of their worst losses have appeared even a few days later. This is possibly related to the 
fact that data breaches tend to be more confusing - their magnitude, implications, and nature are more complicated 
and often not immediately tractable - than pure security breaches. For this reason it is possible both that the media 
keeps infusing new information into the market place, but also that the marketplace takes more time to evaluate and 
incorporate those news into market prices than in presence of security breaches.   
 
To better understand why the market reacts to privacy breaches, we examine a range of factors. Looking at each 
attribute alone, in Table 7, it appears that retail firms suffer more and to a greater degree.  This could be explained 
from the reputation effect. Note that switching costs are often lower from one retailer to another than other consumer 
firms (i.e. banks), so the privacy reputation of a consumer goods merchant could drive away more business than a 
financial institution, even if the stakes are higher. If the breach announcement had evidence of a malicious actor 
deliberately trying to access data, the negative effect of the breach is higher, while if a third-party company (such as 
a data processor) can be blamed for the breach, the market appears to react more favorably. Both of these results 
conform to what one might expect. The number of victims looks to be correlated with a negative market reaction, 
but only for very large data breaches.    

 

Table 7: Cumulative abnormal returns (Day 0) by industry, type of breach, subject, responsibility, cause, and 

numbers affected 

Retail 
Other 
Finance 
Data processor 
Attack evidence 
No attack evidence 
Third party 
Employee 
Customer 

            Breach Classification 
Industry 
 
 
 
Data Misuse 
 
Data Subject 
 
 
Responsibility  Third party responsible 
Breach Cause  Laptop / tape 
 
 
# Affected 
 
 

Hacker / insider 
Bad security practices 
Less than 100,000 
100,000-500,000 
More than 500,000 

 

# Events  Abnormal Return

% Negative 

14 
24 
26 
14 
33 
41 
17 
10 
51 
17 
29 
17 
24 
31 
22 
9 

-0.01570 
-0.00206 
0.00048 
-0.00509 
-0.00870 
-0.00104 
-0.00597 
0.00186 
-0.00459 
0.00158 
-0.00286 
-0.01098 
-0.00112 
0.00202 
-0.00458 
-0.02656 

71.43% 
66.67% 
53.85% 
28.57% 
57.58% 
65.85% 
64.71% 
60.00% 
54.90% 
23.53% 
65.52% 
47.06% 
62.50% 
54.84% 
54.55% 
77.78% 

 
Further  exploration of  Figure  3 highlights what  appears  to be  a  small  size  effect.   The  data  itself  is  quite  noisy, 
however,  and  the  linear  relationship  is  a  poor  fit.  Still,  this  finding  offers  some  limited  support  for  our  third 
hypothesis, which argues that the CAR should be a function of privacy costs, which in turn should be a function of 
the number of individuals affected. One could also anticipate a time effect. Either investors become inured to the 
problem of data breaches, or concern is compounded as companies fail to learn from each others mistakes. Privacy 
theory  does  not  offer  much  guidance  between  these  two  alternatives,  and  the  data  is  equally  ambiguous,  as  the 
passage of time appears to have very little effect on abnormal stock returns (Figure 4).  The absence of a time effect 
allows us to confidently use the full data sample in the following analysis. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

y = -0.0019x + 0.0063

R 2 = 0.0507

Log (# victims)

0

0 

0.03 

0.02 

0.01 

AR 

-0.01 

-0.02 

-0.03 

2

3

7 

1

4

5

6

8

Figure 3: Larger breaches appear to have a negative effect on Day 0 Abnormal Returns 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

0.03

0.02

0.01

R
A

0
02/13/05

04/04/05

05/24/05

07/13/05

-0.01

-0.02

-0.03

Acquisti et. al. / Cost of Privacy Breaches 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

09/01/05

10/21/05

12/10/05

01/29/06

y = 1E-05x - 0.5419

R2 = 0.0233

Date

Figure 4: There does not appear to be a time effect 

 
Regression analysis 

The  data  presented  above  suggests  a  high  level  of  variation  across  observed  privacy  incidents,  and  what  could 
explain it.  Of course, simple tabulated data could fail to account for a variety of competing factors. We use a simple 
regression model to examine whether any feature of the breaches can predict the market reaction. Both the nature of 
the firm and the details of the breach could affect how investors viewed the event. Table 8 summarizes a regression 
model predicting that abnormal returns on day 0 are a function of the number of victims of a breach, whether the 
breach was announced in a major paper or news wire, the industry of the firm involved, whether the breach was 
announced clearly as part of a malicious attempt to gain access to data, the subject of the data, whether a third party 
(outside  the  company)  was  responsible  for  the  security  failure  and  measure  of  the  companys  size,  in  market 
capitalization. This same model is also used to test factors predicting the change in total value of each stock.  
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Table 8: Regression analysis 

 
  
Intercept 
 
Breach with > 100,000 subjects 

Abnormal returns 

Linear coeff 

-7.690 

 

* -1.203 

Std Err 
4.112 

 

0.670 

 
 
 
 
 

Change in total market value 
Linear Coeff 
866.11 

Std Err 

925.89 

 

 

-143.75 

150.77 

 

 

269.63 

171.14 

 

-201.03 
78.22 
-160.63 

 

 

223.39 
198.95 
254.36 

 

-39.83 

153.20 

 

-58.91 
14.87 

 

71.18 

 

 

241.53 
283.77 

 

184.36 

 

 
Reported in major paper or wire service 
 
Firm Sector: retail 
Firm Sector: finance 
Firm Sector: data processor 
 
Breach as part of an active attack to get data 
 
Data subject: Customer 
Data subject: Employee 
 
Responsibility for breach attributed to 3rd party 
 
Company size: log(total stock value) 

 

0.052 

 

-0.458 
0.191 
0.139 

 

-0.388 

 

-0.123 
-0.154 

 

0.335 

 

 

0.760 

 

0.992 
0.884 
1.130 

 

0.680 

 

1.073 
1.260 

 

0.819 

 

0.398 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

89.62 
Abnormal returns measured in percentage points, change in market capitalization measured in $ millions. Firm 

** 0.803 

-96.06 

sector reference: other; data subject reference: third party. * p > .1, ** p > .05 

 

 
When all firm and breach attributes are included, very few of the variables have any significant predictive power. 
There is scant support for Hypothesis 2, since the channel of initial report has no effect on the size of abnormal 
return or change in market value. Our third hypothesis, however, looks promising. Controlling for other factors, a 
breach of more than 100,000 subjects will reduce the return on stock price by 1.2% (p = .077).  On the other hand, 
the  larger  a  company  is,  the  less  impact  a  data  breach  will  have,  with  each  order  of  magnitude  in  total  market 
capitalization increasing the expected return on the event to increase by .8% (p=047).  None of the other variables 
have significant predictive power, nor do any of the parameters in the market value model.  Neither industry, data 
subject, nor breach responsibility is indicative of how the market will react. Interestingly, there was also no market 
response  about  whether  the  announcement indicated  that  the  breach  was  part  of  an  active  attack  to  get  the  data. 
Several methods of measuring a time effect were also added to the model without significant effect. As we continue 
to  add  to  the  dataset  and  identify  outliers  or  inappropriate  data,  we  hope  to  further  refine  this  these  regression 
models to better understand why the market responds differently to similar privacy incidents. 
 
 
 

 
 

Acquisti et. al. / Cost of Privacy Breaches 
 

Comparison with other event studies 
Any model is dependent on the underlying assumptions, and the conclusions of this paper are dependent on a theory 
of firm valuation through market reaction. These methods have been used to study a variety of phenomena related 
information  technology  and consumer  trust. We  present  a  summary  these  studies findings  in  comparison  to  this 
paper in Table 9. The impact of privacy breaches of stock market valuations is somewhat less than that observed for 
security vulnerabilities (from viruses, to hacking, to exploits discovered in applications). This difference may signal 
a different market perception, and possibly a discounting of the consequences of incidents that directly compromise 
consumers data compared to those that affect consumers or corporations through viruses, denial-of-service attacks, 
and software vulnerabilities, and calls for further investigation. Still, our findings are within an order of magnitude 
of recent studies on the negative effects of vulnerability disclosure (Telang and Wattal [2004]), and product recall 
announcements,  as  well  as  the  positive  effects  of  a  quality  award  (Hendricks  and  Singhal  [1996]).  This  latter 
comparison might validate the underlying theory that a privacy breach might indicate a shift in reputation and trust. 

Table 9: Summary of related event studies 
Authors  

# Events  Window 

Time 
Period 

Classification of 
Event Study  
Impact of a Data 
Breaches on Firms 
Impact of 
Vulnerability 
Disclosures  
Impact of Security 
Breaches on Firms  

Impact of Auto 
Recall 
Announcements  

Impact of IT 
Investment 
Announcements  

Impact of Winning 
a Quality Award  

Acquisti, A, Friedman, A, and 
Telang R 
Telang R and S Wattal (2004)  

2000-2005 

1999-2004 

Campbell K, Gordon LA, Loeb 
MP and L Zhou (2003) 
(Personal data accessed) 

Campbell K, Gordon LA, Loeb 
MP and L Zhou (2003) (all 
security breaches) 

1995-2000 

1995-2000 

Cavusoglu H, Mishra B and S 
Raghunathan (2004)  
Hovav A and J DArcy (2003)  

1998-2000 

1998-2002 

Jarrell G and S Peltzman (1985) 

1967-1981 

Davidson WL III and DL 
Worrell (1992)  
Chatterjee D, Richardson VJ 
and RW Zmud (2001)  
Im KS, Dow KE and V Grover 
(2001)  
Dos Santos BL, Peffers K and 
DC Mauer (1993)  
Hendricks KB and Singhal VR 
(1997)  

1968-1987 

1987-1998 

1981-1996 

1981-1988 

1985-1991 

79 

146 

11 

43 

66 

23 

116 

133 

96 

238 

97 

0 

*Not significant at the 10% level 

CAR  

-.58 % 

-0.65%  

0 (cid:198) 1 

0 (cid:198) 1 

 

-1 (cid:198) 1 

-5.4% 

-1 (cid:198) 1 

-1.9%* 

0(cid:198) 1 

-2.1%  

-1 (cid:198) 1 

Not Significant  

-1 (cid:198) 1 

-1 (cid:198) 1 

-0.81%  

-.68% 

-1 (cid:198) 1 

1.16%  

-1 (cid:198) 0 

Not Significant 

-1 (cid:198) 0 

Not Significant 

0 

0.59%  

 
Conclusions 
We have presented the first comprehensive analysis of the impact of a companys privacy incidents on its market 
value.  
We have gathered and combined privacy incidents and breach data from different sources for the 1999-2006 (until 
March) period. Our event study shows that there exists an impact for privacy violations. This impact is statistically 
significant and negative, although it is short-lived. The difference in our mean and median results suggests that a 
number  of  outlying  firms  are  driving  significant  portion of  the negative  results.  One possible  explanation  is  that 
larger firms not only are more visible, but their trust reputation, built over time, can be more significantly affected 
by negative reports about their privacy practices.  
In order to further study this conjecture, our current research is extending the regression analysis to examine the 
determinants of firm-specific stock returns and to understand and contrast the impact of pure security breaches 
compared  to  privacy  ones.  Specifically,  we  are  testing  the  relation  between  abnormal  returns,  breach 
announcements,  and  a  number  of  factors  including  channel  of  announcement,  type  of  company,  attack,  and  data 
breached, and severity of the breach. Obviously, we are limited by a small sample, but we are monitoring current 
breaches as they develop to extend our dataset. The longitudinal nature of this data enables us to detect time trends, 
to determine whether regular announcements generate privacy fatigue or if a standard develops to punish those who 
fail to safeguard personal information after several years of disclosure.   
We  also  plan  to  further  study  implications  of  privacy  violations  that  go  beyond  stock  market  impacts  and  that 
include  non-breach  related  invasions  -  such  as  intrusive  policies  or  faulty  services  in  the  realm  of  personal 
information. This will allow us to further analyze the additional data presented in the Appendix.  

 
 

Acquisti et. al. / Cost of Privacy Breaches 
 

References 
A. Acquisti. Privacy and security of personal information: Economic incentives and technological solutions. In Jean 

Camp and Stephen Lewis, editors, The Economics of Information Security, 2004.  

A. Acquisti and Hal R. Varian. Conditioning prices on purchase history. Marketing Science, 24(3):115, 2005.  
S. Brown and J. Warner.  Measuring security price performance. Journal of Financial Economics, 14:331, 1980 
S. Brown and J. Warner. Using daily stock returns: The case of event studies. Journal of Financial Economics, 1985 
California SB1386/AB-700. California Civil Code, Sections 1798.29 and 1798.82-1798.84. Passed in 2002, in effect 

Jan 1 2005. 

L.  J.  Camp.  Design  for  trust.  In  Rino  Falcone,  editor,  Trust,  Reputation  and  Security:  Theories  and  Practice. 

Springer-Verlang, 2003.  

K. Campbell, L. Gordon, M. Loeb, and L. Zhou. The economic cost of publicly announced information security 

breaches: Empirical evidence from the stock market. Journal of Computer Security, 11(3):431448, 2003.  

J. Campell, W. Andrew, and A. MacKinlay.  The  Econometrics  of  Financial  Markets.  Princeton  University  Press, 

1997.  

F. H. Cate. Information security breaches and the threat to consumers. The Center for Information Policy Leadership 

at Hunton & Williams LLP, 2005. 

H.  Cavusoglu,  B.  Mishra,  and  S.  Raghunathan.  The  effect  of  internet  security  breach  announcements  on  market 
value  of  breached  firms  and  internet  security  developers.  In  International  Journal  of  Electronic  Commerce, 
volume 9, 2002.  

D.Chatterjee, V. J. Richardson, and R.W. Zmud. Examining the Shareholder Wealth Effects of Announcements of 

Newly Created CIO Positions, MIS Quarterly, 25(1), 43-70, 2001. 

Choicepoint, 

Inc. 

2005 

http://www.privacyatchoicepoint.com/common/pdfs/Data_  Disclosures_2005.pdf, 2006. 

disclosures 

of 

U.S. 

data 

incidents. 

URL      

Choicepoint,  Inc.  United  States  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission  Form  10-K,  Commission  file  number  1-

13069, 2006. 

M. J. Culnan and P. K. Armstrong . Information Privacy Concerns, Procedural Fairness, and Impersonal Trust: An 

Empirical Investigation   Organization Science, 1999 

W.  L.  Davidson  III  and  D.  L.  Worrell.  The  Effect  of  Product  Recall  Announcements  on  Shareholder  Wealth 

Strategic Management Journal, 13(6), 467-473, 1992. 

B. L. Dos Santos, K. Peffers, and D. Mauer. The Impact of Information Technology on the Market Value of the 

Firm, Information Systems Research, 4 (March), 1-23, 1993.  

Federal Trade Commission. Identity theft survey report. URL http:  //www.ftc.gov/os/2003/09/synovatereport.pdf, 

2003. 

Federal  Trade  Commission.  Consent  order  with  Petco  animal  supplies,  FTC  File  032-3221.  URL 

http://www.ftc.gov/os/caselist/0323221/  041108agree0323221.pdf, 2004 

Federal Trade Commission. Stipulated final judgement and order in US v Choicepoint, FTC File 052-3069. URL 

http://www.ftc.gov/os/caselist/  choicepoint/choicepoint.htm, 2006. 

A.  Garg,  J.  Curtis,  and  H.  Halper.  Quantifying  the  financial  impact  of  IT  security  breaches.  Information 

Management and Computer Security, 11(2):7483, 2003.  

R. Gellman. Privacy, consumers, and costs - How the lack of privacy costs consumers and why business studies of 

privacy costs are biased and incomplete. http://www.epic.org/reports/dmfprivacy.html, 2002. 

J. Hagel and J. Rayport. The coming battle for customer information. Harvard Business Review, 75(1), 1997.  

K.  Hendricks  and  V.  Singhal.  Quality  awards  and  the  market  value  of  the  firm:  An  empirical  investigation. 

Management Science, 42(3):415436, 1996.  

K.  Hendricks  and  V.  Singhal.  Delays  in  new  product  introductions  and  the  market  value  of  the  firm:  The 

consequences of being late to the market. Management Science, 43(4):422436, 1997.  

A. Hovava and J. DArcy. The impact of denial-of-service attack announcements of the market value of firms. Risk 

Management and Insurance Review, 6(2):97121, 2003.  

Identity Theft Resource Center. Identity theft: The aftermath. URL http://www.idtheftcenter.org/aftermath2004.pdf, 

2004. 

K. S. Im, K. E. Dow, and V. Grover. Research Report: A Reexamination of IT Investment and the Market Value of 

the Firm  An Event Study Methodology, Information Systems Research, 12(1), 103-117, 2001. 

L. Introna and A. Pouloudi. Privacy in the information age: Stakeholders, interests and values. Journal of Business 

 
G.  Jarrell  and  S  Peltzman.  The  Impact  of  Product  Recalls  on  the  Wealth  of  Sellers,  The  Journal  of  Political 

Ethics , 22(1):27-38, 1999. 

Economy, 93(3), 512-536, 1985.  

D. Kahneman, J. Knetsch, and R. Thaler. Fairness as a constraint on profit-seeking entitlements in the market. 

American Economic Review, 76, 1986.  

 
K. Kannan, J. Rees, and S. Sridhar. Reexamining the impact of information security breach announcements on firm 

performance. Working paper, Carnegie Mellon University, 2004. 

 
T. M. Lenard and P. H. Rubin. An economic analysis of notification requirements for data security breaches. 

Progress on Point, The Progress and Freedom Foundation, 2005. 

 
G. R. Milne and M. E. Gordon. Direct mail privacy-efficiency trade-offs within an implied social contract 

framework. J. Public Policy Marketing 12 2 20615, 1993. 

 
J. H. Moor. Toward a Theory of Privacy in the Information Age, Computers and Society, September 1997, pp. 27-

 
L. Ponemon. The 2003 Privacy trust survey. Ponemon Institute, LLC and The CIO Institute of Carnegie Mellon 

32, 1997. 

University, 2003.  

 
L. Ponemon. What does a data breach cost companies? Ponemon Institute, LLC, 2005. 
 
Privacy Rights Clearinghouse. Facts sheet 17b: How to deal with a security breach. URL 

http://www.privacyrights.org/fs/  fs17bSecurityBreach.htm, 2006.  

 
C. D. Raab and C. J.. Bennett. The Distribution of Privacy Risks: Who Needs Protection? The Information Society 

14(4):253-262, 1998. 

T. Reilly. Press release: AG warns consumers: Do not give your private financial information to anyone calling or 

emailing pretending to be investigating the Boston Globe security breach. URL http:  
//www.ago.state.ma.us/sp.cfm?pageid=986&id=1602, 2006. 

Rhee, M. and P R. Haunschild. The Liability of Good Reputation: A Study of Product Recalls in the U.S. 

Automobile Industry . Organization Science 17:1 p. 101, 2006 

M. Sakalosky. Doubleclicks double edge. ClickZExperts, September 3, 2002. URL 

http://www.clickz.com/experts/crm/analyze_data/  article.php/1455141.  

H. J. Smith, S.J. Milberg, and S. Burke. Information privacy: Measuring individuals' concerns about organizational 

practices J. MIS Quarterly. Minneapolis, Vol. 20, Iss. 2; p. 167, 1996. 

 
 

Acquisti et. al. / Cost of Privacy Breaches 
 

D. J. Solove. "A Taxonomy of Privacy" . University of Pennsylvania Law Review, Vol. 154, No. 3, p. 477, January 

2006 

K. A. Stewart and A. H. Segars, An empirical examination of the concern for information privacy. instrument, 

Information Systems Research 13(1), 2002. 

A. Svensson. Analysing information systems security. Department of Informatics, School of Economics and 

Management, Lund University, 2003.  

R. Telang and S. Wattal. Impact of software vulnerability announcements on the market value of software vendors - 

An empirical investigation. Working Paper, Carnegie Mellon University, 2006.  

B. Wall. Bill walls list of computer hacker incidents. URL http:  

//www.geocities.com/SiliconValley/Lab/7378/hacker.htm, 2006. 

Appendix 
The  analysis  presented  in  the  body  of  this  paper  focuses  exclusively  on  the  privacy  breaches  by  publicly  traded 
firms. However, the underlying motivation is to examine the effects on organizations of all privacy breaches and, 
ultimately, all privacy incidents. We argue in this paper that privacy incidents comprise a broad set of situations 
enabling the misuse of personal information.  Since many public, non-profit and privately held organizations and 
institutions also have the responsibility to safeguard personal information, a complete exploration of the problem 
should include these stakeholders.  Moreover, data misuse spans beyond accidental breaches to include intentional 
misuse through active sharing or unauthorized collection. The collection of breach announcements used in this paper 
is  a  subset  of the  larger  collection  of  privacy  incidents  we  have  compiled  for  further analysis.  The  tables  below 
summarize this broader dataset. 
 

Table 1A: Distribution of all privacy incidents by year (up to March 2006) 

Year 
1999 
2000 
2001 
2002 
2003 
2004 
2005 
2006 

Number of Incidents 

1 
6 
4 
3 
3 
8 
151 
30 

Table 2A: Distribution of all privacy incidents by type of incident 

Source of privacy incident 

Number of Incidents 

Computer or tape theft 

Data Mishandling 
Illegal Data Selling 
Hacks and exploits 

Insider attacks 

Intrusive Business Practices 

Password Compromises 

Software flaws with potential 

for data exposure 

32 
39 
6 
80 
9 
13 
3 
24 

 
  

 

 
 

 

Acquisti et. al. / Cost of Privacy Breaches 
 

 

 

Table 3A: Distribution of all privacy incidents by economic sector 

Sector 

Number of Incidents 

Commerce 
Finance 

Information 

IT 

Medical 

Government 
Educational 

Other 

28 
31 
10 
51 
11 
17 
47 
9 

