The Greenhouse Effect and Global Warming

Student Activity Sheet

Name                                                                 Date                                Class

                        

The greenhouse effect results from the heat energy of sunlight being absorbed by the Earth and
molecules  in  the  Earth's  atmosphere.  This  energy  is  usually  radiated  back  towards  space.
However, as we change the gases in the Earth's atmosphere as the results of everyday living, this
energy is unable to leave the Earth's atmosphere and is trapped as heat. The heat causes a gradual
warming of the air around the Earth. This warming is known as the greenhouse effect.

Some  scientists  are  concerned  that  the  heat  in  the  Earth's  atmosphere  may  be  increasing  to
dangerous  levels  due  to  the  greenhouse  effect.  Average  global  temperatures  have  been  rising
since the 1800s: the average temperature of the Earth has risen approximately 0.7oC or 1.2oF.

A warmer atmosphere may seem desirable to many people. However, significant warming could
have many harmful effects. Lower heating costs could be offset by higher air conditioning costs.
Areas that now grow most of the world's food might become too warm or too dry to grow crops.
The  areas  that  would  become  warmer,  like  Canada,  do  not  have  appropriate  soil  for  growing
crops. Lower water levels in lakes and streams would concentrate pollutants. Weather patterns
may  change  with  hurricanes  probably  hitting  the  coast  farther  north  and  with  greater  ferocity.
Warmer temperatures would increase the volume of water in the oceans and possibly melt much
of the ice in mountain glaciers and the Arctic and Antarctic ice caps. This would cause sea level
to rise, causing flooding of the world's coastal cities, where one-third of the world's population
lives.  Protective  barrier  islands  would  disappear  underwater,  resulting  in  increased  coastal
erosion. For these and other related reasons, scientists are very concerned about the greenhouse
effect.

Some scientists are not convinced that global warming, due to the greenhouse effect, is occurring
at this time. They believe that if global warming is occurring, that it may not be due to human
activities. These scientists point out that the Earth's average temperature has fluctuated since the
Earth was formed. So they say that these temperature changes may be due to natural processes
and there is nothing we can do about them. However, we do know that we have increased the
atmospheric  amounts  of  several  compounds  since  the  beginning  of  the  Industrial  Revolution.

Even if the Earth is going through a natural phase of global warming, humans may be increasing
the degree of warming by the chemicals that they add to the air.

Four  primary  compounds  are  thought  to  be  responsible  for  global  warming.  Carbon  dioxide
(CO2) gas is thought to be responsible for 50 to 55 percent of the global warming trend. Fossil
fuel  combustion  (the  burning  of  coal,  oil,  gas,  natural  gas)  and  increased  deforestation  (the
clearing away of forests to use the land for other purposes) are thought to be the main reasons for
increased levels of carbon dioxide in our atmosphere. Trees and other plants need carbon dioxide
to live, much as we humans need oxygen to live. Fewer trees means less CO2 removed from the
air.  Chlorofluorocarbons  (CFCs)  are  thought  to  be  responsible  for  25  percent  of  global
warming. CFCs are used to make plastic foams (such as styrofoam) and aerosol propellants in
addition  to  being  used  as  refrigerants  in  air  conditioners  and  refrigerators.  Methane  (CH4)  is
indicated  in  approximately  12  percent  of  the  global  warming  trend.  It  is  produced  by  bacterial
decay  of  organic  matter  and  in  the  stomachs  of  cattle,  sheep,  termites,  and  other  organisms.
Some methane also comes from industry and other man-made sources.  Nitrous oxide (N2O) is
responsible for about 6 percent of global warming. Nitrous oxide is produced as a byproduct of
certain industrial processes, by microbial action on nitrogen fertilizers and livestock wastes, and
from volcanic eruptions.

Regardless  of  whether  global  warming  is  occurring  as  a  result  of  the  greenhouse  effect,  most
scientists agree that there are steps that we should take to reduce the amount of air pollutants that
are thought to cause it. These steps would reduce air pollution and save energy at the very least.
Some recommended things that we can do include: reducing the production of CFCs; reducing
the use of fossil fuels; increasing the use of air pollution control devices; stopping deforestation;
planting more trees; reducing water pollution; and slowing human population growth.

Objectives:

 Use models to generate data and to simulate what happens in the real world.
 Analyze and interpret data generated from the model.
 Apply knowledge of the greenhouse effect to change the behavior of society and individuals.

Materials:

Graph paper
Pencil or Pen

Data sheet
Colored pencils (student supplied)

The Greenhouse Effect: Global Warming   2

Procedures

1. Your  teacher  will  have  a  demonstration  of  the  greenhouse  effect  set  up  in  the  front  of  the
classroom. You will need to have your data sheet and something to write with so that you can
record two temperatures every minute throughout the demonstration. Students will take turns
writing the temperatures on the board as well.

2. The  lights  will  be  turned  on  for  fifteen  minutes  and  different  students  will  help  read  the
temperatures and record the data on the board. Someone will call out a temperature reading
once a minute. Pay attention so you don't miss any, but if you do, get it from the data table on
the board.

3. The  lights  will  now  be  turned  off  for  fifteen  minutes  and  you'll  see  how  the  temperature
changes. Make sure you record the data on your data table every minute for fifteen minutes
except you will write in the part of the chart that says "lights off".

4.  Take  the  data  table  you  filled  in  and  make  a  graph  from  the  data.  Plot  the  time  on  the
horizontal (X) axis and the temperature on the vertical (Y) axis. Connect the data points to
form a line showing how the temperature changed over time. Make sure you graph the "lights
on"    and     "lights off" data. You can put both sets of data on one graph if you use a different
color  for  each  line  and  include  a  key  explaining  what  each  color  is  on  your  graph.  For
instance, you could make your "lights on" line red and the "lights off" line blue.

5.  Answer the discussion questions.

Discussion Questions

1. The  model  in  the  demonstration  simulated  what  happens  on  Earth  during  the  greenhouse
effect. Each of the elements in the model represented something on Earth. What did item's a)-
d) represent?

light from the lamp

     Model   
a)
b) soil
c) air in the box
d) plastic wrap

    Earth    
a)
b)
c)
d)

2.  How was this demonstration a realistic model of the greenhouse effect?

3.  How was this demonstration not a realistic model of the greenhouse effect?

The Greenhouse Effect: Global Warming   3

4.  In which of the boxes did the greatest temperature change occur? Explain why this happened.

5.  What does the plastic wrap represent in this experiment and was it a good substitute for the

real thing?

6.  Where do these greenhouse gases come from?

CO2:
CH4:

N2O:
CFC:

7.  What effects do you think global warming may have on people's health?

8.  What can we do to help control the amount of greenhouse gases emitted into the atmosphere

and slow global warming?

The Greenhouse Effect: Global Warming   4

Vocabulary

Greenhouse effect:

The  warming  of  the  atmosphere  due  to  the  increased  amounts  of

greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and nitrous oxides. These gases

form a blanket over the Earth, trapping the energy or heat and preventing

it from leaving the atmosphere. The atmosphere acts like a greenhouse.

Carbon dioxide:

Although  this  gas  is  a  normal  part  of  atmosphere,  it  is  thought  to  be

responsible for 55-60% of the global warming trend. This is the gas we

expel when we breathe and that green plants need for photosynthesis.

Fossil fuels:

Coal, oil, and natural gas.

Deforestation:

The removal of large areas of trees or forests by cutting or burning.

Chlorofluorocarbons: Compounds  thought  to  be  responsible  for  25%  of  the  global  warming

trend.  Chlorofluorocarbons  (CFCs)  are  used  in  air  conditioners  and

refrigerators,  as  well  as  in  making  plastic  foams,  and  in  aerosol

propellants.

Methane:

This  gas  is  thought  to  be  responsible  for  approximately  12%  of  the

global warming trend. It is produced by bacterial decay of organic matter

and  in  the  stomachs  of  cattle,  sheep,  termites,  and  other  organisms.

Some also comes from industry and other man-made sources.

Nitrous oxide:

Gas that is responsible for about 6% of the global warming trend. It is

produced  by  the  microbial  breakdown  of  nitrogen  fertilizers  and

livestock wastes, from volcanic eruptions, and from industrial processes.

Model:

A small example that imitates or mimics a real process or thing.

The Greenhouse Effect: Global Warming   5

GREENHOUSE EFFECT DATA TABLE

          MODEL WITHOUT LID
Light On
Time
(min)

Light Off
Time
(min)

Temp
(oC)

Temp
(oC)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

                MODEL WITH LID

Light On
Time
(min)

Temp
(oC)

Light Off
Time
(min)

Temp
(oC)

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

The Greenhouse Effect: Global Warming   6

Teacher Strategies

 Materials for Greenhouse Effect Demonstration:

 Plastic wrap (enough to cover one box)
 Two lamps (Teacher supplied)
 One spray bottle filled with water
 Two cardboard thermometer stands

 Two transparent boxes
 Two 200 Watt bulbs
 Graph paper
 Two thermometers
 Watch or a clock with a second hand (Teacher supplied)
 Potting soil (enough to create a 2-3 cm layer in both boxes) (Teacher supplied)
 Overhead transparency of greenhouse effect
 Student activity sheets (including copy of overhead transparency)-one per student

Preparation:

1. Prepare  the  transparent  boxes  by  adding  potting  soil  in  a  2-3  cm  deep  layer.  Rest  the
thermometer stand on the soil and place the thermometer on top of it. A thermometer stand
can  be  easily  made  from  cardboard  but  it  should  raise  the  thermometer  above  the  soil  and
allow you to easily read the numbers.  Lightly dampen the soil with a spray of water from the
spray bottle. Cover one box with the plastic wrap.

2. Locate the lamps approximately 25 cm above the center of the top of the boxes.
3. Construct a data chart on the board similar to the one in the student activity sheets.

Instructional Strategies:

2.

1. Provide  students  with  background  information  on  the  greenhouse  effect  using  the  provided
overhead  transparency.  Give  students  their  copy  of  the  overhead  at  this  time  and  review
where  these  greenhouse  gases  come  from.  Some  review  of  graphing  skills  may  also  be
necessary.
Inform the students that they will be using a model of the Earth to see how the greenhouse
effect works. Turn on the lamps and have students individually record the temperature every
minute for fifteen minutes on their data charts. As soon as fifteen minutes are up, turn off the
lamp  and  keep  recording  the  temperature  every  minute  for  another  fifteen  minutes  as  the
surroundings  cool.  You  may  want  to  give  each  student  a  turn  at  reading  the  thermometer.
Assign one student for each segment to be the time keeper.

3. Have students construct graphs from the data that they recorded. Use time on the horizontal
axis and temperature on the vertical axis. You may want to have the students use one piece of

The Greenhouse Effect: Global Warming   7

paper and set of axes and use colored pencils or crayons to differentiate between the covered
box and the uncovered box.

Answers to Discussion Questions:

1. Make comparisons between this model and the global greenhouse effect:

light
a)
b) soil
c) air in the box
d) plastic wrap

a) sun
b) crust or land of the Earth
c) air in Earth's atmosphere
d) greenhouse gases

2. How was this demonstration a realistic model of the greenhouse effect?

This demonstration is a realistic model because it demonstrates how heat can be trapped
in  air  when  it  is  enclosed  in  a  space,  which  is  essential  what  is  happening  to  our
atmosphere.

3. How was this demonstration not a realistic model of the greenhouse effect?

This demonstration was not a realistic model of the greenhouse effect because it is much
simpler  than  all  the  complex  physical  and  chemical  interrelationships  that  exist  on  the
Earth.

4.

In which of the boxes did the greatest temperature change occur?

The covered box.

5. Explain why this happened.

The plastic wrap acts as an insulator to trap air in the box.  When the air is trapped in
the  box  and  heat  is  added,  you  are  only  heating  or  adding  energy  to  the  trapped  air.
There is no other air to exchange the heat with.  Therefore, the temperature rises more
quickly in the covered box.

6. What does the plastic wrap represent or model in this experiment?

The plastic wrap represents the greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide, nitrous oxides,
and sulfur dioxides.

7. Where do these greenhouse gases come from?

carbon dioxide

methane

automobiles,  deforestation  (removes  a  large  sink  for
carbon dioxide as plants use carbon dioxide to make their
own food), fossil fuel combustion
decaying  organic  (plant  and  animal)  material  from
slashed  and  burned  agriculture,  farming  (both  animals
and plants)

The Greenhouse Effect: Global Warming   8

chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs)

nitrous oxide

refrigerants,  aerosols,  air  conditioning,  plastic  foams,
solvents
artificial  nitrogen  fertilizers,  industry,  microbes,  and
volcanoes

8. What effects do you think the global warming may have on people's health?

Answers  should  include  ideas  about  heat  stress  related  health  problems,  overcrowding
health related problems, as well as the uncertainty about what will happen.

9. What can we do to help control the amount of greenhouse gases emitted into the atmosphere

and slow global warming?

Answers  should  include  reduction  of  dependency  on  the  automobile,  changing
agricultural methods, and ways to control CFCs production.

Approximate time required: 45 to 60 minutes.

Target audience:  Science.

Extensions:

Grades 4-6    

1.  Have students conduct research on heat-related illnesses and heat tolerance.
2. Take  the  class  to  an  auto  shop  and  have  a  mechanic  show  them  how  an  emissions  tester

3.

works for automobiles.
Invite  a  representative  of  a  local  air  pollution  agency  to  speak  to  the  class  about  the
greenhouse gases and their effects on the environment.

4.  Invite a health care professional to come to class to speak about heat-related illnesses and the

effects of overcrowding.

Grades 9-12

1. Have students try to construct their own model of the Earth to demonstrate the greenhouse
effectperhaps they want to include large bodies of water, like the oceans, in their models to
see how this will effect temperature. Students could also attempt to grow plants in the soil to
discover what effect they may have on the temperature.

2. Take  the  class  to  an  auto  shop  and  have  a  mechanic  show  them  how  an  emissions  tester

3.

works for automobiles.
Invite  a  representative  of  a  local  air  pollution  agency  to  speak  to  the  class  about  the
greenhouse gases and their effects on the environment.

The Greenhouse Effect: Global Warming   9

4.  Invite a health care professional to come to class to speak about heat-related illnesses and the

effects of overcrowding.

5.  Conduct experiment as written. Construct two boxes in the manner described. Cover one with
plastic wrap that is already misted. In the other box place small plants at irregular intervals
(mosses, small houseplants, tiny ferns). Create a depression in one area, approximately 2 in
diameter, and line with plastic wrap and fill 2/3 with water. Place small LegosTM or wooden
blocks at irregular intervals to represent homes and businesses. Mist the soil. Cover this box
with plastic wrap. Place both boxes under the lamps. Record temperature changes over time.
Obtain an empty transparent box. Fill with 1/4 inch of sand over the entire bottom. Add 3.5%
salt solution (35 g of NaCl in 1000 ml of distilled water) until the salt solution reaches half of
the  box  height.  Place  thermometer  in  the  water.  Cover  with  plastic  wrap.  Have  students
collect and record 3 sets of data; one for land mass with plants, pond and buildings, one for
bare soil, one for ocean. This can be repeated for sand alone.
Questions
1.  Each of the models corresponds to what type of earth area?
2.  In  which  box  does  the  greenhouse  effect  cause  the  greatest  increase  in  temperature?
Why?
3.  What method(s) of heat transfer are occurring in the plastic-covered boxes? Explain.
4.  What are some of the laws that currently exist in the U.S. regulating greenhouse gases, air
quality? Do you think these laws are effective? What laws exist in other industrialized/non-
industrialized nations?

References:

Carle,  Mark.  A.,  Mickey  Sarquis,  and  Louise  Mary  Nolan.    1991.    Physical  Science:  The

Challenge of Discovery.  D.C. Health and Company, Lexington, Massachusetts.

Christensen,  John  W.    1991.    Global  Science  Laboratory  Manual.    Kendall/Hunt  Publishing

Company, Dubuque, Iowa.

Hocking,  Colin,  et  al.    1990.    Global  Warming  and  the  Greenhouse  Effect.    Lawrence  Hall  of

Science, University of California at Berkeley, Berkeley, California.

Miller,  Tyler  G.  1990.    Living  in  the  Environment.  Wadsworth  Publishing  Co.,  Belmont,

California.

Roa, Michael L.  1993.  Environmental Science Activities Kit.  The Center for applied Research

in Education, Professional Publishing, West Nyack, New York.

The Greenhouse Effect: Global Warming   10

