12
Sustainable Development and Mitigation
Coordinating Lead Authors:
Jayant Sathaye (USA), Adil Najam (Pakistan)

Lead Authors:
Christopher Cocklin (New Zealand), Thomas Heller (USA), Franck Lecocq (France), Juan Llanes-Regueiro (Cuba), Jiahua Pan (China),
Gerhard Petschel-Held † (Germany), Steve Rayner (USA), John Robinson (Canada), Roberto Schaeffer (Brazil), Youba Sokona (Mali),
Rob Swart (The Netherlands), Harald Winkler (South Africa)

Contributing Authors:
Sarah Burch (Canada), Jan Corfee Morlot (USA/France), Rutu Dave (The Netherlands), László Pinter (Canada), Andrew Wyatt (Australia)

Review Editors:
Mohan Munasinghe (Sri Lanka), Hans Opschoor (The Netherlands)

This chapter should be cited as:
Sathaye, J., A. Najam, C. Cocklin, T. Heller, F. Lecocq, J. Llanes-Regueiro, J. Pan, G. Petschel-Held , S. Rayner, J. Robinson,
R. Schaeffer, Y. Sokona, R. Swart, H. Winkler, 2007: Sustainable Development and Mitigation. In Climate Change 2007: Mitigation.
Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [B. Metz, O.R.
Davidson, P.R. Bosch, R. Dave, L.A. Meyer (eds)], Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

Table of Contents
Executive Summary.................................................... 693
12.1

Introduction...................................................... 695

12.1.1	 The two-way relationship between sustainable
development and climate change .................... 695
12.1.2	 Evolution and articulation of the concept of
sustainable development.................................. 696
12.1.3	 Measurement of progress towards sustainable
development ................................................... 698

12.2	 Implications of development choices for
climate change mitigation.............................. 699
12.2.1	 Multiplicity of plausible development pathways
ahead, with different economic, social and
environmental content...................................... 700
12.2.2	 Lower emissions pathways are not necessarily
associated with lower economic growth. .......... 707
12.2.3	 Changing development pathway requires working
with multiple actors, at multiple scales.............. 708
12.2.4	 Opportunities at the sectoral level to change
development pathways towards lower emissions
through development policies........................... 717

12.3	 Implications of mitigation choices for
sustainable development goals...................... 726
12.3.1	 Energy supply and use..................................... 729
12.3.2	 Forestry sector ................................................ 731
12.3.3	 Agriculture sector ............................................ 731
12.3.4	 Waste and wastewater management sector ..... 732
12.3.5	 Implications of climate policies for sustainable
development ................................................... 733

12.4	 Gaps in knowledge and future research
needs ................................................................... 733
References..................................................................... 734

692

Chapter 12

Chapter 12	

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
The concept of sustainable development was adopted by
the World Commission on Environment and Development,
and there is agreement that sustainable development involves
a comprehensive and integrated approach to economic, social,
and environmental processes. Discourses on sustainable
development, however, have focused primarily on the
environmental and economic dimensions. The importance
of social, political, and cultural factors is only now getting
more recognition. Integration is essential in order to articulate
development trajectories that are sustainable, including
addressing the climate change problem.
There is growing emphasis in the literature on the twoway relationship between climate change mitigation and
sustainable development. The relationship may not always
be mutually beneficial. In most instances, mitigation can
have ancillary benefits or co-benefits that contribute to other
sustainable development goals (climate first). Development
that is sustainable in many other respects can create conditions
in which mitigation can be effectively pursued (development
first) (high agreement, much evidence).
Although still in early stages, there is growing use of
indicators to manage and measure the sustainability of
development at the macro and sectoral levels. This is driven in
part by the increasing emphasis on accountability in the context
of governance and strategy initiatives. At the sectoral level,
progress towards sustainable development is beginning to be
measured and reported by industry and governments using, for
instance, green certification, monitoring tools, and emissions
registries. Review of the indicators illustrates, however, that
few macro-indicators include measures of progress with respect
to climate change (high agreement, much evidence).
Climate change is influenced not only by the climate-specific
policies but also by the mix of development choices and the
resulting development trajectories - a point reinforced by global
scenario analyses published since the Third Assessment Report
(TAR). Making development more sustainable by changing
development paths can thus make a significant contribution
to climate goals. But changing development pathways is not
about choosing a mapped-out path, but rather about navigating
through an uncharted and evolving landscape (high agreement,
much evidence).
Making decisions about sustainable development and
climate change mitigation is no longer the sole purview of
governments. There is increasing recognition in the literature
of a shift to a more inclusive concept of governance, which
includes the contributions of various levels of government,
private sector, non-governmental actors, and civil society. The
more climate change issues are mainstreamed as part of the
planning perspective at the appropriate level of implementation,
and the more all relevant parties are involved in the decision-

making process in a meaningful way, the more likely they are to
achieve the desired goals (high agreement, medium evidence).
Regarding governments, a substantial body of political theory
identifies and explains the existence of national policy styles or
political cultures. The underlying assumption of this work is
that individual countries tend to process problems in a specific
manner, regardless of the distinctiveness or specific features of
any problem; a national ‘way of doing things’. Furthermore,
the choice of policy instruments is affected by the institutional
capacity of governments to implement the instrument. This
implies that the preferred mix of policy decisions and their
effectiveness in terms of sustainable development and climate
change mitigation strongly depend on national characteristics
(high agreement, much evidence).
The private sector is a central player in ecological and
sustainability stewardship. Over the past 25 years, there has
been a progressive increase in the number of companies taking
steps to address sustainability issues at either the company or
industry level. Although there has been progress, the private
sector has the capacity to play a much greater role in making
development more sustainable in the future, because such a
shift is likely to benefit its performance (medium agreement,
medium evidence).
Citizen groups have been major demanders of sustainable
development and are critical actors in implementing sustainable
development policy. Apart from implementing sustainable
development projects themselves, they can push policy reform
through awareness-raising, advocacy, and agitation. They can
also pull policy action by filling the gaps and providing policy
services, including in the areas of policy innovation, monitoring,
and research. Interactions can take the form of partnerships or
stakeholder dialogues that can provide citizens’ groups with a
lever for increasing pressure on both governments and industry
(high agreement, medium evidence).
Deliberative public-private partnerships work most
effectively when investors, local governments and citizen groups
are willing to work together to implement new technologies,
and produce arenas to discuss these technologies that are locally
inclusive (high agreement, medium evidence).
Region- and country-specific case studies demonstrate that
different paths and policies can achieve noticeable emissions
reductions, depending on the capacity to realise sustainability
and climate change objectives. These capacities are determined
by the same set of conditions that are closely linked to the
state of development. The mitigative capacity to realise low
emissions can be low due to differentiated national endowments
and barriers, even when significant abatement opportunities
exist. The challenge of implementing sustainable development
exists in both developing and industrialized countries. The
nature of the challenge, however, tends to be different in the
industrialized countries. (high agreement, much evidence).
693

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

Some general conclusions emerging from the case studies
of how changes in development pathways at the sectoral level
have or could lower emissions are reviewed in this chapter
(high agreement, medium evidence):
•	 Greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions are influenced by but not
rigidly linked to economic growth: policy choices make a
difference.
•	 Sectors where effective production is far below the maximum
feasible with the same amount of inputs - sectors far from
their production frontier - have opportunities to adopt ‘winwin-win’ policies. These policies free up resources and
bolster growth, meet other sustainable development goals,
and also reduce GHG emissions relative to baseline.
•	 Sectors where production is close to optimal given available
inputs – sectors that are closer to the production frontier
- also have opportunities to reduce emissions by meeting
other sustainable development goals. However, the closer
to the production frontier, the more trade-offs are likely to
appear.
•	 To truly have an effect, what matters is that not only a ‘good’
choice is made at a certain point, but also that the initial
policy is sustained for a long period - sometimes several
decades.
•	 It is often not one policy decision, but an array of decisions
that are necessary to influence emissions. This raises the
issue of coordination between policies in several sectors,
and at various scales.
Mainstreaming requires that non-climate policies,
programmes, and/or individual actions take climate change
mitigation into consideration, in both developing and developed
countries. However, merely piggybacking climate change onto
an existing political agenda is unlikely to succeed. The ease
or difficulty with which mainstreaming is accomplished will
depend on both mitigation technologies or practices, and the
underlying development path. Weighing other development
benefits against climate benefits will be a key basis for choosing
development sectors for mainstreaming. Decisions about fiscal
policy, multilateral development bank lending, insurance
practices, electricity markets, petroleum imports security,
forest conservation, for example, which may seem unrelated
to climate policy, can have profound impacts on emissions,

694

Chapter 12

the extent of mitigation required, and the resulting costs and
benefits. However, in some cases, such as a shift from biomass
cooking to LPG in rural areas of developing countries, it may be
rational to disregard climate change considerations because of
the small increase in emissions compared with its development
benefits (high agreement, medium evidence).
There is a growing understanding of the possibilities to choose
mitigation options and their implementation such that there is
no conflict with other dimensions of sustainable development;
or, where trade-offs are inevitable, to allow a rational choice to
be made. The sustainable development benefits of mitigation
options vary within a sector and over regions (high agreement,
much evidence):
•	 Generally, mitigation options that improve productivity
of resource use, whether energy, water, or land, yield
positive benefits across all three dimensions of sustainable
development. Other categories of mitigation options
have a more uncertain impact and depend on the wider
socioeconomic context within which the option is
implemented.
•	 Climate-related policies, such as energy efficiency, are often
economically beneficial, improve energy security, and reduce
local pollutant emissions. Many energy supply mitigation
options can also be designed to achieve other sustainable
development benefits, such as avoided displacement of
local populations, job creation, and rationalized human
settlements design.
•	 Reducing deforestation can have significant biodiversity,
soil, and water conservation benefits, but may result in loss
of economic welfare for some stakeholders. Appropriately
designed forestation and bioenergy plantations can lead
to reclamation of degraded land, manage water runoff,
retain soil carbon and benefit rural economies, but could
compete with land for agriculture and may be negative for
biodiversity.
•	 There are good possibilities for reinforcing sustainable
development though mitigation actions in most sectors,
but particularly in waste management, transportation, and
building sectors, notably through decreased energy use and
reduced pollution.

Chapter 12	

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

12.1

Introduction

The concept of sustainable development had its roots in
the idea of a sustainable society (Brown, 1981) and in the
management of renewable and non-renewable resources. The
concept was introduced in the World Conservation Strategy
by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature
(IUCN, 1980). The World Commission on Environment and
Development adopted the concept and launched sustainability
into political, public and academic discourses. The concept was
defined as “development that meets the needs of the present
without compromising the ability of future generations to meet
their own needs” (WCED, 1987; Bojo et al., 1992). While
this definition is commonly cited, there are divergent views in
academic and policy circles on the concept and how to apply it
in practice (Banuri et al., 2001; Cocklin, 1995; Pezzoli, 1997;
Robinson and Herbert, 2001).
The discussion on sustainable development in the IPCC
process has evolved since the First Assessment Report
which focused on the technology and cost-effectiveness of
mitigation activities. This focus was broadened in the Second
Assessment Report (SAR) to include issues related to equity,
both procedural and consequential, and across countries and
generations, and to environmental (Hourcade et al., 2001) and
social considerations (IPCC, 1996). The Third Assessment
Report (TAR) further broadened the treatment of sustainable
development by addressing issues related to global sustainability
(IPCC, 2001b, Chapter 1). The report noted three broad classes
of analyses or perspectives: efficiency and cost-effectiveness;
equity and sustainable development; and global sustainability
and societal learning. The preparation of TAR was supported by
IPCC Expert Group Meetings specially targeted at sustainable
development and social dimensions of climate change. These
groups noted the various ways that the TAR treatment of
sustainable development could be improved (Munasinghe and
Swart, 2000; Jochem et al., 2001).
In light of this evolution, each chapter of this Fourth
Assessment Report focuses to some extent on the links to
sustainable development practices. Chapter 1 introduces the
concept, Chapter 2 provides a framework for understanding
the economic, environmental, and social dimensions, and
Chapter 3 addresses the issue of development choices for
climate change mitigation in a modelling context. The sector
Chapters 4 to 10 and the cross-sectoral Chapter 11 examine
the impacts of mitigation options on sustainable development
goals; and Chapter 13 describes the extent to which sustainable
development is addressed in international policies. Further, IPCC
(2007) devotes two chapters that are linked to the mitigation
discussion in this report. Chapter 17 in IPCC (2007) considers
adaptation practices, options, constraints and capacity, while
Chapter 18 examines the inter-relationships between adaptation
and mitigation. Finally, Chapter 20 contains discussions of
adaptation and sustainable development.

As in the aforementioned chapters, climate change policies
can be considered in their own right (‘climate first’). Most policy
literature about climate change mitigation, and necessarily most
of this assessment, focuses on government-driven, climatespecific measures that, through different mechanisms, directly
constrain GHG emissions. Such measures will compose an
essential element for managing the risks of climate change.
Nevertheless, the greater emphasis in Section 12.2 is on
other approaches that may be necessary to go beyond the scope
of climate specific actions. Climate change mitigation is treated
as an integral element of sustainable development policies
(‘development first’). Decisions that may seem unrelated to
climate policy can have profound impacts on emissions. This
analysis does not suggest or imply that non-climate actions can
displace climate-specific measures. It emphasizes what more
developed and developing countries can do to alter emissions
paths in the absence of direct constraints on emissions. Such
indirect approaches to climate mitigation are especially relevant
in developing countries where mandatory, climate-specific
measures are controversial and, at best, prospective.
The relationship between economic development and climate
change is of particular importance to developing countries
because of where they are in their development process and
also because of the particular climate challenges that many of
them face. This chapter, therefore, gives particular emphasis
to the notion of “making development more sustainable”.
Making development more sustainable recognizes that there
are many ways in which societies balance the economic, social,
and environmental, including climate change, dimensions
of sustainable development. It also admits the possibility of
conflict and trade-offs between measures that advance one
aspect of sustainable development while harming another
(Munasinghe, 2000).
This chapter (1) describes the evolution of the concept of
sustainable development with emphasis on its two-way linkage
to climate change mitigation (Section 12.1); (2) explores ways to
make development more sustainable, - the role of development
paths, how these can be changed, and the role that state, market,
and civil society could play in mainstreaming climate change
mitigation into development choices (Section 12.2); and (3)
summarizes the impacts of climate mitigation on attributes of
sustainable development (Section 12.3).
12.1.1	 The two-way relationship between
sustainable development and climate change
The growing literature on the two-way nature of the
relationship between climate change and sustainable
development is introduced in Chapter 2 (Metwalli et al., 1998;
Rayner and Malone, 1998; Munasinghe and Swart, 2000;
Schneider et al., 2000; Banuri et al., 2001; Morita et al., 2001;
Smit et al., 2001; Beg et al., 2002; Markandya and Halsnaes,
2002; Metz et al., 2002; Najam and Cleveland, 2003; Swart et
695

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

al., 2003; Wilbanks, 2003). The notion is that policies pursuing
sustainable development and climate change mitigation can
be mutually reinforcing. Much of this literature, as elaborated
upon in Chapters 4 to 11, emphasizes the degree to which
climate change mitigation can have effects. Sometimes called
ancillary benefits or co-benefits, these effects will contribute
to the sustainable development goals of the jurisdiction in
question. This amounts to viewing sustainable development
through a climate change lens. It leads to a strong focus on
integrating sustainable development goals and consequences
into the climate mitigation policy framework, and on assessing
the scope for such ancillary benefits. For instance, reductions
in GHG emissions might reduce the incidence of death and
illness due to air pollution and benefit ecosystem integrity, both
elements of sustainable development (Beg et al., 2002). The
challenge then becomes ensuring that actions taken to address
global environmental problems help to address regional and
local development (Beg et al., 2002). Section 12.3 summarizes
the impacts of climate mitigation actions on economic, social
and environmental aspects of sustainable development noted in
Chapters 3 to 11, and 13.
A key finding of the Third Assessment Report (TAR; IPCC,
2001b) is that through climate mitigation alone, it will be
extremely difficult and expensive to achieve low stabilization
targets (450 ppmv CO2) from baseline scenarios that embody
high emission development paths (also see Chapter 3). Low
emission baseline scenarios, however, may go a long way
toward achieving low stabilization levels even before climate
policy is included in the scenario (Morita et al., 2001) See
Section 3.1.2 for a discussion of the distinction between a
baseline and stabilization or mitigation scenario. Achieving low
emission baseline scenarios consistent with other principles of
sustainable development, that is viewing climate change through
a sustainable development lens, would illustrate the significant
contribution sustainable development can make to stabilization
(Metz et al., 2002; Winkler et al., 2002a; Davidson et al., 2003;
Heller and Shukla, 2003; Shukla et al., 2003; Swart et al., 2003;
Robinson and Bradley, 2006). Section 12.2 focuses on this
critical question of the link between sustainable development
and ways to mainstream climate change mitigation into
sustainable development actions. This is a central element since
this topic is not addressed elsewhere in the Fourth Assessment
Report in a similarly comprehensive manner that is accessible
to a non-climate readership.
By framing the debate as a sustainable development
problem rather than only as climate mitigation, the priority
goals of all countries and particularly developing countries are

Chapter 12

better addressed, while acknowledging that the driving forces
for emissions are linked to the underlying development path
(IPCC, 2007, Chapter 17 and 18; Yohe, 2001; Metz et al., 2002;
Winkler et al., 2002a).
Development paths underpin the baseline and stabilization
emissions scenarios discussed in Chapter 3 and are used to
estimate emissions, climate change and associated climate
change impacts. For a development path to be sustainable
over a long period, wealth, resources, and opportunity must be
shared so that all citizens have access to minimum standards
of security, human rights, and social benefits, such as food,
health, education, shelter, and opportunity for self-development
(Reed, 1996). This was also emphasized by the World Summit
on Sustainable Development (WSSD) in Johannesburg in 2002
which introduced the Water, Energy, Health, Agriculture, and
Biodiversity (WEHAB) framework.
Several strategies and measures that would advance
sustainable development would also enhance adaptive and
mitigative capacities. Winkler et al. (2006) have suggested that
mitigative capacity be defined as “a country’s ability to reduce
anthropogenic greenhouse gases or enhance natural sinks.”
There is a close connection between mitigative and adaptive
capacities and the underlying socio-economic and technological
development paths that give rise to those capacities. In
important respects, the determinants of these capacities are
critical characteristics of such development paths. For instance,
mitigative and adaptive capacities arise out of the more general
pool of resources called response capacity, which is strongly
affected by the nature of the development path in which it
exists.
Prior to exploring these issues further, the evolution of the
sustainable development concept is discussed in Section 12.1.2,
and the growing use of indicators to measure sustainable
development progress at the macro and sectoral levels is
described in Section 12.1.3. This review concludes that while
the use of quantitative indicators is helping to better define
sustainable development, few macro sustainable development
indicators explicitly take GHG emissions and climate change
impacts into consideration.
12.1.2	 Evolution and articulation of the concept of
sustainable development
Since the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, there is general
agreement that sustainable development requires the adoption of
a comprehensive and integrated approach to economic, social and

1	 The climate change and climate change impact scenarios assessed in the Fourth Assessment Report are primarily based on the SRES family of emission scenarios. These
	 define a spectrum of development paths, each with associated socio-economic and technological conditions and driving forces. Each family of emission scenarios will, therefore, give rise to a different set of response capacities.
2	 Development paths are defined here as a complex array of technological, economic, social, institutional, cultural, and biophysical characteristics that determines the
	 interactions between human and natural systems, including consumption and production patterns in all countries, over time at a particular scale. In the TAR, “alternative
development paths” referred to a variety of possible development paths, including a continuation of current trends, but also a variety of other paths. To avoid confusion, the
word ‘alternative’ is avoided in the current report. Development paths will be different in scope and timing in different countries, and can be different for different regions within
countries with large differences in internal regional characteristics.

696

Chapter 12	

environmental processes (Munasinghe, 1992; Banuri et al., 1994;
Najam et al., 2003). The environment-poverty nexus is now well
recognized and the linkage between sustainable development and
achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
has been clearly articulated (Jahan and Umana, 2003). While
the challenge of sustainable development is a common one,
countries have to adopt different strategies to advance sustainable
development goals – especially in the context of achieving the
MDGs (Dalal-Clayton, 2003). The paths they adopt will have
important implications for the mitigation of climate change (for a
more extensive discussion of MDGs, see Section 2.1.6). As noted
in Section 4.5.4.4 and Section 6.6, consideration of clean energy
services, even though not explicitly mentioned in the MDGs, will
be a vital factor in achieving both sustainable development and
climate mitigation goals.
However, discourses of sustainable development have
historically focused primarily on the environmental and
economic dimensions (Barnett, 2001), while overlooking the
need for social, political and/or cultural change (Barnett, 2001;
Lehtonen, 2004; Robinson, 2004). As Lehtonen (2004) explains,
however, most models of sustainable development conceive of
social, environmental (and economic) issues as ‘independent
elements that can be treated, at least analytically, as separate
from each-other’ (p. 201). The importance of social, political and
cultural factors, for example, poverty, social equity, governance,
is only now getting more recognition. In particular, there is a
growing recognition of the importance of the institutional and
governance dimensions (Banuri and Najam, 2002). From a
climate change perspective, this integration is essential in order
to define sustainable development paths. Moreover, as discussed
in this chapter, understanding the institutional context in which
policies are made and implemented is critical.
As noted in Chapter 2, the term ‘sustainable development,’
has given rise to considerable debate and concerns (Robinson,
2004). First, the variety of definitions of sustainable development
(Meadowcroft, 1997; Pezzoli, 1997; Mebratu, 1998) has
raised concerns about definitional ambiguity or vagueness. In
response, it has been argued that this vagueness may constitute
a form of constructive ambiguity that allows different interests
to engage in the debate, and the concept to be further refined
through implementation (Banuri and Najam, 2002; Robinson,
2004). The concept of sustainable development is not unique
in this respect, since its conceptual vagueness bears similarities
to other norm-based meta-objectives such as ‘democracy,’
‘freedom,’ and ‘justice’ (Lafferty, 1996; Meadowcroft, 2000).
Second, the term ‘sustainable development’ can be used
to support cosmetic environmentalism, sometimes called
greenwashing, or simply hypocrisy (Athanasiou, 1996; Najam,
1999). One response to such practices has been the development
of greatly improved monitoring, analytical techniques, and
standards, in order to verify claims about sustainable practices
(Hardi and Zdan, 1997; OECD, 1998; Bell and Morse, 1999;
Parris and Kates, 2003). See Section 12.1.3.

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

Finally, the most serious concern about sustainable
development is that it is inherently delusory. Some critics have
argued that because biophysical limits constrain the amount of
future development that is sustainable, the term ‘sustainable
development’ is itself an oxymoron (Dovers and Handmer,
1993; Mebratu, 1998; Sachs, 1999). This leads some to argue
for a ‘strong sustainability’ approach in which natural capital
must be preserved since it cannot be substituted by any other
form of capital (Pearce et al., 1989; Cabeza Gutes, 1996).
Others point out that the concept of sustainable development
is anthropocentric, thereby avoiding reformulation of values
that may be required to pursue true sustainability (Suzuki and
McConnell, 1997). While very different in approach and focus,
both these criticisms raise fundamental value questions that go
to the heart of present debates about environmental and social
issues.
Despite these criticisms, basic principles are emerging
from the international sustainability discourse, which could
help to establish commonly held principles of sustainable
development. These include, for instance, the welfare of
future generations, the maintenance of essential biophysical
life support systems, ecosystem wellbeing, more universal
participation in development processes and decision-making,
and the achievement of an acceptable standard of human wellbeing (WCED, 1987; Meadowcroft, 1997; Swart et al., 2003;
MA, 2005).
The principles of sustainable development have progressively
been internalized in various national and international legal
instruments (Boyle and Freestone, 1999; Decleris, 2000). Law
contributes to the process of defining the concept of sustainable
development through both international (treaty) law and national
law. At a national level, principles of sustainable development
are being implemented in various regions and countries,
including New Zealand and the European Union. For example,
New Zealand’s Resource Management Act 1991 requires all
decisions under the Act to consider and provide for sustainable
management of natural and physical resources (Furuseth
and Cocklin, 1995). South Africa’s National Environmental
Management Act provides for the development of assessment
procedures that aim to ensure that environmental consequences
of policies, plans and programmes are considered (RSA, 1998).
India’s Planning Commission makes sustainability part of the
approach to providing ‘Clean Water for All’, noting that this
requires a shift from groundwater to surface water where
possible, or groundwater recharge (Government of India,
2006). Similarly, the 2000 EC Water Framework Directive is
seeking to operationalize principles of sustainable use in the
management of EU waters (Rieu-Clarke, 2004).
International environmental treaties generally cite
sustainable development as a fundamental principle by which
they must be interpreted, but rarely provide any further
specification of content. The UN Framework Convention
on Climate Change, for example, includes in its principles
697

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

the right to promote sustainable development, but does not
elaborate modalities for doing so. In response to the necessity
to build a framework of equitable, strong, and effective laws
needed to manage humanity’s interaction with the Earth and
build a fair and sustainable society (Zaelke et al., 2005), the
International Network for Environmental Compliance and
Enforcement (INECE) launched an initiative at the 2002 WSSD
aimed at making a law work for environmental compliance and
sustainable development.
Since the 1980s, sustainable development has moved from
being an interesting but sometimes contested ideal, to now
being the acknowledged goal of much of international policy,
including climate change policy. It is no longer a question of
whether climate change policy should be understood in the
context of sustainable development goals; it is a question of
how.
12.1.3	 Measurement of progress towards
sustainable development
As what is managed needs to be measured, managing the
sustainable development process requires a much strengthened
evidence base and the development and systematic use of
robust sets of indicators and new ways of measuring progress.
Measurement not only gauges but also spurs the implementation
of sustainable development and can have a pervasive effect on
decision-making (Meadows, 1998; Bossel, 1999). In the climate
change context, measurement plays an essential role in setting
and monitoring progress towards specific climate change related
commitments both in the mitigation and adaptation context
(CIESIN, 1996-2001).
Agenda 21 (Chapter 40) explicitly recognizes the need
for quantitative indicators at various levels (local, provincial,
national and international) of the status and trends of the
planet’s ecosystems, economic activities and social wellbeing
(United Nations, 1993). The need for further work on indicators
at national and other levels was confirmed by the Johannesburg
Plan of Implementation (UNEP, 2002).
As pointed out by Meadows (1998), indicators are ubiquitous,
but when poorly chosen create serious malfunctions in socioeconomic and ecological systems. Recognizing the shortcomings
of mainstream measures, such as GDP, in managing the
sustainable development process, alternative indicator systems
have been developed and used by an increasing number of
entities in various spatial, thematic and organizational contexts
(Moldan et al., 1997; IISD, 2006).
Indicator development is also driven by the increasing
emphasis on accountability in the context of sustainable
development governance and strategy initiatives. In their
compilation and analysis of national sustainable development
strategies, Swanson et al. (2004) emphasize that indicators
need to be tied to expected outcomes, policy priorities and
698

Chapter 12

implementation mechanisms. As such, the development of
indicators may best be integrated with a process for setting
sustainable development objectives and targets, but have
an important role in all stages of the strategic policy cycle.
Once priority issues are identified, SMART indicators need
to be developed - indicators that are Specific, Measurable,
Achievable, Relevant/Realistic and Time-bound.
Boulanger (2004) observes that indicators can be classified
according to four main approaches: (1) the socio-natural
sectors (or systems) approach, which focuses on sustainability
as an equilibrium between the three pillars of sustainable
development but which overlooks development aspects: (2)
the resources approach, which concentrates on sustainable
use of natural resources and ignores development issues: (3)
a human approach based on human wellbeing, basic needs;
and (4) the norms approach, which foresees sustainable
development in normative terms. Each approach has its own
merits and weaknesses. Despite these efforts at measuring
sustainability, few offer an integrated approach to measuring
environmental, economic and social parameters (Corson, 1996;
Farsari and Prastacos, 2002; Swanson et al., 2004). This review
of indicators illustrates a significant gap in macro-indicators in
that few include measures of progress with respect to climate
change.
Indicator system development typically builds on a conceptual
framework serving as a link between relevant world views,
sustainability issues and specific indicators. Some of the more
common ones include the pressure-state-impact framework
and capital-based frameworks covering social, environmental
and economic domains. Given the ambiguity of the concept
of sustainable development and differences in socio-economic
and ecological context, even the use of comparable indicator
frameworks usually results in non-identical indicator sets
(Parris and Kates, 2003; Pintér et al., 2005).
Various alternative approaches to estimate macro progress
towards sustainable development have been developed. Many
of these approaches integrate, though not necessarily focus
on, aspects of climate change. One approach to indicator
development focused on monetary measures and involves
adjustment to the GDP. These include, for example, calculation
of genuine savings (Hamilton and et al., 1997; Pearce, 2000),
Sustainable National Income (Hueting, 1993), and efforts to
develop a measure of sustainability (Yohe and Moss, 2000). In
an attempt to aggregate and express resource consumption and
human impact in the context of a finite earth, a number of indices
based on non-monetary, physical measures were created. These
indices may be based on the concepts of environmental space
or ecospace, and ecological footprint (Wackernagel and Rees,
1996; Venetoulis et al., 2004; Buitenkamp et al., 1993; Opschoor,
1995; Rees, 1996). Vitousek et al. (1986) proposed the index of
Human Appropriation of Net Primary Production (HANPP).
This approach specifies the amount of energy that humans divert
for their own use in competition with other species.

Chapter 12	

In trying to avoid shortcomings from the concept of carrying
capacity applied to human societies the formula I = PAT, where I
is the human impact on the environment, P the human population,
A the affluence (presumably per capita income), and T the effect
of technology on the environment, has been commonly used in
decomposing the impact of population, economic activity, and
fuel use on the environment in general and on historical and
future carbon emissions in particular (IEA, 2004c; Kaya, 1990;
Schipper et al., 1997; Schumacher and Sathaye, 2000). Other
approaches include the development of a ‘global entropy model’
that inspects the conditions for sustainability (Ruebbelke,
1998). This is done by employing available entropy data to
demonstrate the extent to which improvements in entropy
efficiency should be accomplished to compensate the effects
of increasing economic activity and population growth. Other
sets of metrics have less precise ambitions but aim to explain
to the larger public the risks of environmental change, such
as the notion ‘ecological footprint’ [see above] used by some
NGOs. In this, the aggregate indicators are noted as the number
of planets Earth needed to sustain the present way of living of
some regions of the World.
As Bartelmus (2001) observes, many of the aggregate
indices are yet to be accepted in decision-making due, among
others, to measurement, weighting and indicator selection
challenges. However, besides efforts to develop aggregate
indices either on a monetary or physical basis, many efforts are
aimed at developing heterogeneous indicator sets. One of the
commonly accepted frameworks uses a classification scheme
that groups sustainability issues and indicators according
to social, ecological, economic, and in some cases, also
institutional categories. Several indicator systems developed
at international and national level have adopted a capital-based
framework following the above categories. They link indicators
more closely to the System of Integrated Environmental and
Economic Accounts System of National Accounts (SNA),
including its environmental component, (Pintér et al., 2005). At
the United Nations, the Division for Sustainable Development
led the work on developing a menu and methodology sheets
for sustainability indicators that integrate several relevant for
climate change from the mitigation and adaptation point of view
(UNDSD, 2006). Also, the UNECE/Eurostat/OECD Working
Group on Statistics for Sustainable Development is developing
a conceptual framework for measuring sustainable development
and recommendations for indicator sets. A set of climate change
mitigation input and outcome indicators should be included.
While not necessarily focused on climate change per se,
many of these indicator efforts include climate change as one of
the key issues, on the mitigation or adaptation side. Keeping a
broader perspective is essential, as climate change, including its
drivers, impacts and related responses, transcend many sectors
and issue categories. Indicators are needed in all in order to
identify and analyze systemic risks and opportunities. In the
mitigation context, quantifying emissions and their underlying
driving forces is an essential component of management and

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

accountability mechanisms. GHG emissions accounting
is a major new field and is guided by increasingly detailed
methodology standards and protocols in both the public and
private sector (WBCSD, 2004).
Whether part of integrated indicator systems or developed
separately, climate change indicators on the mitigation side may
focus on absolute or efficiency measures (Herzog and Baumert,
2006). Absolute measures help track aggregate emissions, thus
quantify the direct pressure of human activities on the climate
system. Efficiency measures indicate the amount of energy or
materials used or GHG emitted in order to produce a unit of
economic output, or more generally, to achieve a degree of
change in human wellbeing. Depending on the policy context,
both absolute measures and efficiency measures may be useful.
But from the climate system perspective, it is ultimately
indicators of absolute emission levels that matter.
At the sectoral level, several initiatives are being
implemented to measure and monitor progress towards
sustainable development, including the reduction of
greenhouse gas emissions. In the buildings sector, for instance,
the US Green Buildings Council, has established Leadership
in Energy and Environmental Design (LEED) that sets a
voluntary, consensus-based national standard for developing
high-performance, sustainable buildings. About 2000 large
buildings have received certificates. The Global Reporting
Initiative (GRI) is a multi-stakeholder process whose mission
is to develop and disseminate globally applicable Sustainability
Reporting Guidelines. These Guidelines are for voluntary use
by organizations for reporting on the economic, environmental,
and social dimensions of their activities, products, and services.
Over 700 large industrial corporations are annually reporting
their sustainable development progress using these guidelines.
Industry sectors, such as cement and aluminium, which
are among the most intensive energy users, have their own
initiatives to track progress (For more information on sectoral
indicators, see Section 12.3.1).
In essence, while tools for measuring progress towards
sustainable development are still far from perfect, considerable
progress in the development of such tools and considerable
uptake in their use has occurred. The trend is clearly towards
more refinement in the tools and an increase in their use by
governments, business and civil society.

12.2	 Implications of development choices	
for climate change mitigation
The roadmap for this section starts with the concept of
development paths. National development paths do not result
from integrated policy programmes. They emerge from
fragmented decisions made by numerous private actors and
public agencies within varied institutional frameworks of state,
699

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

markets, and civil society. Decisions about the development of
the most significant sectors that shape emission profiles - energy,
industry, transportation and land use - are made by ministries
and companies that do not regularly attend to climate risks. The
same is true for even more indirect influences on these sectoral
pathways, including financial, macro-economic, and trade
practices and policies. The focus on development paths places
new emphasis on development’s impact on climate and on
indirect rather than direct actions that affect climate mitigation.
Section 12.2.1 reviews scenario and other literature indicating
that in different nations and regions, contingent development
paths are plausible and can be associated with widely disparate
economic, environmental and social consequences. Section
12.2.2 provides historical evidence that lower emissions
pathways are not necessarily associated with lower economic
growth.
The second segment of the road map suggests the importance
of better understanding in climate policy of how nations
organize sectoral and other emissions-determining policies and
behaviour. Section 12.2.3 assesses literature that analyze: (1)
the particular institutions, organizations, and political cultures
that form the installed systems of decision-making and prioritysetting from which decisions about key sectors or contexts
emerge; and (2) the broader trans-national trends that are
reshaping established governance processes. The description of
these installed systems and the ways in which they are changing
is drawn from an assessment of the social science literature on
relationships between states, markets and civil society. Thus,
Section 12.2.3 broadens the discourse beyond the economics
and technological literature now familiar in climate analysis
by incorporating history, political economy, and organization
theory. The emphasis moves from government to governance.
Rather than focusing on action by governments or states alone,
the social science literature suggests more attention on decisions
by multiple actors (Rayner and Malone, 1998; Jochem et al.,
2001). In some systems, change occurs primarily through actions
initiated by either central governments or more federalized local
jurisdictions. In others, it proceeds more through initiatives by
private organizations that are then complemented by supportive
governmental policies.
The final segment of road map relates in Section 12.2.4
to strategies and actions for changing development paths.
It builds from the insight that changes in development paths
emerge from the interactions of varied, centralized and
decentralized public and private decision processes, many of
which are not traditionally considered as ‘climate policy’. It
emphasizes that national circumstances, including endowments
in primary energy resources, and the strengths of institutions
matter in determining how development policies ultimately

Chapter 12

impact GHG emissions. Ensuring that key sectors evolve in a
more sustainable manner depends on capability to coordinate
decentralized choices and decision processes. The literature
emphasizes the importance of partnerships between public,
private and civil society in actions that contribute to shifts in the
direction of development. However, it does not assume that the
lead coordinating agency will always be the state. In different
societies with different cultures of social change, the lead agent
with a strong motivation, whether political or commercial, to
bear the costs of organizing change may emerge from states,
markets or civil societies.
In sum, Section 12.2 shows that to expand the focus of
effective climate action to include development activities
involves less emphasis on the search for ideal and general
instruments, and involves much more attention on local and
fragmented processes for more marginal changes in key sectoral
decisions. When added up over time, these decisions could lead
to more sustainable development paths and lower emissions.
Clearly, the reformed focus of a broadened scope for climate
action raises many questions that have not been highlighted in
the research agenda. These are reflected in the agenda for future
research in Section 12.4.
12.2.1	 Multiplicity of plausible development
pathways ahead, with different economic,
social and environmental content
Climate policy alone will not solve the climate problem.
Making development more sustainable by changing
development paths can make a major contribution to climate
goals. One of the major findings of TAR in terms of sustainable
development was that development choices matter (Banuri et
al., 2001). The literature on long-term climate scenarios (Metz
et al., 2002; Nakicenovic et al., 2000; Swart et al., 2003), and
especially the SRES Report (Morita et al., 2000), points to the
same conclusion. Climate outcomes are influenced not only by
climate specific policies but also by the mix of development
choices made and the development paths that these policies
lead to. There are always going to be a variety of development
pathways that could possibly be followed and they might lead to
future outcomes at global, national, and local levels. The choice
of development policies can, therefore, be as consequential to
future climate stabilization as the choice of climate-specific
policies.
Development pathways can be useful ways to think about
possible, even plausible, future states of the world. Over the
last century, for example, human health has been improved
significantly in most of the world under very different socio-

3	 Development paths are defined here as a complex array of technological, economic, social, institutional, cultural, and biophysical characteristics that determines the interactions between human and natural systems, including consumption and production patterns in all countries, over time at a particular scale. In the TAR, “alternative development
paths” referred to a variety of possible development paths, including a continuation of current trends, but also a variety of other paths. To avoid confusion, the word ‘alternative’
is avoided in the current report. Development paths will be different in scope and timing in different countries, and can be different for different regions within countries with
large differences in internal regional characteristics.	

700

Chapter 12	

economic pathways and health care systems (e.g., see CGD,
2004; OECD, 2005). Countries have made different decisions
with respect to health care, leading to a wide variety of different
systems, with still a large divide between industrialized and
developing countries (Redclift and Benton, 2006). But in
general, the chosen strategies have in common that they have
contributed to marked health improvements in almost all
regions. Advances have been uneven and improvements are
under constant pressure from new developments (e.g., AIDS,
new infectious diseases). In general, the health example suggests
that human choice can make a positive contribution towards
reaching a common goal (Frenk et al., 1993; Smith, 1997).
The same could be true for sustainable development in general,
and reduced GHG emissions in particular. But changing a
development pathway is not about choosing a mapped out path,
but rather about navigating through an uncharted and evolving
landscape.
Developing scenarios depicting possible development
pathways can falsely suggest that these are in some sense latent
pathways or routes through the future that have been uncovered
through insight or research. In reality, well-defined development
pathways are not waiting to be selected. Even understanding the
much smaller set of current development paths can be difficult.
These are not simply the result of previous policies or decisions
of governments, although these certainly affect the outcomes.
As Shove et al. (1998) argue with respect to energy usage, the
present is the result of myriad small activities and practices
adopted or developed in the course of everyday life.
In reviewing the literature on development pathways, and
in respecting the caveats described above, three key lessons
emerge:
•	 Development paths as well as climate policy determine
GHG emissions;
•	 New global scenario analyses confirm the importance of
development pathways for climate change mitigation;
•	 Development paths can vary by regions and countries
because of different priorities and conditions.
These three findings are discussed in the following section.
12.2.1.1	 Development paths as well as climate policies
determine GHG emissions
For much of the last century, the dominant path to
industrialization was characterized by high concurrent GHG
emissions. The IPCC Third Assessment Report concluded
that committing to alternative development paths can result
in very different future GHG emissions. Development paths
leading to lower emissions will require major policy changes
in areas other than climate change. The development pathway
pursued is an important determinant of mitigation costs and can
be as important as the emissions target in determining overall
costs (Hourcade et al., 2001) These findings were based on an
extensive analysis of model-based emissions scenarios (Morita

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

and Lee, 1998), a survey of more qualitative studies (Robinson
and Herbert, 2001), and a comparison of stabilization scenarios
(Morita et al., 2000) based on the IPCC SRES scenarios
(Nakicenovic et al., 2000).
Developing countries do not have to follow the example of
developed countries in terms of energy use (UNCSD, 2006),
since the early stages of infrastructure development offer
opportunities to satisfy their populations’ needs in different
ways. Many factors that determine a country’s or region’s
development pathway, and, closely related, its energy and
GHG emissions are subject to human intervention. Such
factors include economic structure, technology, geographical
distribution of activities, consumption patterns, urban design
and transport infrastructure, demography, institutional
arrangements and trade patterns. The later choices with respect
to these factors are made, the fewer opportunities there will be
to change development paths, because of lock-in effects (e.g.,
Arthur, 1989). For detailed discussion, see Section 2.7.1 and
Section 3.1.3. An assessment of mitigation options should not
be limited to technology, although this is certainly a key factor,
but should also cover the broader policy agenda. Climate change
mitigation can be pursued by specific policies, by coordinating
such policies with other policies and integrating them into
these other policies. Also, climate mitigation objectives can
be mainstreamed into general development choices, by taking
climate mitigation objectives routinely into consideration in the
pursuance of particular development pathways.
Development policies not explicitly targeting GHG emissions
can influence these emissions in a major way. For example,
six developing countries (Brazil, China, India, Mexico, South
Africa, and Turkey) have avoided through development
policy decisions approximately 300 million tons a year of
carbon emissions over the past three decades. Many of these
efforts were motivated by common drivers, such as economic
development and poverty alleviation, energy security, and local
environmental protection (Chandler et al., 2002).The current
state of knowledge does not allow easy quantitative attribution
to specific policies with accuracy, given that other factors (as
in any country) also influence these emissions. For example,
autonomous technological modernization certainly has played
a role. Chandler et al. (2002), however, also clearly identify
policies that have made a definite contribution. In Brazil,
these included production and use of ethanol and sugarcane
bagasse, development of the natural gas industrial market,
use of alternative energy sources for power generation and a
set of demand-side programmes promoting conservation and
efficiency in the electricity and transportation sectors (See also
Box 12.1).
In China, growth in GHG emissions has been slowed to almost
half the economic growth rate over the past two decades through
economic reform, energy efficiency improvements, switching
from coal to natural gas, renewable energy development,
afforestation, and slowing population growth. In India, key
701

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

factors in GHG emission reductions have been economic
restructuring, local environmental protection, and technological
change, mediated through economic reform, enforcement of
clean air laws by the nation’s highest court, renewable energy
incentives and development programmes funded by the national
government and foreign donors. In Mexico, expanding use of
natural gas in place of more carbon-intensive fuels, promoting
energy efficiency and fuel substitution by means that included
energy pricing mechanisms, and abating some deforestation have
played a major role. The policies in South Africa that contribute
to lower growth in GHG emissions include restructuring the
energy sector, stimulating economic development, increasing
access to affordable energy services, managing energy-related
environmental impacts, and securing energy supply through
diversification. Finally, in Turkey, economic restructuring and
price reform resulting from government moves to more marketoriented policies and the expectation of European integration,
fuel switching, and energy efficiency measures have contributed
to avoided GHG emissions (Chandler et al., 2002).
There are multiple drivers for actions that reduce
emissions, and they can produce multiple benefits. The most
promising policy approaches are those that capitalize on
natural synergies between climate protection and development
priorities to simultaneously advance both objectives. Many
of these synergies are in energy demand (e.g., efficiency and
conservation, education and awareness) and some in energy
supply (e.g., renewable options).
Capturing these potential benefits is not always easy, since
there are many conflicts and trade-offs. From the perspective
of energy security, for example, it can be politically and/or
economically attractive to give priority to domestic coal and
oil resources over more environmentally friendly imported gas
(e.g., SSEB 2006). The adverse economic impact of higher
oil prices on oil-importing developing countries is generally

Chapter 12

more severe than for OECD countries. This is because their
economies are more dependent on imported oil and more
energy-intensive, and because energy is used less efficiently.
On average, oil-importing developing countries use more than
twice as much oil to produce a unit of economic output as do
OECD countries. Developing countries are also less able to
weather the financial turmoil wrought by higher oil-import
costs (IEA, 2004a). For a discussion of the role of energy
security for development paths, see Section 3.3.6. Some studies
have shown that, depending on how priorities are set, some
conflict between local atmospheric pollution problems and
global climate change issues may arise. This is because some
of the most cost-effective, environmentally-friendly power
generation technologies for the global environment available
in developing countries, such as biomass-fired or even some
hydroelectric power plants, may not be sound for the local
environment (due to NOx and particulate emissions in the former
case, and flooding in the latter). Conversely, abating local air
pollution generally is beneficial from a global perspective. Still,
there are a few exceptions. Decreasing sulphur and aerosol
emissions (with the exception of black carbon) to address local
air pollution problems can increase overall radiative forcing,
because these aerosols have a negative radiative forcing. Thus,
exploring development paths requires careful assessment of
both local environmental priorities and global environmental
concerns (Schaeffer and Szklo, 2001).
In developed countries too, development choices made today
can lead to very different energy futures. In the TAR, Banuri et
al, ( 2001) distinguished between strategies decoupling growth
from resource flows (e.g., resource light infrastructure, ecointelligent production systems, ‘appropriate’ technologies and
full-cost pricing), and strategies decoupling wellbeing from
production (intermediate performance levels, regionalization
avoiding long-distance transport, low-resource lifestyles).
Technological mitigation options at the sectoral level are mainly

Box 12.1: Greenhouse gas emissions avoided by non-climate drivers: a Brazilian example
In the field of energy, experience with policies advancing energy efficiency and renewable energy use confirm that, although
developing countries need to increase their energy consumption in order to fuel their social and economic development,
it is possible to do so in a cleaner and more sustainable manner. These policy choices can have a significant impact on
energy trends, social progress and environmental quality in developing countries (Holliday et al., 2002; Anderson, 2004;
Geller et al., 2004). In Brazil, programmes and measures have been undertaken over the past two or three decades in order to
mitigate economic and environmental problems. These have included not only improvements in the energy supply and demand
side management, but also specific tax incentive policies encouraging the production of cheap, small-engine automobiles
(<1000 cc) to allow industry to increase production (and create more jobs while increasing profits) and to make cars more
accessible to lower-income sectors of the population. These policies have led to lower carbon dioxide emissions than would
otherwise have been the case. Results of these programmes and measures show that, in 2000 alone, some 11% in CO2
emissions from energy use in Brazil have been reduced compared to what would have been emitted that year, had previous
policy decisions not been implemented. Interestingly, although these actions were not motivated by a desire to curb global
climate change, if the inherent benefits related to carbon emissions are not fully appraised in the near future, there is a chance
that such ‘win-win’ policies may not be pursued and may even be discontinued (Anderson, 2004; Szklo et al., 2005).

702

Chapter 12	

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

discussed in Chapter 4 to 11 which also cover to some extent
non-technological options that relate to different development
priorities, as far as the literature allows.

of ecosystem services, biodiversity, human wellbeing and the
capacity of the population to deal with these developments is
largely determined by the choice of development pathway.

The connections between development pathways and
international trade are often left unexplored. International trade
allows a country to partially ‘de-link’ its domestic economic
systems from its domestic ecological systems, as some goods
can be produced by other economic systems. In such cases,
the impacts of producing goods impact the ecological systems
of the exporting country (where production takes place)
rather than the ecological system of the importing country
(where consumption occurs). One popular way of showing
that the impacts of economic activities in many nations affect
an area much larger than within their national boundaries is
the ecological footprint (see Section 12.1.3). For example,
the environmental effects of soya and hardwood production
for export as fodder and construction material, respectively,
are well-known examples. As a consequence, in discussing
the implications of development choices for climate change
mitigation, it is not enough to discuss development pathways
for individual countries. To fully address global emission
reductions, an integrated multi-country perspective is needed
(Machado et al., 2001).

The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP,
2002), used SRES scenarios as well as the scenarios of the
World Water Vision (Gallopin and Rijsberman, 2000) and the
Global Scenario Group (Raskin et al., 1998) as inspiration for
the development of four development pathways for the third
Global Environmental Outlook (UNEP/RIVM, 2004): Markets
First, Security First, Policy First and Sustainability First. Again,
the different development pathways reflected by these scenarios
are associated with a wide range of GHG emissions similar to
the range captured by the SRES scenarios.

12.2.1.2	 New global scenario analyses confirm the
importance of development paths for mitigation
Section 3.1.5 discusses some factors that determine
development paths, such as structural changes in production
systems, technological patterns in sectors, such as energy,
transportation, building, agriculture and forestry, geographical
distribution of activities, consumption patterns and trade
patterns. After publication of IPCC TAR, several new scenarios
relating to climate change or global sustainability were
published, making different assumptions for these factors. Most
of them confirm the main findings of SRES (see also Chapter
3). It is important, however, to translate the lessons derived
from scenarios (which are often global in scale) to national
and even local level policy choices that can lead to the desired
outcomes.
For the Millennium Ecosystems Assessment (MEA), four
scenarios explored implications of development pathways for
global and regional ecosystem services, loosely based on the
SRES but developed and enriched further (Alcamo et al., 2005;
Carpenter and Pingali, 2005; Cork et al., 2005). For the next 50
years, all scenarios find that pressures on ecosystem services
increase with the extent of the pressure being determined by
the particular development path. The MEA scenarios identify
climate change next to land-use change as a major driver
of biodiversity loss in the coming century. Quality of the
services differs strongly by scenario - with the most positive
scenarios finding a clear improvement in some services and
the most negative scenario, finding a general decrease. The
MEA scenario analysis, thus, emphasizes that development

Shell’s Low Trust Globalization, Open Doors and Flags
scenarios explore how different future development pathways
could affect the company’s business environment. In the Open
Doors scenario, CO2 emissions increase most rapidly as a
result of higher economic growth and the absence of securitydriven investment in indigenous renewable energy sources,
even if people may be more concerned about climate change
than in other scenarios. The Low Trust Globalization scenario
is characterized by larger barriers to international trade and
cooperation. Paradoxically, there could be faster progress
towards carbon efficiency as a result of a different set of policies
aimed at energy efficiency, conservation and development of
renewables, notably wind and, possibly, nuclear power. Finally,
the Flags scenario with a patchwork of national approaches
could show positive responses to climate change because of
factors such as the pursuit of self-reliance (Shell, 2005).
Several scenarios developed since the TAR have explored
different development pathways, but without explicitly
addressing climate change or GHG emissions. The characteristics
of these pathways in terms of the rate and structure of
geopolitical, economic, social and technological development,
however, would result in large variations in GHG emissions.
Four scenarios developed by the US National Intelligence
Council (Davos World, Pax Americana, A New Caliphate and
Cycle of Fear) explore how the world may evolve until 2020
and what the implications for US policy might be, focusing
on security concerns (NIC, 2004). The National Intelligence
Council scenarios show the possible impacts of particular
development pathways in some regions for other regions. Also,
in several developing countries, different future development
pathways have been explored in systematic scenario exercises,
for example, China (Ogilvy and Schwartz, 2000); the Mont
Fleur scenarios for South Africa (Kahane, 2002); the Guatemala
Vision (Kahane, 2002); Destino Colombia (Cowan et al., 2000);
Kenya at the crossroads (SID/IEA, (Society for International
Development and the Institute of Economic Affairs), 2000).
Taking global climate change explicitly into account would
strengthen and enrich development-oriented scenarios as the
ones mentioned above.

703

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

Case studies in Tanzania (Agrawala et al., 2003a), Fiji
(Agrawala et al., 2003c), Bangladesh (Agrawala et al., 2003b),
Nepal (Agrawala et al., 2003a), Egypt (Agrawala et al., 2004b)
and Uruguay (Agrawala et al., 2004a) show how climate-change
adaptation can be integrated with national and local development
policies, often as a no-regrets strategy. Implementation of
no-regrets strategies is, however, not without challenges. A
study of the Baltic region explores a sustainable development
pathway addressing broad environmental, economic and social
development goals, including low GHG emissions. It points
out that a majority of the population could favour - or at least
tolerate - a set of measures that change individual and corporate
behaviour to align with local and global sustainability (Raskin et
al., 1998). Kaivo-oja et al. (2004) conclude that climate change
as such may not be a major direct threat to Finland. However,
the effects of climate change on the world’s socio-economic
system and the related consequences for the Finnish system may
be considerable. The Finnish scenario analysis, which is based
on intensive expert and stakeholder involvement, suggests that
such indirect consequences have to be taken into account in
developing strategic views of possible future development
paths for administrative and business sectors.
Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency (MNP,
2005) has developed the four IPCC SRES scenarios for a
sustainability outlook for the Netherlands. The four scenarios
represent four world perspectives with four different views
on future priorities for action to make development more
sustainable. This outlook points at several dilemmas. Surveys
showed that 90% of the Dutch population prefer a future which
would be different from the globalizing, market-oriented A1
scenario. Yet, A1 appears to be the future they are heading for.
A majority of the population also thinks that something has
to be done about unsustainable production and consumption
patterns, and suggest that the government should do more. The
study suggests that the regional (European) level may be the
most appropriate level to address sustainability issues. Global
political, economic and cultural differences make effective
global policy difficult, while many sustainability issues go
beyond local or national capacity to develop and implement
effective policies.
Scenarios describe different states of the world that could
come about by different developments in the driving forces that
are often of a geopolitical nature and are largely unaffected by
national or local policy-making. These scenarios studies reveal
that different pathways are possible, but also that pursuing them
involves many complex challenges. Such challenges include
consideration of indirect effects, and difficulties in translating
the often positive attitude of the population towards sustainable
futures into concrete changes. Decision-makers have to consider
the robustness of alternative development pathways they pursue
through their policy choices, in the face of global developments
they will be confronted with.

704

Chapter 12

12.2.1.3	 Development paths can vary by regions and
countries because of different priorities and
conditions
An understanding of different regional conditions and
priorities is essential for mainstreaming climate change
policies into sustainable development strategies (See Section
12.2.3). Since regions and countries differ in many dimensions,
it is impossible to group them in a way consistent across all
dimensions. There is a diversity of regional groupings in the
literature using many criteria that are specific to their purpose
within the underlying context. (For regional groupings, see
Section 2.8).
As noted in Section 12.1.1, the mitigative capacity of a nation
is closely related to its underlying development path, which
depends on the general pool of resources that may be referred to
as response capacity. The response capacity including mitigative
capacity of countries varies, amongst other factors, with their
ability to pay for abatement costs. Winkler et al. ( 2007) analysed
the mitigative capacity of different countries as shaped by two
economic factors: namely average abatement cost (or mitigation
potential; high cost means low potential); and ability to pay, as
approximated by GDP per capita. Ability to pay, measured by
GDP per capita, is an important factor in mitigative capacity,
since more wealth gives countries greater capacity to reduce
emissions. The cost of abatement can act as a barrier in turning
mitigative capacity into actual mitigation. Examining these
factors together, Winkler et al. (2007) found that the abatement
costs are not linearly correlated with level of income. Some
countries have high mitigative capacity (income) and are also
able to translate this into actual mitigation due to low costs.
For others, mitigative capacity is clearly low. Relatively high
average abatement costs mean that this capacity can be turned
into even less actual mitigation. Interestingly, there are some
poorer countries with low abatement costs. Conversely, there are
also countries with high mitigative capacity, as approximated
by income, but high average abatement costs. However, this
group of countries still has higher mitigative capacity, simply
by virtue of their higher ability to pay. Low-income countries
do not spend on mitigation even if they have low-cost mitigation
opportunities, simply because the opportunity cost in terms of
basic development needs is too high.
Developed economies: Developed economies are included
in Annex I to the UNFCCC and are members of the OECD. CO2
emissions from fossil fuel combustion accounted for over 80%
of their total emissions in 2000 with negligible amounts from
land-use change (Table 12.1). These countries are also largely
responsible for GHG emissions with high radiative forcing.
Their population growth is projected to be low or negative
(UNDP, 2004), income and level of human development are
in the upper middle and high end of the spectrum (UNDP,
2004), and energy consumption and GHG emissions per capita
are above the world average (IEA, 2005). These developed
countries are assessed to be least vulnerable when compared

Chapter 12	

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

Table 12.1: Profiles of emissions and human development at different levels of development

Units

Developed/industrialized/Annex I
countriesc)
OECD

Emissions profiles by gases, 2000a)

EIT

Developing/Non-Annex I
countriesd)
Developing

Least
developed

100

100

100

CO2 (fossil fuel)

%

81

41

4

CH4

%

11

16

22

N2O

%

6

10

12

LUC

%

0

33

62

High GWP gases

%

2

0

0

Human development profilesb)
HDI, 2003
Life expectancy at birth
Adult literacy
GDPppp/capita, 2003
Population growth rate (2003-2015)
GDP/capita growth rate (1990-2003)
Electricity consumption per capita, 2002
CO2 emissions per capita, 2002

years

0.892

0.802

0.694

0.518

77.7

68.1

65.0

52.2

%

100.0

99.2

76.6

54.2

US$/capita

25915

7930

4359

1328

%/yr

0.5

-0.2

1.3

2.3

%/yr

1.8

0.3

2.9

2.0

kWh/capita

8615

3328

1155

106

tonnes/capita

11.2

5.9

2.0

0.2

10-15

14-22

Vulnerability assessmente)
Vulnerability scores

18->40

Notes:
a) Source: Baumert et .al., 2004, p. 6. FF: fossil fuel combustion; High GWP (global warming potential) gases: sulphur hexafluoride (SF6), perfluorocarbons (PFCs), and
hydrofluorocartbons (HFCs).
b) Source: UNDP, 2005. HDI range: 0.00<HDI<1.00; PPP: purchasing power parity. PPP normally deflates the income level of the developed nations while inflating
those in the developing world as one dollar would have larger purchasing power that it has in the developed world.
c) Annex I countries include both developed OECD and EIT countries. However, a few newly admitted OECD countries are not in Annex I list, including South Korea,
Singapore, and Mexico. The group of economies in transition (EIT) countries contains several sub-groups: those that are part of the enlarged EU, central Asian
Republics, and other members of the CIS. In UNDP (2005) categorization, the coverage is larger, including Central and Eastern Europe and the Commonwealth of
Independent Sates (CIS).
d) In emissions profiles, these two subgroups were counted separately while in the UNDP human development profiles, least developed is a subgroup of the
	 developing world.
e) Source: Adger et al., 2004b. Vulnerability scores range from 10 to 50, with 10 the least vulnerable and 50 the most vulnerable. These scores are derived from a series
of proxy variables for vulnerability including food security, ecosystem sensitivity, settlement/infrastructure sensitivity, human health sensitivity, economic capacity,
human resource capacity, governance capacity and environmental capacity. See, Baumert et al., 2004, p.17.

to other groups of countries (Adger et al., 2004), with
vulnerability scores lower than 15, close to the lower end of the
spectrum (Table 12.1). In general, mitigative capacity in these
economies is high but cost can be high. As well as marginal
cost of mitigation increases with the rate of energy efficiency.
Nevertheless, there are large mitigation potentials in these
countries. For example, passenger vehicle economy in North
America and Australia is well below that in EU and Japan, even
lower than some developing countries such as China (An and
Sauer, 2004). Barring a few newly industrialized countries,
most are highly industrialized with limited scope or need for
large-scale expansion of the physical infrastructure, such as
public utilities, physical transport infrastructure, and buildings
(Pan, 2003).
Notwithstanding this limited scope or need for infrastructure
expansion and economic growth figures often much lower than
in many developing countries, the future will look different

from today and low-carbon development pathways are
possible. Improving energy efficiency, modernizing production
and changing consumption patterns would have a large
impact on future GHG emissions (Kotov, 2002). Developed
countries possess comparative advantages in technological
and financial capabilities in mitigation of climate change.
Priority mitigation areas for countries in this group may lie
in improving energy efficiency, building new and renewable
energy, and carbon capture and storage facilities, and fostering
a mutually remunerative low-emissions global development
path through technological and financial transfer of resources
to the developing world.
In many industrialized countries (e.g., Japan and in Europe),
implications of energy systems with very low carbon emissions
have been explored, often jointly by governments, energy
specialists and stakeholders (e.g., Kok et al., 2000). However, a
fundamental and broad discussion in society on the implications
705

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

Chapter 12

of development pathways for climate change in general and
climate change mitigation in particular in the industrialized
countries has not seriously been initiated. Low-emission
pathways apply not only to energy choices. For example, in
North-America and Europe, UNEP (2002) identifies land-use
development, particularly infrastructure expansion, as a key
variable determining future environmental stresses, including
GHG emissions. Pathways that capitalize on advances in
information technologies to provide a diverse range of lifestyle
and spatial planning choices will also affect energy use and
GHG emissions.

2003), Bangladesh (Rahman et al., 2003), Brazil (La Rovere and
Romeiro, 2003), China (Jiang et al., 2003) and India (Shukla
et al., 2003) A common finding of these studies is that it is
possible to develop pathways that combine low GHG emissions
with effective responses to pressing regional problems. In the
energy sector, energy security and reduced health risks can be
effectively combined with low GHG emissions, even without
explicit climate policies. Enhancing soil management, avoiding
deforestation, and encouraging reforestation and afforestation
can increase carbon storage, while also serving the primary
goals of food security and ecosystem protection.

Economies in Transition: With EU enlargement, economies
in transition as a single group no longer exist. Nevertheless,
Central and Eastern Europe and Commonwealth of Independent
States share some common features in socioeconomic
development (UNDP, 2005), and in climate change mitigation
and sustainable development (IPCC, 2001b; Adger et al., 2004).
With respect to social and economic development, countries
in this group fall between the developed and developing
countries (Table 12.1). In terms of level of human development
and vulnerability, for instance, these countries fall behind
the developed countries but are well ahead of the developing
countries. In certain key areas, however, they are closer to the
developed countries in terms of population growth, levels of
industrialization, energy consumption, and GHG emissions..
In other areas, including income levels and distribution,
institutions and governance, they can show features similar to
the developing world. GDP per capita level in some of these
EIT countries is as low as that in the lower middle income
developing countries (World Bank, 2003), and energy intensity
is in general high (IEA, 2003a).

Although the developing economies are highly diverse, their
general features contrast to those of the industrialized world.
Levels of human development and consumption of energy per
capita are much lower than those in the developed countries and
in the economies in transition (Table 12.1). GHG emissions from
land-use change and agriculture are a significant proportion of
their total emissions (Ravindranath and Sathaye, 2002; Baumert
et al., 2004).

Although the 0.3 % per annum rate of economic growth in the
past 15 years has been low, it is expected that in many countries,
future rates could be high, which would contribute to an upward
trend in GHG emissions. Measures to decouple economic and
emissions growth might be especially important for this group
through restructuring the economy (Kotov, 2002). Mitigative
capacities are high as compared developing economies, but
lower than those for developed economies due to a weaker
financial basis. These capacities can be further enlarged through
institutional reform, such as liberalization of the energy market
and political determination to increase energy efficiency.
Developing Economies: Recently, interest at regional level
in exploring development pathways which are consistent with
lower GHG emissions has increased (Kok and de Coninck,
2004). This appears to be valid primarily for developing
countries. Case studies focus on the future in the priority areas
of energy supply, food security and fresh water availability in
South Africa (Davidson et al., 2003), Senegal (Sokona et al.,

Given the fact that energy consumption and emission per
capita are low in the developing world, focus on climate
mitigation alone may have large opportunity cost in terms of
fiscal and human capitals, and therefore not be compatible
with meeting sustainable development goals. With respect to
levels of human development, UNDP (2005) projects that by
2015 almost all developing regions will not be able to meet
their Millennium Development Goals. With respect to access to
clean water, for example, the 2015 MDG goal will be missed
by 210 million people who will not have access, with 50% in
South Asia, 40% in Sub-Saharan Africa, 7% in East Asia and
the Pacific. Non-climate policies for sustainable development
goals can be more effective in addressing climate change, such
as population control, poverty eradication, pollution reductions,
and energy security, as demonstrated in the People’s Republic
of China (Winkler et al., 2002b; PRC, 2004). In order to realize
the promise of leapfrogging, improvements are needed to the
institutional capabilities of the recipient developing country
and its energy and environmental policies in order to foster
sustainable industrial development (Gallagher, 2006; Lewis
and Wiser, 2007).
In aggregate terms, some large developing countries are
included in the list of top 25 emitters (Baumert et al., 2004).
These few developing countries are projected to increase their
emissions at a faster rate than the industrialized world and the
rest of developing countries as they are in the stage of rapid
industrialization (Pan, 2004b). For these countries, climate
change mitigation and sustainable development policies can
reinforce one another, however, financial and technological
assistance can be help these countries to pursue a low carbon

4	 EITs are still recognized in international agreements, such as UNFCCC and its Kyoto Protocol.

706

Chapter 12	

path of development (Ott et al., 2004). Emissions per capita for
some developing countries, however, will continue to be lower
than the industrialized countries for many decades.
For most other developing countries, adaptation to climate
change takes priority over mitigation as they are more vulnerable
to climate change and less carbon dependent (Hasselmann et al.,
2003). However, both adaptive and mitigative capacities tend to
be low (Huq et al., 2003). OPEC countries are unique in a sense
that they may be hurt by development paths that reduce the
demand for fossil fuels. Diversification of their economy is high
on their agenda. Although climate change mitigation can be one
consideration in evaluating poverty alleviation options, poverty
has to be alleviated regardless of GHG emissions. Improved
access to energy can lead to increasing GHG emissions, for
example, where kerosene and propane use is more appropriate
than biomass renewables. However, in absolute terms this is
a minor increase in global GHG emissions (see also Section
12.2.4).
For most Small Island States, the key issue to sustainable
development is the adoption of a comprehensive adaptation
and vulnerability assessment and implementing framework
with several priorities: sea level rise (high percentage of the
population located in coastal areas); coastal zone management
(including specially coral reefs and mangroves); water supply
(including fresh water catchments);: management of upland
forest ecosystem; and food and energy security. For some
islands, extreme events, such as tropical hurricanes and El Niño
and La Niña events, are an important threat.
In summary, different regions and types of countries have
different contextual conditions to respond to, and therefore,
their attempts to move towards a development path leading to
sustainable development while also mitigating climate change,
will vary considerably. Policy decisions will be most effective
where made while recognizing these contextual conditions and
where they relate and adapt to the existing regional and country
realities.
12.2.2	 Lower emissions pathways are not
necessarily associated with lower economic
growth
Section 12.2.1 has demonstrated that business-as-usual
futures in countries with similar characteristics can result in very
different emission profiles, depending on the development path
adopted. Since economic growth figures prominently among
the objectives of policy-makers worldwide, the relationship
between economic growth and emissions at the national level is
reviewed in Section 12.2.2. Consideration is given to whether
lower emissions pathways are necessarily associated with
lower economic growth The conclusion that there are degrees
of freedom between economic growth and GHG emissions is
further explored in Section12.2.3 and Section 12.2.4.

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

Economic activity is a key driver of CO2 emissions. How
economic growth translates into new emissions, however, is
ambiguous. On one hand, as the economy expands, demand
for and supply of energy and of energy-intensive goods also
increases, pushing up CO2 emissions.. On the other hand,
economic growth may drive technological change, increase
efficiency and foster the development of institutions and
preferences more conducive to environmental protection and
emissions mitigation (see Chapter 3). Also, economic growth
may be associated with specialization in sectors high) emissions
per unit of output, such as services (manufacturing and heavy
industries, respectively), thus resulting in a faster strong or weak
relationship between domestic emissions and GDP. Unlike
technological change or efficiency, however, specialization
does not affect the level of global emissions: it only modifies
the distribution of emissions across countries.
The balance between the scale effect of growth and the
mitigating factors outlined above has generated intense scrutiny
since the early 1990s. Much of the literature focuses on the
‘environmental Kuznets curve’ (EKC) hypothesis, which posits
that at early stages of development, pollution per capita and GDP
per capita move in the same direction. Beyond a certain income
level, emissions per capita will decrease as GDP per capita
increases, thus generating an inverted-U shaped relationship
between GDP per capita and pollution. The EKC hypothesis
is compatible with several, and possibly joint, explanations:
structural shift towards low carbon-intensity sectors; increased
environmental awareness with income, policy or technology
thresholds; and increasing returns to abatement (Copeland and
Taylor, 2004). The EKC hypothesis was initially formulated for
local pollutants in the seminal analysis of Grossman and Krueger
(1991) but was quickly expanded to CO2 emissions. Even so, it
recognized that some of the theoretical explanations for local
pollutants, namely that higher income individuals would be
more sensitive to environmental concerns, are less relevant for
GHGs that do not have local environmental or health impacts.
The EKC hypothesis has generated considerable research, and
the field is still very active. Recent summaries can be found in
Stern (2004), Copeland and Taylor (2004) or Dasgupta et al.
(2004). With regard to carbon dioxide, three conclusions can be
drawn, as discussed below.
First, using GDP and emissions data over multiple countries
and time periods, studies consistently find that GDP per capita
and emissions per capita move in the same direction among
most or all of the sample (Schmalensee et al., 1998; Ravallion
et al., 2000; Heil and Selden, 2001; Wagner and MüllerFürstenberg, 2004). A 1% increase in GDP per capita is found
to lead to an increase in CO2 emissions per capita of 0.5% to
1.5%, depending on the study. All studies also find evidence that
this coefficient, elasticity of per capita CO2 emissions relative
to per capita GDP, is not constant but decreases as per capita
income rises. Until recently, empirical studies consistently
found a relationship between per capita GDP and per capita CO2
emissions such that, beyond a certain level of GDP per capita,
707

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

per capita CO2 emissions would decrease as income increases
- thus confirming the EKC hypothesis for carbon dioxide.
However, the reliability of these estimates has been challenged
recently on technical grounds. For a general discussion, see
Harbaugh et al. (2002) and Millimet et al. (2003); and for a
critical review focusing on carbon dioxide, see Wagner and
Müller-Fürstenberg (2004). Two main points emerge from the
most recent reviews: (1) they cast doubt on the idea that the
EKC hypothesis could be validated based on existing data; (2)
they conclude that the relationship between GDP and emissions
data is less robust than previously thought.
Second, studies using time series at the country level find
less robust relationships between GDP per capita and CO2
emissions per capita. For example, Moomaw and Unruh (1997)
show that international oil price shocks, and not per capita GDP
growth, explain most of the variations in per capita emissions in
OECD countries. Similarly, Coondoo and Dinda (2002) find a
strong correlation between emissions and income in developed
countries and in Latin America, but a weaker correlation
in Africa and Asia. Recent work on the EKC (Dasgupta et
al., 2004) also shows that the relationship between GDP per
capita and pollution is not as rigid as it seems, and in fact,
mostly disappears when other explanatory variables, notably
governance, are introduced.
Third, including trade among the explanatory variables
of CO2 emissions usually yield EKC curves peaking farther
in the future (Frankel and Rose, 2002), although there are
methodological issues associated with this approach (Heil and
Selden, 2001). Using trade-corrected emissions data for USA,
Aldy (2005) also shows that taking trade into accounts leads to
curves that peak much later. Neither taking trade into account
as a new explanatory variable nor correcting emissions for trade
effects, however, significantly increases the robustness of the
correlation between observed levels of GDP per capita and
observed emission levels.
To sum up, the econometric literature on the relationship
between GDP per capita and CO2 emissions per capita does not
support an optimistic interpretation of the EKC hypothesis that
“the problem will take care of itself” with economic growth.
The monotonically increasing relationship between economic
activity and CO2 emissions emerging from the data does not
appear to be econometrically very robust, especially at country
level and at higher GDP per capita level. The pessimistic
interpretation of the literature findings that growth and CO2
emissions are irrevocably linked is not supported by the data.
There is apparently some degree of flexibility between economic
growth and CO2 emissions. For example, CO2 emissions from
fossil-fuel combustion in China remained essentially constant
between 1997 and 2001. This was despite a +30% growth in
GDP (IEA, 2004a) due to the combination of closing smallscale, inefficient power plants, shift in industry ownership away
from the public sector, and introduction of energy efficiency and
environmental regulation (Streets et al., 2001; Wu et al., 2005).
708

Chapter 12

However, these econometric studies do not distinguish between
structural emissions and emissions that result from policy
decisions. Thus, limited information is provided about how
future policy choices may or may not influence CO2 emissions
paths. To explore these choices, a more disaggregated approach
is necessary, as discussed in the following section.
12.2.3	 Changing development pathway requires
working with multiple actors, at multiple
scales
Over the past two decades, social scientists have observed
significant changes in the role of government in relation to social
and economic change. These include a shift from government
defined strictly by the nation state to a more inclusive concept
of governance that recognizes the contributions of various
levels of government (global, trans-national, regional, local)
as well as the roles of the private sector, non-governmental
actors, and civil society (Rhodes, 1996; Goodwin, 1998).
The emergence of these new forms of governance has been
attributed to the need for new institutions to address the more
complex problems of present-day society, among which global
environmental risks figure prominently (Beck, 1992; Giddens,
1998; Howes, 2005). Ideology and economic globalization
have also played a role in the shifting focus from government
to governance. Command-and-control strategies are losing
favour while market-based mechanisms, voluntary initiatives,
and partnerships with non-governmental organizations have
gained wider acceptance (Lewis et al., 2002). However, the
shift to discussions of governance does not imply a reduction in
the role of government. Governments remain central actors in
environmental policy. They ensure the delivery of environmental
protection to citizens, and help create the rules, norms, and
many organizations that ensure environmental protection (Haas
et al., 1993; OECD, 2001; Ostrom et al., 2002).
Recognizing the difficulty and limitations of trying to
directly control their domestic economies in an increasingly
open and globalized economy, governments now try to pursue
economic growth through strategic policies. These policies
are designed to increase access to foreign markets, encourage
inward foreign investment, maintain national competitiveness,
and obtain favourable outcomes from trade agreements (Jessop,
1997). While some believe that globalization has made national
governments less powerful, others argue that rather than simply
eroding government power, globalization has changed the ways
in which governments operate and influence situations (LeviFaur, 2005). On environmental issues, a strong case has been
made for the need for government policy to ensure delivery
of environmental protection as a public good (e.g., Liverman,
1999; Haas et al., 1993; OECD, 2001; Ostrom et al., 2002).
The three key institutional sectors– government, market
and civil society – have begun to work in closer collaboration,
partnering with each other in multiple and diverse ways when
their goals are common and their comparative advantages are

Chapter 12	

differentiated (Najam, 1996; Hulme and Edwards, 1997; Davis,
1999). This is not to imply that they always or even mostly
work in partnership or have synchronous priorities: it mean that
they now do so more often than they did, including in terms of
global climate change mitigation (Najam, 2000). The nature of
global governance on a range of issues, including on climate
change, is today best understood not only as what states do but
as a combination of what the state, civil society and markets do
or not do (Najam et al., 2004).
The more prominent roles businesses and civil society groups
have played in governance has not been without controversy.
Some believe that only the state can act in the public interest,
while industry and citizens are motivated by self-interest. Others
see all actors as motivated by self-interest and, in this context,
believe competition and the market ensure the best outcomes
– public and private. In this view, civil society, consumers and
industry bear greater responsibility and share the risks, while
the state maintains a role in setting standards and auditing
performance (Dryzek, 1990; Dryzek, 1997; Howes, 2005).
While the roles, responsibilities, and powers assigned to
the respective actors remains a hotly contested subject, it is
widely acknowledged that responsibility for the environment
and sustainability has become a much broader project. It is no
longer primarily the preserve of governments, but involves civil
society, private sector, and the state (Rayner and Malone, 2000;
Najam et al., 2004).
12.2.3.1	 State
The transition from government to governance recognizes
the changing trends among political constitutions in developed
and developing countries. While varying in speed and scope
in individual states, these institutional reforms broadly span
the domains of government and market activity, the powers of
public executive administration relative to that of legislatures
and courts, the degree of federalism within nation states,
the organization of the financial system and capital markets,
the demands of corporate governance and corporate social
responsibility, the structure of industrial organization and
public utilities, the strength and engagement of civil society
organizations, and the delegation of national sovereignty to
multinational and regional law and regimes (Berger and Dore,
1996; Hollingworth and Boyer, 1997; Schmidt, 2002; Heller
and Shukla, 2003).
The specific constellation of these reforms depends on the
pre-existing institutions in a country, the local politics of reform
and resistant domestic interests. Yet in almost all cases, the reorganization of governance institutions will have important
implications for the choice of potential national development
paths in key input sectors. For example, a recent study of
electricity sector reforms in five leading emerging nations China, India, South Africa, Brazil and Mexico - found that in
no cases did the changes away from power provision through

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

state monopolies correspond closely to the orthodox designs of
electricity market reforms (Box 12.2).
All five electricity sectors separate ownership of generation
from transmission and distribution and allow participation in
the generation markets by independent, often foreign, power
producers. Nowhere have competitive generation markets
flourished or has the state withdrawn substantially from
system planning, tariff setting based on social and political
criteria, infrastructure financing, or predominant ownership
of major power sector firms (Victor and Heller, 2007). Yet,
the consequences for climate friendly energy development
have varied across these emerging markets because of
nationally specific characteristics. Social goals, including
increasing access and renewable power development, have
not been interrupted. In some cases, such as the Indian State
of Gujarat, the substitution of public grid power by privately
developed stand-alone power plants has increased the rate of
substitution of coal-fired generation by natural gas (Shukla
et al., 2005). In Mexico, complex, financially problematic,
government guarantees of tariffs have also encouraged gas fuel
diversification from oil to gas. In other cases, including China,
the ongoing flux in institutional reforms creates both risks of
intensive coal-based power development and the opportunities
of more climate friendly energy growth.
The choice of policies that governments seek and are able
to pursue is influenced by the political culture and regulatory
policy style of a country or region, and the extent of public
expectations that their governments will take a strong or weak
lead in pursuing policy responses. Earlier efforts to address
the issues of institutional capacity for mitigation include
a compendium of policy instruments (DOE, 1989); two
collections of country studies (Grubb, 1991; Rayner, 1993) and
a review of the relevant social science literature on institutions
(O’Riordan et al., 1998).
A substantial body of political theory identifies and explains
national policy styles or political cultures. The underlying
assumption is that individual countries tend to process problems
in a specific manner, regardless of the distinctiveness or specific
features of any specific problem; a national ‘way of doing
things.’ The key features of prevailing ‘policy styles’ in various
countries and regions of the world are highlighted.
Richardson et al. (1982) identified national policy style
as deriving from the interaction of two components “(a)
the government’s approach to problem solving and (b) the
relationship between government and other actors in the
policy process.” Using a basic typology of styles, countries
are subdivided according to whether national decision-making
is anticipatory or reactive, and whether the political context
is consensus-based or impositional. Many studies of national
differences in institutional arrangements for making and
implementing environment and technology policy emphasize
the essentially cooperative approach to environmental
709

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

Chapter 12

Box 12.2: Poverty tariff in South Africa
The extent to which the policy alleviates poverty depends on the energy burden (percentage of the total household budget
spent on energy). The energy burden of poor households in remote rural villages can be up to 18% of the total household
budget, according to data from a case study reported in Table 12.2; see also UCT (2002). The 50 kWh provided by the poverty
tariff would reduce the energy burden by two-thirds (6 percentage points). Monthly expenditure on electricity and other fuels
decline by 18% and 16% respectively, due to the poverty tariff.
Table 12.2: Mean household expenditure on electricity and other fuels and energy as a percentage of total household expenditure
Expenditure on

Before subsidy

After subsidy

Difference

Electricity (Rand/month)

38

31

7

18%

Fuels excluding electricity (Rand/month)

70

59

11

16%

Energy share in household expenditure (%)

18

12

6

Source: Prasad and Ranninger, 2003.

A recent study in the poor areas of Cape Town showed that monthly electricity consumption has risen by 30-35 kWh/month
per customer since the introduction of the poverty tariff, a substantial rise against an average consumption ranging from 100
to 150 kWh per month (Borchers et al., 2001; Holliday et al., 2002). This rise is less than the full 50 kWh/month, suggesting
that households make greater use of electricity, but also value some saving on their energy bills (Cowan and Mohlakoana,
2005)
The impacts on climate change mitigation have been broadly scoped. If extended to all customers in a broad-based approach, the poverty tariff might at most increase emissions by 0.146 MtCO2 under the assumption that all the free electricity
would be additional to existing energy use (UCT, 2000; Hawken, 1999; Anderson, 1998; Holliday et al., 2002). In practice, it
is likely that electricity might displace existing use of paraffin, coal, wood, candles, batteries and other fuels to some extent.
This upper-bound estimate represents 0.04% of total GHG emissions, but about 2% of residential sector emissions in 1994.
This example from South Africa shows that poverty-alleviation and environmental objectives can be addressed simultaneously. To the extent electricity use displaces indoor fuel use, it may also provide a benefit to public health.

protection in Europe and the more confrontational approach
that predominates in the United States (Lindquist, 1980;
Kelman, 1981; Kunreuther et al., 1982). Jasanoff (1986)
shows how information about established technologies, such
as formaldehyde use, is interpreted differently by scientific
advisory bodies in different countries. In particular, Brickman
et al. (1985) argue that decentralization of decision-making
in the USA both increases the demand for scientific details
of technological and environmental hazards and engenders
competition between different explanations. Europeans
generally expect national government, and increasingly the
European Union, to take the lead in all matters pertaining to
environmental safety and health, as well as economic and social
welfare.
Recent empirical studies confirm the view that only detailed
and case-specific analyses of government institutions and
policies can illuminate national differences in the pursuit of
environmental and other regulatory objectives. Weiner (2002)
finds that, contrary to common assertions, the USA and Europe
have not differed substantially in their use or implementation
of the precautionary principle. Stewart (2001) finds that the
USA has successively moved between alternative forms of
environmental policies, beginning with command and control,
710

before switching toward market instruments (permits and taxes),
and later experimentation with flexible negotiated regulation
and information based instruments.
In these cases, national political and regulatory cultures
are distinguished by institutional factors, such as the judicial
doctrines of administrative review and regulatory standards
of general treatment, more than cultural predilections that
support or restrict government action. Finally, governments
appear to have varied traditions of policy preferences and
authority. European governments and populations appear more
comfortable with lifestyle (demand) regulation than do North
American governments, which often tend to look to longer-run
technology development support in collaboration with market
actors (Nelson, 1993).
An important, though often neglected, issue in the choice of
policy instruments is the institutional capacity of governments to
implement the instrument on the ground (Rayner, 1993). This is
often a matter of what countries with highly constrained resources
think that they can afford. However, even industrialized nations
exhibit significant variation with respect to the characteristics
that would be considered ideal for the successful application
of the complete suite of policy instruments listed above. These

Chapter 12	

attributes include (O’Riordan et al., 1998):
•	 a well developed institutional infrastructure to implement
regulation;
•	 an economy that is likely to respond well to fiscal policy
instruments because it possesses certain characteristics of
the economic models of the free market;
•	 a highly developed information industry and mass
communications infrastructure for educating, advertising,
and public opinion formulation;
•	 a vast combined public and private annual RD&D budget for
reducing uncertainties and establishing pilot programmes.
To the extent that these close to ideal conditions for
conventional policy instruments are missing, policy-makers are
likely to encounter obstacles to their effectiveness. For example,
both Brazil and Indonesia (Petrich, 1993) have carefully
crafted forest protection laws that could be used to secure
forest preservation and carbon management. However, neither
country is able to allocate sufficient resources to monitoring and
compliance with those laws to ensure that they are effective.
Even in industrialized countries, competition for resources
among state agencies responsible for promoting economic
development and those responsible for environmental protection
are almost universally resolved in favour of the former. In much
of the developing world, the shortage of programmes resources
is exacerbated by pressures to utilize natural resources to earn
foreign income. This increases demands of population for
energy, and pressures to convert forest land to human habitation.
As a result, legislative initiatives often seem to “leave more
marks on paper than on the landscape” (Rayner and Richards,
1994).
Less industrialized countries often have poor infrastructures,
exacerbated by lack of human, financial, and technological
resources. In addition, these countries are likely to focus on
more basic considerations of nation building and economic
development. The economic conditions of less-industrialized
countries also present opportunities to achieve both sustainable
development goals and emissions reductions measures at lower
cost than in the industrialized countries.
The notions of adaptive and mitigative capacity advanced
in the IPCC TAR appear to reinforce the idea that the capacity
to develop and implement climate response strategies are
essentially the same as those required to develop and implement
policies across a wide variety of domains. They are largely
synonymous with those of sustainable development. The issues
and cases discussed here suggest that the challenges of capacity
building for sustainable development is not confined to the
less industrialized countries, but that industrialized countries
also fall short of the capacity to respond to climate mitigation
challenges in a sustainable fashion.
As O’Riordan et al. (1998) note “the more that climate
change issues are routinized as part of the planning perspective
at the appropriate level of implementation, the national and

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

local government, the firm, the community, the more likely they
are to achieve desired goals. Climate policies per se are hard
to implement meaningfully. However, merely piggybacking
climate change onto an existing political agenda is unlikely to
succeed.”
12.2.3.2	 Market
Industry is a central player in ecological and sustainability
stewardship. Accordingly, over the past 25 years or so, there has
been a progressive increase in the number of companies taking
steps to address sustainability issues (Holliday et al., 2002; Lyon,
2003) at either the company or industry level (see Box 12.3). A
number of companies have, as part of their corporate strategy,
voluntarily defined goals that reflect social responsibilities and
environmental concerns that go beyond traditional company
obligations. Following this line of thinking, an increasing
number of companies are defining targets for GHG emissions
and sinks. Some of the more widely acknowledged corporate
sustainability drivers include regulatory compliance, market
opportunities, and reputational value. Lyon (2003) hypothesizes
that voluntary action on the environment might be explained by
either a recognition by companies that pollution is a symptom
of production inefficiencies, or a perception that consumers
are willing to pay more for products with better environmental
credentials. Either explanation would signal that markets are
more important than regulation as an incentive for improved
environmental performance. Lyon (2003) suggests instead
that “it is the opportunity to influence regulation that makes
corporate environmentalism profitable”.
Some companies have recognized that pursuing
sustainability offers potential cost savings (Thompson, 2002;
Dunphy et al., 2003). For example, by increasing energy and
material efficiency in production and by reducing wastes,
companies can reduce costs per unit of production and thereby
gain a competitive market advantage (Hawken et al., 1999;
Schaltegger et al., 2003). This concept of ‘eco-efficiency’
further acknowledges that businesses which constantly work
to evaluate their environmental performance will be more
innovative and responsive businesses. DuPont, for example,
has sought to elevate sustainability to the strategic level, using a
three-pronged strategy involving integrated science, knowledge
intensity and productivity improvements (Holliday, 2001). The
company has achieved financial savings in excess of US$1
billion per annum, partly through reduced energy and raw
material use and less waste (Holliday, 2001).
Lyon (2003) suggests that the influence of ‘green marketing’
is modest in terms of shifting industry behaviour with respect
to the environment. Senge and Carstedt (2001) position
consumers as a key influence in shaping the ‘next industrial
revolution’, founded on an economic system that genuinely
connects industry, society and the environment. Their view
is that a shift in consumer attitudes and values is an essential
prerequisite to building sustainable societies. Schaefer and
711

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

Chapter 12

Box 12.3: Role of Business
One well-known example of a corporation which has embraced sustainability is Interface Inc., a USA. manufacturer of carpets and upholstery. Since embracing the sustainability goal in 1994, Interface has reduced the carbon intensity of its products by 36% (Hawken et al., 1999; Anderson, 2004) Many of these reductions came through investments in energy efficiency
and renewable energy (Holliday et al., 2002). However, Interface has also substantially reduced GHG emissions through other
elements of its sustainability strategy, including reduction in raw material use and recycling materials not directly related to
energy consumption (Hawken et al., 1999; Anderson, 2004). As most of the materials used by Interface in its production are
derived from petrochemicals (Anderson, 1998; Hawken et al., 1999), these strategies have led to substantial reductions in
the company’s carbon footprint.
CEMEX, a Mexican-based cement manufacturer, was able to achieve similar emissions results through adoption of sustainability-oriented business model. One of the major environmental issues facing cement manufacturers is energy use (Wilson
and Change, 2003). As part of its sustainability strategy, Cemex has focused intently on its energy use in an effort to reduce
its ecological burden. For example, in 1994 CEMEX embarked on an eco-efficiency programmes to “optimize its consumption of raw materials and energy” (Wilson and Change, 2003), p.29). Through this and other measures, CEMEX reduced CO2
emissions 2.7 million tons between 1994 and 2003 (Wilson and Change, 2003, p.32).
ITC Ltd, an Indian conglomerate and third largest company in terms of net profits in the country, reportedly sequestered
almost a third of its CO2 emissions in 2003-04, and plans to become a carbon positive corporation through a programmes
of energy savings and CO2 sequestration through farm and social forestry initiatives. Through programmes for rainwater
harvesting, the company plans to become a water-positive corporation as well. Its ‘e-Choupal’ intervention has eliminated
the need for brokers and helped 2.4 million farmers across six Indian states participate in global sourcing and marketing of
products (Das and Dutta, 2004).

Crane (2005) conclude that a change in behaviour by the
majority of consumers is not imminent. They suggest that it
will require a sense of crisis to bring about a sea change in
consumption patterns.
Managing stakeholder relations has also been identified as a
corporate environmental driver. Many companies seek to improve
relations with government, NGOs and local communities,
because this can offer benefits, such as faster approvals for
projects or products (Thompson, 2002), a continuing ‘licence
to operate’, and greater scope for self-regulation. In regard to
NGOs, improved relations can reduce or eliminate protests,
such as consumer boycotts and direct lobbying (Thompson,
2002). Companies are also improving their environmental and
social performance in response to demands from their corporate
clients. Many large corporations, in particular, have introduced
purchasing guidelines that place demands on suppliers to meet
environmental performance standards (Thompson, 2002). The
role of trade associations is another factor - including at the
international negotiations (Hamilton et al., 2003).
Demands of investors, insurers and other financial
institutions are providing further incentives in relation to
sustainability. Through improved sustainability performance,
companies can potentially increase the attractiveness of their
shares in the market, reduce insurance premiums and obtain
better loan terms (Thompson, 2002). For example, the rapid
growth of socially responsible investment funds (SRIs) in
712

the last decade is providing an incentive for greater corporate
sustainability (Thompson, 2002; Borsky et al., 2006). The role
of institutional investors, and the growing concern in some
business circles about liability due to inaction on climate change
should also be acknowledged. This has led to a growing number
of stakeholder initiatives to have publicly owned companies
become proactive on climate change, and a growing number of
initiatives to monitor and manage GHG emissions, even in the
absence of domestic legislation and mandatory requirements
(see Innovest, 2005; Cogan, 2006). The Carbon Disclosure
Project has emerged as an important framework internationally
for company reporting on their carbon footprint. Disclosure
of environmental impact is increasingly seen as a crucial
element of a company’s risk profile for legal liability as well as
competitive position in the face of possible future regulation.
For example, re-insurers, companies providing insurance to
insurance companies, have shown considerable concern about
how climate change could impact insurance claims. Zanetti et
al. (2005) suggest that climate change should be a core element
in a company’s long term-risk management strategy. Risk and
return, demand, compliance and enforcement regimes, amongst
other factors, are also likely to have an impact on investment.
Notwithstanding these achievements, there is widespread
debate as to whether industry’s responses to environmental
decline and sustainability issues more generally are sufficient
(Elkington, 2001; Sharma, 2002; Doppelt, 2003; Dunphy et al.,
2003).

Chapter 12	

All the same, notions of corporate social responsibility (CSR)
have gained a wider hold. The essence of the CSR perspective
is that there is a clear basis for businesses to widen their focus
from simply profit maximization to include other economic,
social, and environmental concerns. The arguments in support
of CSR include competitive advantage (Porter and van der
Linde, 1995; Porter and Kramer, 2002), notions of corporate
citizenship (Marsden, 2000; Andriof and McIntosh, 2001),
and stakeholder theory (Post et al., 2002; Driscoll and Starik,
2004; Windsor, 2004). Drawing on the experience of DuPont,
Holliday (2001) acknowledges the importance of shareholder
value, but adds that business practices focused on sustainability
outcomes can generate financial gains.
Colman (2002) reported that 45% of the Fortune Global
Top 250 companies have issued environmental, social or
sustainability reports. Similarly, CSR would seem to have
become a more serious concern to European companies,
though Pharaoh (2003) suggests it is primarily sales driven. In
the UK, socially responsible investment (Srivastava and Heller,
2003) grew from US$ 46 billion in 1997 to US$ 450 billion
in 2001 (Sparkes, 2002). Borsky et al. (2006) report that the
US$ 2.16 trillion of socially responsible investments held in the
USA accounted for approximately 11% of the total investment
assets under management in 2003. The standards used by SRI
funds to evaluate firms vary widely in the issues they address
(with many simply staying away from weapons, tobacco,
alcohol, and gambling) and how rigorously these standards are
applied. Some SRI companies emphasize diversity and labour
relations, while others focus on environment. There is no set of
common criteria, and thus not all companies on SRI lists can
be considered sustainable. However, growing public interest in
SRI has led more companies to be concerned about a variety of
social and environmental issues.
In considering the role of business, a distinction between
multinationals and smaller, entrepreneurial enterprises is useful.
A recent UK report identifies a difference in perspectives and
approaches to global climate change in these two groups
of businesses, with multinationals taking a long-term view,
positioning for the future based on broad policy directions
(Hamilton and Kenber, 2006). By contrast, smaller businesses,
entrepreneurs or venture capitalists are more sensitive to the
details of immediate or shorter term policy reforms. Similarly,
there may be a difference even within the multinational sector
between the energy suppliers (e.g., electricity producers/
distributors, oil companies, or even coal companies) and energy
intensive industries (e.g., chemical or aluminium companies).
The former takes a longer term, market development or proactive view and the later a more reactive view (e.g., BIAC/
OECD/IEA, 1999). Finally, some companies are likely to be
‘winners’ with any effort to advance sustainable development
through clean energy policies (e.g., insulation industry, window
manufacturers, energy service companies) and some are likely
to be ‘losers’ (e.g., producers of energy inefficient products). It
is therefore difficult to speak about ‘market’ sector preferences

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

because there are different types of businesses with significantly
different perspectives in different places.
In summary, although there has been progress, the private
sector can play a much greater role in making development
more sustainable. As the number of companies that operate
both profitably and more sustainably increases, the view that
addressing social and environmental issues is incompatible
with shareholder maximization may loose ground. Opinions
vary on the extent to which business can be relied upon to
meet sustainability objectives. These range from business
being inherently self-interested and exclusively profit-driven,
to socially responsible businesses going ‘beyond compliance’
are on the forefront of the sustainability curve. Although the
issues are complicated, there can be no question that the shift
towards improved sustainability is fundamentally connected
to the social, economic and environmental performance of the
private sector. This is especially true in relation to the issue of
climate change.
12.2.3.3	 Civil society
Civil society refers to the arena of uncoerced collective
action around shared interests, purposes and values (Rayner and
Malone, 2000). In theory, its institutional forms are distinct from
those of the state, family and market, although in practice, the
boundaries between state, civil society, family and market are
often complex, blurred and negotiated. Civil society commonly
embraces a diversity of spaces, actors and institutional forms,
varying in their degree of formality, autonomy and power. Civil
societies are often populated by organizations such as registered
charities, development non-governmental organizations,
community groups, women’s organizations, faith-based
organizations, professional associations, trades unions, self-help
groups, social movements, business associations, coalitions and
advocacy groups (Najam, 1996). As this definition emphasizes,
civil society is closely related to the more recent concept of
‘social capital’. As described by Putnam (1993), social capital
describes the overlapping networks of associational ties that
bind a society together.
During the past three decades, the mantle of civil society has
been increasingly claimed by non-governmental organizations
(NGOs). The NGO sector has experienced an explosion in
numbers worldwide as well as a proliferation of types and
functions. There is considerable debate about the extent to
which NGOs claim to be or even represent civil society in the
traditional sense can be maintained. Certainly, their dependence
on either government or business raises questions about the
extent to which they are truly independent of the state and
the market. According to The Economist (2000), a quarter of
Oxfam’s US$ 162 million income in 1998 was given by the
British Government and the EU. World Vision US, which claims
to be the world’s largest privately funded Christian relief and
development organization, receives millions of dollars worth of
resources from the US Government. The role of governments
713

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

in supporting NGOs is not limited to financial support. At least
one UK-based NGO has advised various small governments in
climate negotiations and has even drafted text. Other NGOs are
closely associated with the market sector, known as BINGOs
(Business and Industry NGOs). A question frequently raised
about NGOs is of accountability (Jordan and van Tuijl, 2006).
Relatively few NGOs are directly accountable to members in
the same way that governments are to voters or businesses are
to shareholders, raising further questions about the extent to
which their claims to the mantle of civil society are justified
(Najam, 1996).
Whether they are truly ‘civil society’ or not, there is little
doubt that NGOs can be effective in shaping development
and environment. A multitude of interest groups, including
civil society in its various manifestations, seek to influence
the direction of national and global climate change mitigation
policy (Michaelowa, 1998). Non-governmental organizations
have been particularly active and often influential in shaping
societal debate and policy directions on this issue (Corell and
Betsill, 2001; Gough and Shackley, 2001; Newell, 2000).
The literature on the various ways in which civil society, and
especially NGOs, influence global environmental policy in
general and climate policy in particular, points out that civil
society employs ‘civic will’ to the policy discourse and that it
can motivate policy in three distinct but related ways (Banuri
and Najam, 2002). First, it can push policy reform through
awareness-raising, advocacy and agitation. Second, it can pull
policy action by filling the gaps and providing policy services
such as policy research, policy advice and, in a few cases, actual
policy development. Third, it can create spaces for champions
of reform within policy systems so that they can assume a
salience and create constituencies for change that could not be
mobilized otherwise.
The image of civil society ‘pushing’ for environmental
protection and climate change mitigation policies is the most
familiar one. There are numerous examples of civil society
organizations and movements seeking to push policy reform
at the global, national and even local levels. The reform
desired by various interest groups within civil society can
differ (Michaelowa, 1998). But common to all is the legitimate
role civil society has in articulating and seeking their visions
of change through a multitude of mechanisms that include
public advocacy, voter education, lobbying decision-makers,
research, and public protests. Given the nature of the issue, civil
society includes not only NGOs but also academic and other
non-governmental research institutions, business groups, and
broadly stated the ‘epistemic’ or knowledge communities that
work on better understanding of the climate change problematic.
Some have argued that civil society has been the critical
element in putting global climate change into the policy arena
and relentlessly advocating its importance. Governments have
eventually began responding to these calls from civil society for
systematic environmental protection and global climate change
mitigation policies (Gough and Shackley, 2001; Najam et al.,
714

Chapter 12

2004). In particular, studies on the negotiation processes of
global climate change policy (Levy and Newell, 2000; Corell
and Betsill, 2001) highlight the role of non-governmental and
civil society actors in advancing the cause of global climate
change mitigation.
The role of civil society in ‘pulling’ climate change mitigation
policy is no less important. In fact, the IPCC assessment
process itself is a voluntary knowledge community seeking to
organize the state of knowledge on climate change for policymakers. It is an example of how civil society, and particularly
how ‘epistemic’ or knowledge communities can directly add
to or ‘pull’ the global climate policy debate (Siebenhuner,
2002; Najam and Cleveland, 2003). In addition, the knowledge
communities as well as NGOs have been extremely active and
instrumental in servicing the needs of national and sub-national
climate policy. This is done in various ways: by universities and
research institutions writing local and national climate change
plans; by NGOs helping in the preparation of national climate
change positions for international negotiations and increasingly
being part of the national negotiation delegations (Corell and
Betsill, 2001); by civil society and epistemic actors playing key
roles in climate change policy assessments at all levels from the
local to the global.
Finally, civil society plays a very significant role by ‘creating
spaces for champions of policy reform’ and providing platforms
where these champions can advance these ideas. The Pew
Climate Initiative and the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment
are two examples of how civil society has created forums and
space for discourse by different actors, and not just civil society
actors, to interact and advance the discussion on where climate
change mitigation and sustainable development policy should
be heading. Increasingly, civil society forums such as these are
very cognisant of the need to broaden the participation in these
forums to other institutional sectors of society.
12.2.3.4	 Interactions
The shift from ‘government to governance’ has been
accompanied by both theoretical and a practical interest in
how the three main arenas of actors – state, market and civil
society – interact, including how they might work in concert to
achieve improved outcomes from a sustainability perspective.
A variety of perspectives are offered that cast light on these
questions including ‘partnerships’ (Najam et al., 2003; Hale,
2004; Forsyth, 2005), ‘deliberative democracy’ (Levine,
2000; O’Riordan and Stoll-Kleeman, 2002; Gutmann and
Thompson, 2004), and ‘transition theory’ (Geels, 2004; Elzen
and Wieczorek, 2005)
Each of these studies considers issues of governance in
the context of sustainable development and climate change
mitigation. Partnerships considers forms of cooperative
governance and action, deliberative democracy deals with
issues of representation in decision-making, Transition theory

Chapter 12	

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

seeks to explain how technological innovation occurs and
how these processes might be channelled towards changing
the technological composition of development pathways, for
example, in support of de-carbonization.

and less powerful groups, non-representative outcomes, and a
failure to integrate local knowledge. An analysis of waste-toenergy projects in the Philippines and India confirms that such
problems will be encountered (Forsyth, 2005).

Partnerships: Partnerships between public and private actors
can maximize impact by taking advantage of each partner’s
unique strengths and skill sets. Partnership programmes can
provide citizens groups with a lever for increasing pressure on
both governments and industry to change in support of improved
sustainability. From an economic development perspective,
one of the potentially fruitful styles of partnership has been
between governments and industry through BOT projects Build, Operate, Transfer. Despite their promise as a means of
financing large-scale capital intensive projects, there have been
significant difficulties in practice (see Box 12.4).

The notion that partnerships between sectors is the wave of
the future was given particular salience by the World Summit
on Sustainable Development in Johannesburg, South Africa,
in 2002. There, several ‘Type II’ partnerships were launched
involving various combinations of governments, business
and civil society actors (Najam and Cleveland, 2003; Hale,
2004; Bäckstrand and Lövbrand, 2006). Although too early to
evaluate the impacts, these particular partnerships, represent
a larger trend in the last decade with a far greater level of
partnership activities between governments and NGOs, and
between government and business, and now increasingly all
three. Such multi-sector forums and partnerships are no longer
limited to a few industrialized countries or to particular sectoral
mixes. There are now cross-sectoral partnerships and the
search for meaningful cross-sectoral partnerships in developing
and industrialized countries alike and initiated equally by
governments, business and civil society.

Cooperative environmental governance models offer
advantages such as a more structured framework for pluralist
contributions to policy, consensus-building, more stable policy
outcomes, and social learning. Although these cooperative
models allow for more stakeholder participation, it is also
suggested that they fail to fully address exclusion of minority

Box 12.4: Public Private Partnerships
Globally, public private partnerships (PPPs) are an increasingly popular tool governments use to fund large-scale infrastructure projects. Broadly, PPPs involve the investment of private capital and the use of private sector expertise to deliver public
infrastructure and services. There are various forms of PPPs. In the power generation sector, popular examples of PPPs are
Build-Operate-Transfer (BOT) projects. Private partners (investors) provide the financing and technology, they build, and they
operate the power generation facility for a concessionary period of up to 35 years. During the concession, a government
partner provides the investor with ownership rights and gradually buys back the project by providing the developer with the
right to charge consumers a fee for its product. At the end of the concession period, the facility is transferred to government
ownership at no further cost to the government.
BOT projects have enabled developing country governments with growing energy needs to access new financial capital for
green or intermediate fuel technologies for power generation. For example, Vietnam is utilizing such investments for naturalgas fired turbines, and Laos is engaging in a large programme of hydropower construction to supply electricity to a regional
power grid in the Greater Mekong Sub region. However, BOT projects have also enabled governments to bring on-line more
conventional fossil-fuel powered generating capacity in regions where alternative fuels are not available - heavy oils in some
regions of China and coal in Thailand.
While PPPs have assisted governments with access to new financial capital and expertise to invest in cleaner power generating capacity, care needs to be taken in evaluating their costs, benefits and risks to governments and consumers. In uncertain
investment environments such as that in developing countries, private partners require a range of onerous guarantees from
governments to reduce their investment risks over the life of the projects. These include take-or-pay guarantees where governments commit to purchase a minimum level of production, guarantees to cover currency exchange risks, fuel supply price
guarantees, political risk guarantees to protect against government regulatory change. In the aftermath of the East Asian
financial crisis that began in 1997, governments such as the Philippines and Indonesia, paid a high price for guaranteed
power purchases that were denominated in US dollars as their currencies devalued respectively and power demand from
industry dropped.
Sources: Estache and Strong, 2000; Handley, 1997; Irwin et al., 1999; Tam, 1999; Wyatt, 2002.

715

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

Deliberative Democracy: According to Pimbert and Wakeford
(2001), various social and political factors have brought support
to the use of deliberative processes in policy-making, planning
and technology assessments. According to Levine (2000),
public debate over issues such as global warming provides the
public opportunity to form opinions, where otherwise such an
opportunity might not exist. Additionally, deliberative processes
provide decision-makers with insight into the public mood and,
public deliberation provides the opportunity for the public to
justify their views on matters of concern.
Notions of deliberative democracy emerge from the observed
shift from ‘government to governance’, in that they refer to
shared responsibility for the design of policy. O’Riordan and
Stoll-Kleeman (2002) suggest that policy spaces are no longer
characterized by hierarchical orders; opportunities have been
opened for a variety of forms of public-private cooperation,
policy networks, formal and informal consultation, working
across scales from multinational to local. The drivers, they
suggest, include a need for new approaches to decision-making,
occasioned by new mixes of private, public and civic actors.
There are at least five issues that continually challenge
social scientists engaged in the design and implementation
of participatory mechanisms, such as consensus conferences,
focus groups, citizens’ juries, and community advisory boards.
These are:
•	 Representation – Who and how to select. The challenge
is achieving representativeness of a community and
establishing the legitimacy of those participating to speak
on behalf of others;
•	 Resources – Participatory decision-making requires
substantial investment by all parties, chiefly, funding and
logistical support on the part of governments and business
and time on the part of citizens;
•	 Agenda framing – Too narrow a framing prejudges the
issues, but overly broad framing frustrates closure;
•	 Effectiveness – Does citizen involvement have impact on
decisions. Disaffection deepens when citizen deliberations
are not seen to have traction and people think their time has
been wasted;
•	 Evaluation – This is seldom done, and when done, is usually
self-evaluation of process rather than of outcomes.
Transition Theory: What can loosely be referred to
as ‘transition theory’ (Elzen and Wieczorek, 2005) offers
another perspective on ‘society – market – state’ relations, but
importantly also presents some insights into how societies can
shift onto more sustainable paths. Berkhout (2002) observed that
energy and climate change policy communities are confronted
with a major challenge in the form of shaping a substantially
de-carbonized future. This necessitates a better understanding
of the links between technologies and the institutions in which
they are imbedded (Geels, 2004).

716

Chapter 12

The important questions refer to the factors that impede
transitions and, of particular interest to policy communities,
how transitions could be induced. Socio-technical systems
are often characterized by technological lock-in and path
dependency. Actors and organizations become imbedded in
interdependent networks and mutual dependencies (Walker,
2000; Berkhout, 2002; Geels, 2004). Elzen and Wieczorek
(2005) outline options for inducing innovation under different
governance paradigms – the top-down, command-and-control
approach (state) a market model, or through policy networks
(processes, interactions, networks). Geels (2004) and Smith
(2003) approach the same question from a different perspective,
both concluding that radical innovations are nurtured in ‘niches’.
Thus: “Climate change, for instance, is currently putting
pressure on energy and transport sectors, triggering changes in
technical search heuristics and public policies” (Geels, 2004).
Berkhout (2002) offers that substantial commitment is required
from governments and businesses to invoke transitions.
While the literature on transition theory is vague on how
to induce innovations, such as those that might bring about
a shift onto a more sustainable development path. It usefully
emphasizes the importance of interactions among actors/
organizations, technology, and institutions. For a shift to a more
sustainable path, Smith (2003) provides an important reminder
that technical change has traditionally occurred in the context
of economic growth. Sustainable development, he suggests,
implies that “the problem ordering shifts subtly yet profoundly”,
which will establish new challenges in achieving “publicly
managed transitions towards environmentally sustainable
technological regimes” (Smith, 2003). In the context of climate
change, acknowledged in the literature on transition theory as an
impetus for technological innovation, this challenge needs to be
addressed; this will require new approaches to the governance
of technological change and innovation (Berkhout, 2002; Elzen
and Wieczorek, 2005).
12.2.3.5	 Policy implications
The discussion above implies that actors and actor coalitions
are important and that there is increasing evidence of multilevel patterns of governance and transnational networks of
influence on climate change and other global environmental
issues. These networks join actors across organizational
boundaries; business representatives and environmental nongovernmental organization activists may join shareholders,
government policy communities and scientists to promote (or
stall) action (Haas, 1990; Levy and Newell, 2000; Fairhead and
Leach, 2003; Paterson et al., 2003; Biermann and Dingwerth,
2004; Haas, 2004; Levy and Newell, 2005). Also, local and
regional governments are increasingly active and may provide
an invaluable testing ground and experience with mitigation
policy in key areas, such as transportation (Betsill and Bulkeley,
2004; Lindseth, 2004; Bulkeley and Betsill, 2005). This suggests
that policy-makers could do a number of things differently to
promote understanding of climate change and agreement on

Chapter 12	

policy responses to climate change:
•	 Create ‘policy spaces’ for non-state actors, scientists, and
experts to interact with government actors; actively facilitate
interactions between experts and other stakeholders to build
trust, understanding and support for action across a wide
range of actors (Ostrom, 1990; Ostrom, 2000; Stern, 2000;
Banuri and Najam, 2002; Ostrom et al., 2002). Such activity
would provide benefits if built from the bottom-up (building
on experience and viewpoints from an increasingly active
municipal and community level set of response) and from
the top-down (working across elites in government or in
scientific/expert and other NGO circles).
•	 Institutionalize opportunities for public debate and wider
interactions within the public sphere on environmental issues
(Renn, 2001; Bulkeley and Mol, 2003; De Marchi, 2003;
Liberatore and Funtowicz, 2003). By creating the means
for dialogue and collaboration to construct understanding
about global environmental change, participants have
the opportunity to formulate views – talk leads to value
formation – which can ultimately generate public support
for political action (Dietz and Stern, 1995; Dietz, 2003).
•	 Encourage and facilitate local action and experimentation
– where local communities have the potential to work
more closely with affected stakeholders and tailor response
strategies to the community’s values and norms (Cash and
Moser, 2000). Local action on climate change interacts
with governance and action taken at different scales (e.g.,
at national and international levels; Bulkeley and Betsill,
2005).
Domestic policy processes influence international policy
opportunities and constraints on climate change (Fisher, 2004).
Any domestic policy process will necessarily be working
to develop a position with input across the range of actors,
for example, market, state, civil society and science/expert
communities (Hajer, 1995; SLG, 2001; Fisher, 2004). How
this plays out will, to some extent, be influenced by different
cultural and social biases in governance at the domestic level
(e.g., whether science and business have a privileged role in
the policy process; the access and influence of environmental
organizations; how coalitions of actors across these groups
interact with the policy process). On issues of global
environmental change, scientists and other experts necessarily
play a privileged role to advise governments (Jasanoff, 1990;
Giddens, 1991; Beck, 1992; Yearley, 1994; Jasanoff and Wynne,
1998), forming what Haas (1990; 2004) has referred to as
transnational epistemic communities or networks of influence.
Given large uncertainties, global environmental change science
argues for policy processes that give a central role to public
deliberation about the issues – to facilitate common framings
about the problem and eventual agreement on responses
(Funtowicz and Ravetz, 1993; Hajer and Wagenaar, 2003; Stern
and Fineberg, 1996).
Ultimately, devising effective climate change mitigation
strategies depends on good governance practices, which is

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

the essence of sustainable development, for example, wholeof-government decision-making; synergies among economic,
environmental and social policies; coalition-building; political
leadership; integrated approaches; and policy coherence.
12.2.4	 Opportunities at the sectoral level to change
development pathways towards lower
emissions through development policies
The multiplicity of plausible development paths ahead are
underlined in Section 12.2.1, in which low emissions are not
necessarily associated with low economic growth (Section
12.2.2). However, the vast literature on governance indicates
that changing development pathways can rarely be imposed
from the top: it requires the coordination of multiple actors, at
multiple scales (Section 12.2.3).
On this basis, examples of opportunities to change
development pathways towards lower emissions at the sectoral
level are presented in Section 12.2.4. Firstly, opportunities
in major sectors are reviewed: energy (Section 12.2.4.1);
transportation and urban planning (Section 12.2.4.2); rural
development (Section 12.2.4.3); and macro-economy and trade
(Section 12.2.4.4). Some general lessons are drawn in Section
12.2.4.5. The potential for action on non-climate policies in
major sectors is summarized in Section 12.2.4.4, and some
insights on how climate considerations could be mainstreamed
into non-climate policies in Section 12.2.4.7.
In reviewing how individual policies not intended for climate
mitigation impact GHG emissions, examples are drawn from
policies already adopted and implemented, and from forwardlooking analysis to estimate the impact of future non-climate
policies on emissions. However, few case studies directly
analyze the link between a given policy and GHG emissions,
and these are mostly in the energy sector.
In fact, assessing the impact of specific policies on GHG
emissions, even ex post, is difficult for at least four reasons.
First, policy packages usually encompass a wide range of
measures, making it difficult to disentangle their individual
effects. Second, absent command-and-control policies, or cases
in which the emission-producing sectors are directly controlled
by governments, public policies are only one of many incentives
that decision-makers react to (see also Section 12.2.3). Third,
indirect effects of policies on emissions, such as increased
demand induced by energy efficiency programmes, are even
more difficult to evaluate. And last, there is rarely a control
group on the basis of which carbon savings can be evaluated.
To make up for the scarce literature on the relationships
between policies and emissions, studies of the relationships
between policies and proxies and/or key determinants of GHG
emissions are also included in the review, for example, studies
linking land-use policies with deforestation rate. This allows
examples to be drawn from a wider range of sectors, namely
717

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

energy, transportation and construction, rural development, as
well as from macro-economic and trade policies. The depth
of the literature, however, is variable across sectors. Finally,
the examples below are intended to discuss the relationships
between given policies and GHG emissions, and not the pros
and cons of each policy.
12.2.4.1	 Energy
The implications of four broad categories of energy
policies on emissions are discussed: provision of affordable
energy services to the poor; liberalization; energy efficiency;
and energy security. Policies that support the penetration of
renewable energy - which are often introduced for non-climate
reasons, but are also obvious tools for climate mitigation in the
energy sector - are discussed in Section 4.5.
Access to Energy: Access to energy is critical for the
provision of basic services such as lighting, cooking,
refrigeration, telecommunication, education, transportation
or mechanical power (Najam et al., 2003). Yet, an estimated
2.4 billion people rely on wood, charcoal or dung for cooking,
and 1.6 billion are without access to electricity (IEA, 2004c).
Providing access to commercial fuel and efficient stoves
would have highly positive impacts on human development
by reducing child mortality, improving maternal health, and
freeing up time used to collect fuel wood, especially for women
and girls (Najam and Cleveland, 2003; Modi et al., 2006). For
example, indoor air pollution, mainly from cooking and heating
from solid fuels, is responsible for 36% of all lower respiratory
infections and 22% of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease
(WHO, 2002). See also Chapter 4 and Chapter 6. It is estimated
that a shift from crop residues to LPG, kerosene, ethanol gel,
or biogas could decrease indoor air pollution by approximately
95% (Smith et al., 2000). The impact on GHG emissions
depends on the nature of the biomass resources and the carbon
intensity of the replacement. Providing reliable access to
electricity would also have highly positive impacts on human
development, by providing preconditions for the development
of new economic and social activities, for example, allowing
for education activities at night and employment generating
business initiatives (World Bank, 1994; Karekezi and Majoro,
2002; Spalding-Fecher et al., 2002; Toman and Jemelkova,
2003).
The implications of improved access to commercial fuels for
cooking on GHG emissions are ambiguous. On the one hand,
emissions increase, albeit by a small amount globally. Smith
(2002) estimates that providing LPG as fuel for roughly two
billion households would increase global GHG emissions by
about 2%. On the other hand, unsustainable use of fuelwood and
related deforestation decreases. For example, the ‘butanization’
programmes adopted in Senegal in 1974 to support LPG use
through a combination of subsidies to LPG, support for the
development for stoves suitable for local conditions and removal
of tax on imported equipment, is estimated to have resulted in
718

Chapter 12

a 33-fold increase in LPG use, and in a 15% drop of charcoal
consumption (Davidson and Sokona, 2002). Similarly, the
implications of electrification programmes for GHG emissions
are ambiguous. Energy demand is likely to increase as a result
of easier access and induced economic benefits. However,
emissions per unit of energy consumed might decrease,
depending on the relative carbon content of the fuel used in
the baseline (typically kerosene) and of the electricity newly
provided (de Gouvello and Maigne, 2000). Public policies have
a strong influence on this technology choice. In some cases, the
technology is set directly by public decision-makers. But even
where left to private entities, public policies, such as the choice
between centralized or decentralized models of electrification,
or the nature of the fiscal system, strongly constrain technology
choices.
One example of such indirect impact is documented by
Colombier and Hourcade (1989). They found that the “equal
price of electricity for all” principle embedded in French law
has generated vast implicit subsidies from urban to rural areas
and discouraged, over time, the development of cost-effective
decentralized electrification alternatives to grid expansion. The
expanded grid the country is locked into, however, is the source
of very high maintenance and upgrading costs to accommodate
increased demand from rural households and companies – much
higher than would have occurred had decentralized solutions
been implemented at the onset. The implications for GHG
emissions (not studied in the paper) are probably limited given
the share of nuclear power in France. But similar dynamics
could have more important GHG emissions implications in
countries with fossil-fuel dominated power grids.
Liberalization: Many countries have embarked on
liberalization of their energy sector over the past two decades.
These programmes with the objective to reduce costs and
improve efficiency of energy services include privatization
of the energy producers, separation between production and
transmission activities, liberalization of energy markets, and
lifting restrictions on capital flows in the sector. Overall,
liberalization programmes aim at improving the efficiency of the
energy sector, and should, therefore, lead to reduced emissions
per unit of output. Effective privatization programmes, however,
differ markedly from country to country (Kessides, 2004),
depending on prior institutional arrangements. In addition,
privatization programmes are often sequentia. See, for example,
Jannuzzi (2005) for a discussion on how the Brazilian regulator
progressively adapted policies to elicit sufficient resources for
energy efficiency and R&D from private utilities. These policies
are often ‘incomplete’, in the sense that former public power
generators remain dominant by combining features from both
the public and private sector, an outcome very different from the
ideal private energy markets (Victor and Heller, 2007: see also
Section 12.2.3.1). It may, therefore, not be surprising that there
is little literature drawing general lessons on the implications of
privatization programmes on GHG emissions.

Chapter 12	

A great deal of literature, however, deals with the emission
implications of some components of privatization programmes,
particularly removal of energy subsidies. Energy subsidies
removal may also be adopted as a stand-alone policy, independent
from privatization. Conversely, subsidies may remain even
within competitive markets. Government subsidies in the global
energy sector are in the order of US$ 250-300 billion per year,
of which around 2-3% support renewable energy (De Moor,
2001). Removing subsidies on energy has well-documented
economic benefits. It frees up financial resources for other uses
and discourages overuse of natural resources (UNEP, 2004). But,
reducing energy subsidies might have important distributional
effects, notably on the poor, if not accompanied by appropriate
compensation mechanisms. The impact of policies to reduce
energy subsidies on CO2 emissions is expected to be positive
in most cases, as higher prices trigger lower demand for energy
and induce energy conservation. For example, econometric
analyses have shown that price liberalization in Eastern Europe
during the period 1992-1999 was an important driver of the
decrease in energy intensity in the industrial sector (Cornillie
and Fankhauser, 2002). Similarly, removal of energy subsidies
has been identified as instrumental in reducing GHG emissions
compared with the baseline in China and India over the past 20
years (Chandler et al., 2002). Overall, an OECD study showed
global CO2emissions could be reduced by more than 6% and
real income increased by 0.1% by 2010, if support mechanisms
on fossil fuels used by industry and the power generation
sector were removed (OECD, 2002). Yet subsidies removal
may actually result in increased emissions in cases where
poor consumers are forced off-grid and back to highly carbon
intensive fuels, such as non-sustainable charcoal or diesel
generators. For example, removal of the subsidies for LPG in
Senegal under the ‘butanization’ programmes discussed above
is expected to increase charcoal and unsustainable fuelwood use
(Deme, 2003). For additional discussion on energy subsidies,
see Section 4.5.1 and Section 6.8.3.2 and Section 13.2.1.5.
Energy Efficiency: Policies that increase energy efficiency
– both on the demand and on the supply side – are pursued to
reduce demand for energy without affecting, or while increasing,
output at very low costs. This is the case even though some of
the direct efficiency gains might be offset by increased demand
due to lower energy costs per unit of output. Efficiency also
increases competitiveness, relaxes supply constraints and,
therefore, enhances the range of policy options and space,
and lowers expenditure on energy thereby freeing up more
resources for other development goals. The impact on CO2
emissions, in turn, tends to be positive, but depends heavily on
the carbon content of the energy supply. For example, Brazil
National Electricity Conservation Program (PROCEL), created
in 1985, has saved an estimated 12.9 TWh and an estimated
R$ 2.6 billion from 1986 to 1997. This is 25 times as much

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

as the amount invested in the programmes, while reducing
emissions by an estimated 3.6 Mt CO2 over the same period
of time (La Rovere and Americano, 1999; Szklo et al., 2005).
Similarly, Palmer et al. (2004) estimate that the annual energy
savings generated by all current Demand-Side Management
programmes (DSM) in the USA represent about 6% of the
country’s non-transportation energy consumption. This leads
to reductions in CO2 emissions equivalent to (at most) 3.5%
of the country’s total. DSM programmes are also discussed in
Section 6.8.3.1 and Section 5.5.1.Over the period 1973-1998,
the International Energy Agency (IEA, 2004b) estimates that
energy efficiency - driven both by policies and by autonomous
technical improvements - have resulted in energy savings
corresponding to almost 50% of 1998 energy consumption
levels. Without these savings, energy use (and CO2 emissions)
in 1998 would have been almost 50% higher than observed.
Energy Security: Energy security is broadly defined as
ensuring long-term security of energy supply at reasonable
prices to support the domestic economy. This is a major concern
for Governments worldwide, and it has taken new prominence
in recent years with the political instability in the Middle East,
increased oil prices, and tensions over gas in Europe (Dorian et
al., 2006; Turton and Barreto, 2006). Energy security concerns,
however, can translate into very different policies depending
on national and historical circumstances (Helm, 2002). Their
impact on carbon emissions is ambiguous, depending on the
nature of the policies and, in particular, on the fuel sources being
favoured. For example, in response to the first oil shock, Brazil
launched in 1975 the National Alcohol Fuel Program (PROALCOOL) to increase the production of sugarcane ethanol as
a substitute for oil, at a time when Brazil was importing about
80% of its oil supply. The programmes resulted in reduction
of oil imports and expenditure of foreign currency and job
creation, as well as in large emission reductions, estimated at 1.5
Mt CO2/yr (Szklo et al., 2005). Brazil also provides an example
where emissions actually increased as a result of energy security
considerations. During the 1990s, Brazil faced lack of public
and private investment in the expansion of the power system
(both generation and transmission) and a growing supplydemand imbalance, which culminated in electricity shortage
and rationing in 2001. This situation forced the country to install
and run emergency fossil-fuel plants, which led to a substantial
increase in GHG emissions from the power sector in 2001
(Geller et al., 2004). Hourcade and Kostopoulo (1994) show
how reactions to the first oil shock by France, Italy, Germany,
and Japan led to very different emissions with relatively similar
economic outcomes (see Box 12.5).

5	 PRO-ALCOOL was also a way of assisting the domestic sugar industry at times of low international sugar prices.

719

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

Chapter 12

Box 12.5: Differentiated reactions to the first oil shock in France, Italy, Germany and Japan
An example of how different development paths can unfold in relatively similar countries is given by Hourcade and Kostopoulou (1994) for France, Italy, Germany, and Japan - countries with similar levels of GDP per capita in 1973 – in their response to
the first oil shock. France moved aggressively to develop domestic supply of nuclear energy and a new building code. Japan
made an aggressive shift of its industry towards less energy-intensive activities and simultaneously used its exchange-rate
policies to alleviate the burden of oil purchases. Germany built industrial exports to compensate the trade balance deficit
in the energy sector. Much of the variations of CO2 emissions per unit of GDP from 1971 to 1990 can be attributed to these
choices (Figure 12.1 left). Yet, while this indicator diminished by half in France, by a third in Japan, and ‘only’ by a quarter in
Germany (IEA 2004b).
120

index 1971 = 100

200

index 1971 = 100

180

100
Italy

Japan

Japan

80

160
Italy

France

60

Germany

40
20
1971

140

1975

1980

1985

France
Germany

120

1990

100
1971

1975

1980

1985

1990

Figure 12.1: (left) CO2 emissions from fossil-fuel combustion per unit of GDP; (right) Evolution of GDP per capita
Note: GDP in US$ in constant prices at market exchange rates.
Source: IEA, 2004a

Hourcade and Kostopoulou (1994) also observe that the macro-economic performance of these countries was relatively
comparable between 1973 and 1990 (Figure 12.1 right), suggesting that widely different environmental outcome can be
obtained at similar welfare costs in the long-run. In addition, they observe that the responses were for a large part driven by
the country’s pre-existing technologies and institutions (thus providing an illustration of the general observations about decision-making made in Section 12.2.3.1).

12.2.4.2	 Transportation and urban planning
Transportation is a key development issue. Transportation
is also one of the fastest growing end-use sectors in terms of
CO2 emissions in both the developed and the developing world.
The level of these emissions results from the combination of
the distances travelled by goods and people, and the set of
technologies used to make these journeys. Demand for and
supply of transportation are largely inelastic in the short-term,
but become elastic in the longer run as people and activities
change location, as new infrastructure is developed and as
preferences evolve. A very wide array of policies affects these
long-term dynamics. The set of transportation technologies
available at time, and their relative costs, are also influenced by
public policies.

ultimately emissions from the transport sector are discussed in
this section: one of congestion policy, one of urban planning
at city level, and the other of national policy driving urban
planning. The first example is from the City of London,
where a congestion charge was introduced in February 2003
to reduce congestion. Simultaneously, investment in public
transport was increased. Early results suggest that congestion
in the charging zone has reduced by 30% during the charging
hours, that CO2 emissions have been reduced by 20%, and that
primary emissions of NOx and PM10 have been reduced by 16%
(Transport for London, 2005). However, the cost-benefit ratio of
the operation is questioned (Prud’homme and Bocarejo, 2005;
Santos and Fraser, 2006). Other examples of how non-climate
transportation policies can impact on emissions are given in
Section 5.5.

Three examples of how public policy choices affect
transportation supply, transportation demand, technology, and

The second example is the development and steady
implementation of an integrated urban planning programme in

720

Chapter 12	

the city of Curitiba (Brazil) from 1965 onwards. This has allowed
the city to grow eight-fold from 1950 to 1990, while maintaining
75% of commute travel by bus – a much higher public transport
modal share than in other big Brazilian cities (57% in Rio,
45% in São Paulo) – as well as little congestion. As a result,
Curitiba uses 25% less fuel than cities of similar population
and socio-economic characteristics. Two characteristics of
the programmes seem to have contributed particularly to its
success: (i) integration of infrastructure and land-use planning;
and (ii) the consistency with which successive municipal
administrations have implemented the plan over nearly three
decades (Rabinovitch and Leitman, 1993).
The third example concerns urban planning in the United
States and Europe (and Japan), the latter being on average
rather compact while the former exhibit important sprawl.
Nivola (1999) notes that this difference cannot be explained
only by differences in demography, geography, technology or
income. He argues that the combination of public choices is
responsible for most of the differences in urban sprawl between
the USA and Europe. Such policies include: (1) a bias towards
public financing of roads to the detriment of other modes of
transportation in the USA - against a more balanced approach in
Europe; (2) dedicated revenues for highway construction in the
USA - against funds drawn from general revenues in Europe; (3)
lower taxes on gasoline in the USA than in Europe; (4) housing
policies more geared towards supporting new homes: (5) a tax
system more in favour of homeowners in the USA; (6) lower
support from the federal government to local governments in the
USA than in Europe; and (7) the quasi-absence of regulations
favouring small in-city outlets against shopping malls in the
USA. In turn, this difference in urban planning generates widely
different transport demand, energy consumption (Newman
and Kenworthy, 1991), and CO2 emissions. Per capita CO2
emissions from travel in the USA are nearly three times as high
as in major European countries, due mostly to a larger number
of journeys per capita and a higher energy intensity (Schipper
et al., 2001). A key point in the analysis made by Nivola (1999)
is that most of these consequences were totally unintended, as
these policies were adopted for non-transportation reasons (let
alone for emissions reasons).
12.2.4.3	 Agriculture and forestry
Vast arrays of policies affect the emissions of the agriculture
and forestry sectors, and the emissions or the sequestration
rate from biomass and soils. An extensive list of non-climate
policies that impact on CO2, CH4 and N2O emissions from
the agriculture sector are presented in Chapter 8 (Tables 8.10
and 8.11). The list includes sectoral policies designed to
reach environmental goals other than climate change, such as
biodiversity conservation or watershed protections; agricultural
policies designed to reach non-environmental goals, such
as increasing exports of agricultural products or securing
farmers’ income; and non-agricultural policies with impact
on the agriculture sector, such as energy price reforms. For

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

example, the 2003 EU Common Agricultural Policies reform,
by decoupling subsidies from production targets, is likely to
lead to reduced on-farm CO2 and N2O emissions (see Table
8.10). In fact, changes in the Common Agricultural Policy from
1997 to 2001 (in intervention prices, in per-hectare support to
grains and oilseeds, as in milk quotas and livestock subsidies)
are estimated to have resulted in a 4% decline of agricultural
sector emissions in Europe over that period (De Cara et al.,
2005).
If the direct emissions of the forestry sector are small, the
emissions/uptake related to land conversion from/to forests are
extremely large (see Chapter 9). In addition, emissions/uptake
related to changes in the quality of existing forests, to the use
of forest products in carbon stocks, and to bioenergy are very
large. Policies affecting land use and land-use change, policies
affecting the substitution between wood-based and other
products, and policies related to bioenergy are thus likely to
have strong implications for the net emissions from forests and
forest products.
The causes of deforestation have been studied specifically.
They differ from regions to regions and depend on the interaction
of cultural, demographic, economic, technological, political and
institutional issues (e.g., Angelsen and Kaimowitz, 1999; Geist
and Lambim, 2002). In all cases, the drivers of deforestation
are strongly affected by policy decisions. For example, rural
road construction or improvement tend to encourage future
deforestation (Chomitz and Gray, 1996; Chomitz, 2007), yet
may have positive economic implications by providing better
access to markets and basic services for remote population
in developing countries (Jacoby, 2000). Similarly, agriculture
intensification policies have potentially important but ambiguous
effects on deforestation. On the one hand, intensification
increases the productivity of existing agricultural land and
lowers the pressure on forests. On the other, it could also trigger
migration and it might, in fact, increase deforestation. Careful
design of agriculture intensification policies is thus necessary
to avoid unintended outcome on deforestation (Angelsen and
Kaimowitz, 2001).
A third example concerns a macro-economic policy decision:
the devaluation of Brazil currency in 1999, which fell by 50%
against the US dollar. Coupled with an increase of soybean
prices on the international market, increased the value of
soybean and beef production in the country - notably in the state
of Mato Grosso – triggered massive increase in production and
massive deforestation of cerrado forests. In fact, a third of total
deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon between 1999 and 2003
occurred in Mato Grosso (Chomitz, 2007).
12.2.4.4	

Macro-economy and trade

Macro-economic policies such as exchange rate policies,
fiscal policies, government budget deficits, or trade policies may
have profound impacts on the environment, even though they
721

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

are designed for other purposes. This link has been extensively
studied in the past decades, notably in the context of the evaluation
of structural adjustment programmes in developing countries. A
key finding from this literature is that the relationship between
macro-economic policies and the environment are often
complex and country-specific, and depend on whether or not
other market or institutional imperfections persist (Munasinghe
and Cruz, 1995; Gueorguieva and Bolt, 2003). No case studies
discuss the impact of structural adjustment on GHG emissions,
but some discuss the relationship between structural adjustment
and deforestation and thus, by extension, GHG emissions from
land-use change. Again, the effects depend on the mix of policies
adopted as part of the structural adjustment programmes, and
of country-specific characteristics. For example, Kaimovitz
et al. (1999) report that the structural adjustment programmes
implemented in Bolivia in 1985 strongly increased profitability
of soybean production, and led to massive deforestation in
soybean producing areas. Symmetrically, Benhin and Barbier
(2004) find that a structural adjustment programmes implemented
in Ghana in 1983 led to a reduction of deforestation linked to
extension of cocoa culture because, among others, of increased
producer price for cocoa, higher availability of inputs, and other
measures aimed at rehabilitating existing cocoa farms. Another
channel through which structural adjustment programmes could
impact on deforestation is through the timber market. Pandey
and Wheeler (2001) analyse cross-country data on the markets
for wood products in countries where World Bank supported
adjustment programmes were implemented. They find that these
programmes greatly affect imports, exports, consumption and
production in many forest product sectors, but that the impacts
on deforestation tend to cancel out. If domestic deforestation
does not increase, however, imports of wood products do,
suggesting increased pressures on forest in other countries.
Finally, as also noted above, Pandey and Wheeler (2001) find
that currency devaluation strongly increases the exploitation of
forest resources.
Among macro-economic policies, trade policies have
attracted particular attention in recent years, due to the fact
that international trade has increased dramatically over the
past decades. There is a general consensus that, in the longrun, openness to trade is beneficial for economic growth.
However, the pace of openness, and how to cope with social
consequences of trade policies are subject to much controversy
(Winters et al., 2004). Trade has multiple implications for GHG
emissions. First, increased demand for transportation of goods
and people generates emissions. For example, freight transport
now represents more than a third of the total energy use in the
transportation sector (see Section 5.2.1). Secondly, trade allows
countries to partially ‘de-link’ consumption from emissions,
since some goods and services are produced abroad, with
opposite implications for the importing and exporting countries.
For example, Welsch (2001) shows that foreign demand for
German goods accounts for nearly a third of the observed
structural changes in the composition of output and decrease
in emissions intensity of West Germany over the period 1985722

Chapter 12

1990. At the other end, Machado et al. (2001) report that inflows
and outflows of carbon embodied in the international trade of
non-energy goods in Brazil accounted for some 10% and 14%,
respectively, of the total carbon emissions from energy use of the
Brazilian economy in 1995. And the game is often not zero-sum,
when production technologies are less carbon-efficient in the
exporting country than in the importing one. For example, Shui
and Harriss (2006) estimate that USA-China trade represents
between 7% and 14% of China’s total CO2 emissions, and that
USA-China trade increases world emissions by an average of
100 MtCO2-eq per year over the period 1997-2003 because
of higher emissions per kWh and less efficient manufacturing
technologies in China. Finally, policies favourable to trade
have been accused of favouring the relocation of companies to
‘pollution heavens’ where environmental constraint would be
lower. Empirical analysis, however, do not confirm the ‘race to
the bottom’ hypothesis (Wheeler, 2001). See also Section 11.7.
12.2.4.5	 Some general insights on the opportunities to
change development pathways at the sectoral level
Although the examples discussed above are very diverse,
some general patterns emerge. First, in any given country,
sectors where effective production is far below the maximum
feasible production with the same amount of inputs – sectors that
are far away from their production frontier – have opportunities
to adopt ‘win-win-win’ policies. Such policies free up resources
and bolster growth, meet other sustainable development goals,
and also, incidentally, reduce GHG emissions relative to
baseline. Among the examples discussed above, the removal of
energy subsidies in economies in transition, or the mitigation of
urban pollution in highly polluted cities in the developing world
pertain to the ‘win-win-win’ category. Of course, these policies
may have winners and losers, but compensation mechanisms
can be designed to make no-one worse off in the process.
Conversely, sectors where production is close to the optimal
given available inputs – sectors that are closer to the production
frontier – also have opportunities to reduce emissions by meeting
other sustainable development goals. However, the closer to
the production frontier, the more trade-offs are likely to appear.
For example, as discussed above, diversifying energy supply
sources in a country where the energy system is already costefficient might be desirable for energy security reasons and/or
for local or global environmental reasons. But it might come at
a cost to the country if, for example, diversification involves
more expensive technologies or more risky investments (Dorian
et al., 2006).
Third, in many of the examples reviewed above, what
matters is not only that a ‘good’ choice is made at a certain
time, but also that the initial policy has persisted for a long
period – sometimes several decades – to truly have effects.
The comparison between the development of European and
USA cities since the end of World War II is a case in point. The
reason is that some of the key dynamics for GHG emissions,

Chapter 12	

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

such as technological development or land-use patterns, present
a lot of inertia, and thus need sustained effort to be re-oriented.
This raises deep institutional questions about the possibility
of governments to make credible long-term commitments,
particularly in democratic societies where policy-makers are in
place only for short spans of time (Stiglitz, 1998).
A fourth element that stems from some of the examples
outlined above is that often not one policy decision but an
array of decisions are necessary to influence emissions. This
is especially true when considering large-scale and complex
dynamics such as the structure of cities or the dynamics of
land-use. This raises, in turn, important issues of coordination
between policies in several sectors, and at various scales.
Fifth, as already emphasized in Section 12.2.3, institutions
are significant in determining how a given policy or a given
set of policies ultimately impact on GHG emissions (World
Bank, 2003). For example, the differentiated reactions of Japan,
Italy, Germany and France to the first oil shock can be traced to
differences in institutions, relative power of different influence
groups, and political cultures (Hourcade and Kostopoulou,
1994).
12.2.4.6	

Mainstreaming climate change into development
choices: Setting priorities

As highlighted in Sections 12.2.4.1 to 12.2.4.5, development
policies in various sectors can have strong impacts on GHG
emissions. The operational question is how to harness that
potential. How can climate change mitigation considerations be
mainstreamed into development policies.
Mainstreaming means that development policies,
programmes and/or individual actions that otherwise would
not have taken climate change mitigation into consideration
explicitly include these when making development choices.
This makes development more sustainable.
The ease or difficulty with which mainstreaming is
accomplished will depend on both the mitigation technology
or practice, and the underlying development path. No-regrets
energy efficiency options, for instance, are likely to be easier to
implement (and labelled as climate change mitigation actions)
than others that have higher direct cost, require coordination
among stakeholders, and/or require a trade-off against other
environmental, and social and economic benefits. Weighing
other development benefits against climate benefits will be a
key basis for choosing development sectors for mainstreaming
climate change considerations. In some cases, it may even be
rational to disregard climate change considerations because of
an action’s other development benefits (Smith, 2002).
Development policies, such as electricity privatization, can
increase emissions if they result in construction of natural gas
power plants in place of hydroelectric power for instance, but

they can reduce emissions if coal power plants are not built.
Judicious and informed choices will be needed when pursuing
development policies in order to ensure that GHG emissions are
reduced and not increased (see above). This section considers
which sectors should receive priority for mainstreaming climate
change mitigation into development choices; what sectors are
better off not pursuing mainstreaming; and which stakeholders
might have a bigger stake and voice in mainstreaming. The
next section considers concrete ways to mainstream mitigation
considerations into development choices.
Prioritizing requires that the current and future associated
emissions of the targeted sector and the mitigation potential of
the non-climate sustainable development action be estimated.
Policy-makers can then weigh the emissions reduction potential
against other sustainability aspects of the action in choosing
the appropriate policy to implement. In order to implement
such an approach, empirical analyses are needed to estimate
future associated emissions and current and future mitigation
potential of development actions. Few, if any, global analyses
provide complete guidance of this type. In light of the lack of
empirical analyses, associated emissions for selected sectors in
which development actions may be pursued are presented. This
provides an initial guide in ranking sustainable development
actions. A more complete analysis is needed, however, which
would require the estimation of future associated emissions,
and current and future mitigation potential of sustainable
development actions.
Selected examples of CO2 emissions associated with sectors
where sustainable development actions could be implemented
are presented in Table 12.3. These are described below:
Emissions associated with selected sectors:
•	 Macro-economy: Through fiscal tax and subsidy policies,
public finance can play an important role in reducing
emissions. Rational energy pricing based on long-runmarginal-cost principle can level the playing field for
renewables, increase the spread of energy efficient and
renewable energy technologies, improve the economic
viability of utility companies, and can reduce GHG emissions.
Non-climate taxes/subsidies and other fiscal instruments
can impact the entire global fossil fuel emissions of CO2,
which amounted to about 51 GtCO2-eq in 2004. Those that
directly reduce fossil fuel use could be easily relabelled and
mainstreamed as climate taxes, but others, for example a tax
on water use, would need to be evaluated for their fossil fuel
impacts and climate benefits.
•	 Forestry: Adoption of forest conservation and sustainable
forest management practices can contribute to conservation
of biodiversity, watershed protection, rural employment
generation, increased incomes to forest dwellers and carbon
sink enhancement. The forestry sector emissions show a
high and low range to signal the uncertainty in estimates of
deforestation. A best estimate value is about 7% of global
emissions in 2004 (see Table 12.3). There are many country723

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

Chapter 12

Table: 12.3: Mainstreaming climate change into development choices - selected examples

Selected sectors

Non-climate policy
instruments and actions
that are candidates for
mainstreaming

Primary decision-makers
and actors

Global greenhouse gas
emissions by sector that
could be addressed by nonclimate policies (% of global
GHG emissions)a,d

Comments

Macro-economy

Implement non-climate
taxes/subsidies and/or
other fiscal and regulatory
policies that promote
sustainable development

State (governments at all
levels)

100

Total global GHG
emissions

Combination of
economic, regulatory, and
infrastructure non-climate
policies could be used
to address total global
emissions

Forestry

Adoption of forest
conservation and
sustainable management
practices

State (governments at all
levels) and civil society
(NGOs)

7

GHG emissions from
deforestation

Legislation/regulations to
halt deforestation, improve
forest management,
and provide alternative
livelihoods can reduce
GHG emissions
and provide other
environmental benefits

Electricity

Adoption of cost-effective
renewables, demand-side
management programmes,
and transmission and
distribution loss reduction

State (regulatory
commissions), market
(utility companies) and,
civil society (NGOs,
consumer groups)

20b

Electricity sector CO2
emissions (excluding
auto producers)

Rising share of GHGintensive electricity
generation is a global
concern that can be
addressed through nonclimate policies

Petroleum imports

Diversifying imported
and domestic fuel mix
and reducing economy’s
energy intensity to improve
energy security

State and market (fossil
fuel industry)

20b

CO2 emissions
associated with
global crude oil and
product imports

Diversification of energy
sources to address oil
security concerns could
be achieved such that
GHG emissions are not
increased

Rural energy in developing
countries

Policies to promote
rural LPG, kerosene and
electricity for cooking

State and market (utilities
and petroleum companies),
civil society (NGOs)

<2c

GHG emissions from
biomass fuel use, not
including aerosols

Biomass used for rural
cooking causes health
impacts due to indoor air
pollution, and releases
aerosols that add to global
warming. Displacing all
biomass used for rural
cooking in developing
countries with LPG would
emit 0.70 GtCO2-eq., a
relatively modest amount
compared to 2004 total
global GHG emissions

Insurance for building and
transport sectors

Differentiated premiums,
liability insurance
exclusions, improved
terms for green products

State and market
(insurance companies)

20

Transport and
building sector GHG
emissions

Escalating damages
due to climate change
are a source of concern
to insurance industry.
Insurance industry could
address these through the
types of policies noted here

International finance

Country and sector
strategies and project
lending that reduces
emissions

State (international
Financial Institutions) and
market (commercial banks)

25b

CO2 emissions from
developing countries
(non-Annex 1)

IFIs can adopt practices
so that loans for GHGintensive projects in
developing countries that
lock-in future emissions are
avoided

Notes:
a. Data from Chapter 1 unless noted otherwise.
b. CO2 emissions from fossil fuel combustion only; source: IEA, 2006.
c. CO2 emissions only. Authors estimate, see text.
d. Emissions indicate the relative importance of sectors in 2004. Sectoral emissions are not mutually exclusive and may overlap.

724

Chapter 12	

specific studies of the potential to reduce deforestation
(Chapter 9).
•	 Electricity: Adoption of cost-effective energy efficiency
technologies in electricity generation, transmission
distribution, and end-use reduce costs and local pollution
in addition to reduction of greenhouse gas emissions.
Electricity deregulation or privatization can be practised
in any country and can impact the global electricityrelated emissions which amounted to about 20% of global
emissions.
•	 Oil import security: Oil import security is important to ensure
reliable supply of fuels and electricity. Diversification of oil
imports, through increasing imported and domestic sources
oil and other energy carriers is an approach adopted by
countries concerned about energy security. The percentage
of net oil imports serves as one indicator of a country’s
energy security. The CO2 emissions associated with net oil
imports amounted to about 20% of global emissions (see
Table 12.3). Reducing oil imports as a strategy to improve
energy security thus offers a significant global opportunity to
reduce emissions. Minimizing the use of coal as a substitute,
and increasing use of less-carbon-intensive energy sources
and reducing energy intensity of the economy are options
that could be pursued to achieve this goal (IEA, 2004b).
However, heavy use of biomass as a fossil fuel substitute
may compete with other societal goals such as food security,
alleviation of hunger and conservation of biodiversity.
Example of a sector where other benefits outweigh
mainstreaming:
•	 Rural household energy use: Development of rural regions,
better irrigation and water management, rural schools,
better cook stoves in developing countries can promote
sustainable development. The emissions associated with
rural household activities, mostly derived from energy
needed for cooking and some heating, are relatively small,
however. These emissions are estimated to be between
10% and 15% of developing-country residential sector
emissions or less than 0.5% of global emissions. Rural
areas of developing countries rely primarily on traditional
bioenergy and consume comparatively small amounts of
fossil fuels. The use of improved cook stoves is one way to
reduce biomass and fossil fuel use. The worldwide amount
estimated by Smith (2002) for provision of LPG as fuel for
roughly two billion households is about 2% of global GHG
emissions. From a global perspective, Table 12.3 suggests
that smaller sectors with significant other welfare benefits
need not be burdened with having to reduce CO2 emissions
since larger gains from sustainable development actions that
address climate change mitigation are to be had elsewhere.

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

Emissions that key stakeholders can influence:
•	 International finance: While climate change mitigation is
an important component of the multilateral bank (MDB)
strategies, in practice climate change issues are not
systematically incorporated into lending for all sectors. MDBs
could explicitly integrate climate change considerations into
their guidelines for country and sector strategies, and apply
a greenhouse gas accounting framework in their operations
(Sohn et al., 2005). MDBs can directly influence their own
lending and indirectly influence the emissions of borrowing
countries. The annual emissions from World Bank-funded
energy activities alone, for instance, were estimated to range
from 0.27 to 0.32 GtCO2 (World Bank, 1999). MDBs could
directly influence more than the aforementioned amounts
once emissions associated with all lending activities of all
MDBs are counted. Indirectly, through policy dialogue and
conditionality, MDBs could influence additional emissions
from developing countries, which amounted to about 25%
of global emissions in 2004 (Table 12.3).
•	 Insurance: Buildings and transport vehicles form the bulk
of the insured activities. Emissions from these sectors
and from all international marine vessels and aircraft are
estimated to be about 20% of global emissions, giving
insurers a significant potential role in controlling emissions.
Some insurers are beginning to recognize climate-change
risks to their business (Vellinga et al., 2001; Mills, 2005).
Examples of actions may include premiums differentiated
to reflect vehicle fuel economy (this is not unique to the
buildings and/or transport sector or distance driven); liability
insurance exclusions for large emitters; improved terms to
recognize the lower risks associated with green buildings; or
new insurance products to help manage technical, regulatory,
and financial risks associated with emissions trading (Mills,
2003).
12.2.4.7	 Operationalization of mainstreaming
Though there is a considerable amount of literature on how
development policies are made (see Section12.2.3), there is
currently very limited literature on how climate mitigation
considerations could be mainstreamed into development
policies. Based on a number of Indian case studies on
integrating climate change mitigation in local development,
Heller and Shukla (2003) note operational guidelines which
can integrate development and climate policies into the future
development pathways of developing countries. In developing
countries, which by and large have not yet enacted domestic
GHG legislation, the Clean Development Mechanism can play
a role as one component of national GHG reduction strategies
and sustainable development.

6	 Bioenergy use is assumed to be GHG emissions neutral.

725

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

Based on a United States Environmental Protection Agency
(US EPA, 2006) report on best practices for implementation of
clean energy policies and programmes, Sathaye et al. (2006)
conclude that following best practices would benefit the
operationalization process: (a) commitment of publicly elected
and/or regulatory bodies; (b) involvement and support of key
stakeholders; (c) sound economic and environmental analyses
conducted using simple and transparent tools; (d) longer time
frames for programmes so that they can overcome market
and funding cycles; (e) setting annual and cumulative targets
to gage progress of mainstreaming; (f) ensuring additionality
over and above existing and other planned programmes; (g)
selection of an effective entity for implementation; (h) education
and regular training of key participants; (i) monitoring and
evaluation of mainstreaming results; and (j) maintenance of a
functional database on a project’s or programme’s sustainable
development performance.
A study of the Baltic region explores a sustainable
development pathway addressing broad environmental,
economic and social development goals, including low GHG
emissions. A majority of the population could favour - or at least
tolerate - a set of measures that change individual and corporate
behaviours to align with local and global sustainability (Raskin
et al., 1998). Kaivo-oja (2004) concludes that climate change
as such may not be a major direct threat to Finland, but the
effects of climate change on the world’s socio-economic system
and the related consequences for the Finnish system may be
considerable. The Finnish scenario analysis, which is based
on intensive expert and stakeholder involvement, suggests
that such indirect consequences have to be taken into account
in developing strategic views of possible future development
paths for administrative and business sectors.

12.3	 Implications of mitigation choices 	
for sustainable development goals
The evolution of the concept of sustainable development with
emphasis on its two-way linkage to climate change mitigation
is discussed in Section 12.1, and the link between the role of
development paths and actors or stakeholders that could make
development more sustainable by taking climate change into
consideration is explored in Section 12.2.The reverse linkages
are summarized in Section 12.3, and the literature on impacts
of climate mitigation on attributes of sustainable development
is assessed.
The sectoral chapters (Chapters 4–11) provide an overview
of the impacts of the implementation of many mitigation
technologies and practices that are being or may be deployed at
various scales in the world. In this section, the information from
the sectoral chapters is summarized and supplemented with
findings from the sustainable development literature. Synergies
with local sustainable development goals, conditions for their
726

Chapter 12

successful implementation, and trade-offs where the climate
mitigation and local sustainable development may be at odds
with each other are discussed (see overview Table 12.4). In
addition, the implications of policy instruments on sustainable
development goals are described in Section 12.3.5, with the
focus on the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM).
As documented in the sectoral chapters, mitigation options
often have positive effects on aspects of sustainability, but may
not always be sustainable with respect to all three dimensions of
sustainable development - economic, environmental and social.
For example, removing subsidies for coal increases its price and
creates unemployment of coal mine workers, independently of
the actual mitigation (IPCC, 2001). In some cases, the positive
effects on sustainability are more indirect, because they are the
results of side-effects of reducing GHG emissions. Therefore, it
is not always possible to assess the net outcome of the various
effects.
The sustainable development benefits of mitigation options
vary over sectors and regions. Generally, mitigation options that
improve productivity of resource use, whether it is energy, water,
or land, yield positive benefits across all three dimensions of
sustainable development. In the agricultural sector (Table 8.8),
for instance, improved management practices for rice cultivation
and grazing land, and use of bioenergy and efficient cooking
stoves enhance productivity, and promote social harmony and
gender equality. Other categories of mitigation options have a
more uncertain impact and depend on the wider socio-economic
context within which the option is being implemented.
Some mitigation activities, particularly in the land use sector,
have GHG benefits that may be of limited duration. A finite
amount of land area is available for forestation, for instance,
which limits the amount of carbon that a region can sequester.
And, certain practices are carried out in rotation over years and/
or across landscapes, which too limit the equilibrium amount of
carbon that can be sequestered. Thus, the incremental sustainable
development gains would reach an equilibrium condition after
some decades, unless the land yields biofuel that is used as a
substitute for fossil fuels.
The sectoral discussion below focuses on the three aspects
of sustainable development - economic, environmental, and
social. Economic implications include costs and overall
welfare. Sectoral costs of various mitigation policies have
been widely studied and a range of cost estimates are reported
for each sector at both the global and country-specific levels
in the sectoral Chapters 4 to 10. Yet, mitigation costs are
just one part of the broader economic impacts of sustainable
development . Other impacts include growth and distribution of
income, employment and availability of jobs, government fiscal
budgets, and competitiveness of the economy or sector within
a globalizing market.

Chapter 12	

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

Table 12.4: Sectoral mitigation options and sustainable development (economic, local environmental and social) considerations: synergies and trade-offs a)
Sector and mitigation
options

Potential sustainable development synergies and conditions
for implementation

Potential sustainable development tradeoffs

Energy Supply and Use: Chapters 4-7
Energy efficiency
improvement in all sectors
(buildings, transportation,
industry, and energy
supply: Chapters 4-7)

- Almost always cost-effective, reduces or eliminates local
pollutant emissions and consequent health impacts, improves
indoor comfort and reduces indoor noise level, creates business
opportunity and jobs, and improves energy security
- Government and industry programmes can help overcome lack of
information and principal agent problems
- Programmes can be implemented at all levels of government and
industry
- Important to ensure that low-income household energy needs are
given due consideration, and that the process and consequences
of implementing mitigation options are, or the result is, genderneutral

- Indoor air pollution and health impacts
of improving biomass cook stove thermal
efficiency in developing country rural areas
are uncertain

Fuel switching and
other options in the
transportation and
buildings sectors
(Chapters 5 and 6)

- CO2 reduction costs may be offset by increased health benefits
- Promotion of public transport and non-motorized transport has
large and consistent social benefits
- Switching from solid fuels to modern fuels for cooking and
heating indoors can reduce indoor air pollution and increase free
time for women in developing countries
- Institutionalizing planning systems for CO2 reduction through
coordination between national and local governments is important
for drawing up common strategies for sustainable transportation
systems

- Diesel engines are generally more fuelefficient than gasoline engines and thus
have lower CO2 emissions, but increase
particle emissions
- Other measures (CNG buses, hybrid
diesel-electric buses and taxi renovation)
may provide little climate benefits

Replacing imported
fossil fuel with domestic
alternative energy sources
(DAES: Chapter 4)

- Important to ensure that DAES is cost-effective
- Reduces local air pollutant emissions.
- Can create new indigenous industries (e.g., Brazil ethanol
programme) and hence generate employment

- Balance of trade improvement is traded
off against increased capital required for
investment
- Fossil-fuel-exporting countries may face
reduced exports
- Hydropower plants may displace local
populations and cause environmental
damages to water bodies and biodiversity

Replacing domestic
fossil fuel with imported
alternative energy sources
(IAES: Chapter 4)

- Almost always reduces local pollutant emissions
- Implementation may be more rapid than DAES
- Important to ensure that IAES is cost-effective
- Economies and societies of energy-exporting countries would
benefit

- Could reduce energy security
- Balance of trade may worsen but capital
needs may decline

Afforestation

- Can reduce wasteland, arrest soil degradation, and manage water
runoff
- Can retain soil carbon stocks if soil disturbance at planting and
harvesting is minimized
- Can be implemented as agro-forestry plantations that enhance
food production
- Can generate rural employment and create rural industry
- Clear delineation of property rights would expedite
implementation of forestation programmes

- Use of scarce land could compete with
agricultural land and diminish food security
while increasing food costs
- Monoculture plantations can reduce
biodiversity and are more vulnerable to
diseases
- Conversion of floodplain and wetland
could hamper ecological functions

Avoided deforestation

- Can retain biodiversity, water and soil management benefits, and
local rainfall patterns
- Reduce local haze and air pollution from forest fires
- If suitably managed, it can bring revenue from ecotourism and
from sustainably harvested timber sales
- Successful implementation requires involving local dwellers in
land management and/or providing them alternative livelihoods,
enforcing laws to prevent migrants from encroaching on forest
land

- Can result in loss of economic welfare for
certain stakeholders in forest exploitation
(land owners, migrant workers)
- Reduced timber supply may lead to
reduced timber exports and increased use
of GHG-intensive construction materials
- Can result in deforestation with consequent
sustainable development implications
elsewhere

Forest Management

- See afforestation

- Fertilizer application can increase N2O
production and nitrate runoff degrading
local (ground)water quality
- Prevention of fires and pests has short
term benefits but can increase fuel stock
for later fires unless managed properly

Forestry Sector: Chapter 9

727

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

Chapter 12

Table 12.4. Continued.
Sector and mitigation
options

Potential sustainable development synergies and conditions
for implementation

Potential sustainable development tradeoffs

- Mostly positive when practised with crop residues (shells, husks,
bagasse, and/or tree trimmings)
- Creates rural employment
- Planting crops/trees exclusively for bioenergy requires that
adequate agricultural land and labour is available to avoid
competition with food production

- Can have negative environmental
consequences if practised unsustainably
- biodiversity loss, water resource
competition, increased use of fertilizer and
pesticides
- Potential problem with food security
(location specific) and increased food costs

Cropland management
(management of nutrients,
tillage, residues, and agroforestry)
Cropland management
(water, rice, and set-aside)

- Improved nutrient management can improve ground water quality
and environmental health of the cultivated ecosystem

- Changes in water policies could lead
to clash of interests and threaten social
cohesiveness
- Could lead to water overuse

Grazing land management

- Improves livestock productivity, reduces desertification, and
provide social security to the poor
- Requires laws and enforcement to ban free grazing

Livestock management

- Mix of traditional rice cultivation and livestock management
would enhance incomes even in semi arid and arid regions

Bioenergy (Chapter 8 and 9)
Bioenergy production

Agriculture: Chapter 8

Waste Management: Chapter 10
Engineered sanitary
landfilling with landfill gas
recovery

- Can eliminate uncontrolled dumping and open burning of waste,
improving health and safety for workers and residents
- Sites can provide local energy benefits and public spaces
for recreation and other social purposes within the urban
infrastructure

- When done unsustainably can cause
leaching that leads to soil and groundwater
contamination with potentially negative
health impacts

Biological processes for
waste and wastewater
(composting, anaerobic
digestion, aerobic and
anaerobic wastewater
processes)

- Can destroy pathogens and provide useful soil amendments if
properly implemented using source-separated organic waste or
collected wastewater
- Can generate employment
- Anaerobic processes can provide energy benefits from CH4
recovery and use

- A source of odours and water pollution if
not properly controlled and monitored

Incineration and other
thermal processes

- Obtain the most energy benefit from waste

- Expensive relative to controlled landfilling
and composting
- Unsustainable in developing countries if
technical infrastructure not present
- Additional investment for air pollution
controls and source separation needed
to prevent emissions of heavy metals and
other air toxics

Recycling, reuse, and
waste minimization

- Provide local employment as well as reductions in energy and raw - Uncontrolled waste scavenging results in
materials for recycled products
severe health and safety problems for those
- Can be aided by NGO efforts, private capital for recycling
who make their living from waste
industries, enforcement of environmental regulations, and urban
- Development of local recycling industries
planning to segregate waste treatment and disposal activities
requires capital.
from community life.

Note:
a) Material drawn from Chapters 4 to 11. New material is referenced in the accompanying text below that describes the sustainable development
implications of mitigation options in each sector.

Environmental impacts include those occurring in local
areas on air, water, and land, including the loss of biodiversity.
Virtually all forms of energy supply and use, and land-use
change activity cause some level of environmental damage.
GHG emissions are often directly related to the emissions of
other pollutants, either airborne, for example, sulphur dioxide
728

from burning coal which causes local or indoor air pollution,
or waterborne, for example, from leaching of nitrates from
fertilizer application in intensive agriculture.
The social dimension includes issues such as gender
equality, governance, equitable income distribution, housing

Chapter 12	

and education opportunity, health impacts, and corruption. Most
mitigation options will impact one or more of these issues, and
both benefits and trade-offs are likely.
12.3.1	 Energy supply and use
Mitigation options in the energy sector may be classified
into those that improve energy efficiency and those that reduce
the use of carbon-intensive fuels. The latter may be further
classified into domestic and imported fuels. The synergies and
trade-offs of these options with economic, local environmental,
and social sustainable development goals are presented in Table
12.4. In the case of energy efficiency, it is generally thought to
be cost effective and its use reduces or eliminates local pollutant
emissions. Improving energy efficiency is thus a desirable
option in every energy demand and supply sector.
As noted in Section 12.1.3, over the last decade, quantification
of progress towards sustainable development has gained
ground. In the industrial sector, several trade associations
provide platforms for organizing and implementing GHG
mitigation programmes. Chapter 7 notes that performance
indicators are being used by the aluminium, semiconductor,
and cement industry to measure and report progress towards
sustainable development. The Global Reporting Initiative
(GRI), a UNEP Collaborating Centre initiative, for example,
reports that over 700 companies worldwide make voluntary
use of its Sustainability Reporting Guidelines for reporting
their sustainable development achievements. Industrial sectors
with high environmental impacts lead in reporting and 85%
of the reports address progress on climate change (GRI,
2005), and (KPMG Global Sustainability Services, 2005).
Another example is in the buildings sector. Several thousand
commercial buildings have been certified by the USA Green
Building Council’s programme on Leadership in Energy and
Environmental Design (LEED), which uses 69 criteria to award
certificates at various levels of achievement. The certification
ensures that a building meets largely quantitative criteria related
to energy use, indoor air quality, materials and resource use,
water efficiency, and innovation and design process (USGBC,
2005). Economic and ethical considerations are the most cited
reasons by businesses in the use of these two guidelines.
12.3.1.1	 Energy demand sectors – Transport, Buildings
and Industry
In the buildings sector, energy efficiency options may be
characterized as integrated and efficient designs and siting,
including passive solar technologies and designs and urban
planning to limit heat island effect. Considering energy
efficiency as the guiding principle during the construction of
new homes results in both reduced energy bills -enhancing the
affordability of increased energy services- and GHG abatement
(see Section 6.6). Policies that actively promote integrated
building solutions for both mitigating and adapting to climate
change are especially important for the buildings sector. Good

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

urban planning, including increasing green areas as well as
cool roofs in cities, has proven to be an efficient way to limit
the heat island effect, which also reduces cooling needs.
Mitigation and adaptation can, therefore, be addressed
simultaneously by these energy efficiency measures.
In developing countries, efficient cooking stoves that use
clean biomass fuels are an important option. These can have
significant health benefits including reduction in eye diseases.
The incident is disproportionately high amongst rural women in
many developing countries where fuelwood and other biomass
materials are a principal source of energy (Porritt, 2005). It has
also been shown, for example, that the availability of cleaner
burning cookers and solar cookers in developing countries not
only has important health benefits but also significant social
benefit in the lives of women in particular (Dow and Dow, 1998).
A move to a more reliable and cleaner fuel not only has benefits
in terms of carbon emission and health, it has also the effect of
freeing up significant amount of time for women and children,
which can be applied to more socially beneficial activities,
including going to schools in the case of children. The air
pollution benefit of improved stoves, however, is controversial;
other studies have noted that efficiency was improved at the
expense of higher emissions of harmful pollutants (see Section
4.5.4.1).
In the transport sector, the energy efficiency measures may
be categorized into those that are vehicle specific and those that
address transportation planning. Vehicle-specific programmes
focus on improvement to the technology and vehicle operations.
Planning programmes are targeted to street layouts, pavement
improvements, lane segregation, and infrastructural measures
that improve vehicle movement and facilitate walking, biking
and the use of mass transport. Cost-effective mitigation
measures of both types have been identified that result in higher
vehicle and/or trip fuel economy and reduce local air pollution.
Institutionalizing planning systems for CO2 reduction through
coordinated interaction between national and local governments
is important for drawing up common strategies for sustainable
transportation systems (see Section 5.5.1). While there are
many synergies in emission controls for air pollution and
climate change, there are also trade-offs (see Section 5.5.4).
Promotion of bicycling, walking, and other non-motorized
modes of transportation has large and consistent co-benefits
of GHG reduction, air quality, and people health improvement
(see Section 5.2.1 and 5.5.4). Diesel engines are generally more
fuel efficient than gasoline engines and thus have lower CO2
emissions, but increase particle emissions. Air quality driven
measures, such as obligatory particle matter and NOx filters
and in-engine measures, mostly result in higher fuel use and
consequently, higher GHG emissions.
In the industrial sector, energy efficiency options may be
classified as those aimed at mass-produced products and systems,
and those that are process-specific. The potential for costeffective measures is significant in this sector. Measures in both
729

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

categories would have a positive impact on the environment.
To the extent the measures improve productivity, they would
increase economic output and hence add to government tax
revenue. Higher tax revenue would benefit national, state and
local government fiscal balance sheets (see Section 7.7; Nadel
et al., 1997; Barrett et al., 2002; Phadke et al., 2005).
Since energy efficiency improvement reduces reliance on
energy supply, it is likely to improve a nation’s energy security.
Using prices as an instrument to promote energy efficiency
mitigation options is often difficult due to the many barriers that
impede their progress. Lack of information about such mitigation
options and the principal agent problem have been documented
to be particularly significant barriers in the residential sector,
but these also prevail in the small and medium scale industries
sectors (Sathaye and Murtishaw, 2005). Programmes that
can overcome such barriers would increase energy efficiency
penetration.
12.3.1.2	 Energy supply
Switching to low carbon energy supply sources is the other
mitigation category in the energy sector with significant GHG
benefits. This can be achieved through either increased reliance
on imported or indigenous alternative fuels. Using a higher
proportion of low carbon imported fuels will almost always
reduce local air pollution. Its direct impact will be to increase
payment for fuel imports that may result in worsened balance
of payments, unless these are utilized to increase a nation’s
exports (Sathaye et al., 1996). The higher fuel imports will
increase dependence on international fuel supply that may
result in reduced energy security unless diversification of supply
mitigates concerns about increased dependence. Economies and
societies of low carbon fuel exporting countries would benefit
from the higher trade.
Increased reliance on most indigenous low carbon energy
sources would also reduce local air pollution, but the local
environmental benefits in certain solid bioenergy applications
appear to be uncertain (see Section 4.5.4.1). While indigenous
low carbon fuels can reduce fuel imports, these have to be
balanced against higher capital requirements for investment in
fuel extraction, processing and delivery (Sathaye et al., 1996).
The development of large hydro sources can displace local
populations and put their livelihood in jeopardy, and in reservoirs
with large surface area, the resulting methane emissions may
reduce their net GHG benefit substantially. For example,
although hydroelectric plants have the potential to reduce GHG
emissions significantly, a large amount of literature points to
important environmental costs (McCully, 2001; Dudhani et al.,
2005), highlights the social disruptions and dislocations (Sarkar
and Karagoz 1995; Kaygusuz, 2002), and questions the long-

Chapter 12

term economic benefits of major hydropower development.
Increased use of indigenous low-carbon fuels can reduce
export of fuels from other countries to the extent the latter are
substituted away. These may adversely affect the trade balance
of exporting countries (Sathaye et al., 1996).
At the same time, low carbon fuels can have other
environmental benefits. For example, a move away from coal
to cleaner fuels will reduce ecosystem pressures that often
accompany mining operations (Azapagic, 2004). Similarly, a
move away from charcoal and fuelwood as a source of energy
will have the attendant environmental benefits of reducing the
pressures of deforestation (Masera et al., 2000; Najam and
Cleveland, 2003). This points towards the need to optimize
technology choice decisions not only along the dimension of
carbon emissions but also other environmental costs.
Wind power can cause harm to bird populations, and may not
be aesthetically appealing. Increased use of biomass is viewed
as a renewable alternative, but indoor air pollution from solid
fuels has been ranked as the fourth most important health risk
factor in least developed countries (see Chapter 4). Trade-offs
among pollutants are inevitable in the use of some mitigation
options, and need to be resolved in the specific context in which
the option is to be implemented.
Several examples of corruption that either increases the
price of electricity and/or prevent the proceeds from extracted
resources to meet development needs are provided in Section
4.5.4.3. This suggests that corruption may reduce the sustainable
development benefits of new mitigation technologies and/or
low carbon fuels that require a significant modification of social
systems.
12.3.1.3	 Cross-sectoral sustainable development impacts
Implementation of mitigation options often creates new
industries, for example, for energy efficient products such
as cooking stoves, efficient lamps, insulation materials, heat
pumps, and efficient motors, or for solar panels, windmills,
and biogas installations. The success of these new industries
depends on various factors, such as the degree of information,
costs, the image of the product and its traditional competitors
or its attributes other energy efficient. New industries can create
new jobs and income, and might be pioneers in new market
with significant competitive advantage. Ethanol production
from sugar waste has created a new industry and generated
employment opportunities and tax revenue for the Government
of Brazil. However, the older, outpaced industry may lose jobs.
Besides the uncertainty on the overall net effect, this may lead
to regional loss of employment. For example, the increased
production of biofuels for transportation, or energy production

7	 Carbon capture and storage (CCS) is an emerging GHG mitigation option that is described in Chapter 4. Its sustainable development impacts would be similar to those described in this section for the siting of power plants.
8	 Low carbon energy sources include hydro, biomass, wind, natural gas and other similar energy carriers.

730

Chapter 12	

in rural areas, is expected to protect existing employment and to
create new jobs in rural areas (Sims, 2003). Renewable energy
systems are more labour intensive than fossil fuel systems and
a higher proportion of jobs are relatively highly skilled. Thus,
an increase in employment of the rural people can only be
achieved, if corresponding learning opportunities are created.
If, however, labour intensity decreases over time, the longterm effect on jobs might be less pronounced than originally
anticipated.
12.3.2	 Forestry sector
Mitigation options in the forestry sector may be categorized
as those that (1) avoid emissions from deforestation or forest
degradation; (2) sequester carbon through forestation; and (3)
substitute for energy intensive materials or fossil fuels.
Reducing or avoiding deforestation has considerable
environmental benefits. It can retain biodiversity, ecosystem
functions, and in cases of large land areas, affect local weather
patterns (see Section 9.7.2). Reduction of forest fires improves
local air quality. Many deforesting countries have laws that
promote conservation of forest areas. The lack of enforcement
of laws that ban or limit deforestation or timber extraction has
allowed illegal extraction of logs and the burning of forests
in Indonesia (Boer, 2001) and Brazil (Boer, 2001; Fearnside,
2001). Avoiding deforestation is relatively expensive, since the
opportunity cost of deforested land is high due to its high timber
and land values. Stakeholders such as land owners, migrant
workers, and local saw mills would be negatively affected.
Transparency and participatory approaches have played a key
role in reducing communal tensions and allowed communities
to reap the same or larger benefits within an organized legal
framework. The Joint Forest Management Programme in India
has created a community-based approach to manage forest fringe
areas to reduce forest logging for fuelwood and encroachment
on forest lands for agriculture (Behera and Engel, 2005).
Successful implementation requires that alternative livelihood
be provided to the deforesters, programmes to promote forest
management jointly with the local population be pursued, and
that enforcement be stricter.
Afforestation can provide carbon benefits by increasing
carbon stocks on land and in products. Trees planted on wasteland
can arrest soil degradation and help manage water runoff. Soil
carbon can be increased to the extent soil disturbance during
planting and harvesting is minimized. Planting in conjunction
with agricultural crops (agro-forestry) enhances economic
benefits while increasing food security. Afforestation activities
are generally undertaken in rural areas and benefit the rural
economy and generate employment for rural dwellers. Clear
delineation of property rights would expedite the implementation
of forestation programmes. A major concern is that forestation
may diminish food security if it were to occur primarily on
rich agricultural land, and that monoculture plantations would

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

reduce biodiversity and increase the risk of catastrophic failure
due to diseases. Conversion of floodplains and wetlands to
forest plantations could hamper ecological functions.
Afforestation activities can also yield biomass fuel that may
be used as a fossil fuel substitute in power plants or as a liquid
fuel substitute. Palm-tree plantations are also a rich source of
bio-diesel fuel. These sustainable development benefits and
potential trade-offs also apply to bioenergy plantations. In
regions, where crop residues (rice husks, sugarcane bagasse,
nut shells, and/or tree trimmings) are available, these can be
harvested synergistically with the crops and pose less potential
sustainable development trade-offs.
Forest management activities include sustainable
management of native forests, prevention of fires and pests,
longer rotation periods, minimizing soil disturbance, reduced
harvesting, promoting understory diversity, fertilizer application,
and selective and reduced logging. Most of these activities bring
positive social and environmental benefits. Minimizing soil
disturbance may result in less use of fossil fuels, less emissions
from biomass burning, and more employment if less machinery
is used. The prevention of fires may result in larger fire events
later due to excessive accumulation of fuel. Therefore, such
practice should be linked to other practices such as sustainable
wood fuel production. Theoretically, N fertilizer application
increases net primary productivity (NPP) (and CO2 removals),
but there is a trade-off since at the same time it increases N2O
emissions and may contaminate waters with nitrates.
Some of the social benefits of mitigation policies come
through education, training, participation as an integral part of
a policy. Participatory approaches to forest management can
be more successful than traditional, hierarchical programmes
(Stoll, 2003). These participatory programmes can also help
to strengthen civil society and democratization. Participatory
approaches can create social capital (Dasgupta, 1993): networks
and social relations which allow humans to cope better with
their livelihoods.
12.3.3	 Agriculture sector
Table 12.4 also summarizes the impact of different
mitigation activities in agriculture sector on the constituents
and determinants of sustainable development (see also Section
8.4.5 and Table 8.8). The table provides a description and
tentative direction of impact but the exact magnitude of impact
would depend upon the scale and intensity of the activities in
the context where they are undertaken.
Several mitigation activities are explored in Chapter 8,
ranging from crop, tillage/residue, nutrient, rice, water, manure/
biosolid, grazing lands, organic soils, livestock and manure
management practice, to land cover change, agro-forestry,
land restoration, bioenergy, enhanced energy efficiency and
increased carbon storage in agricultural products. It is shown
731

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

that appropriate adoption of these mitigation measures is likely
to help achieve social, economic and environmental goals,
although sometimes trade-offs may also occur. Interesting
enough, these trade-offs, when and if they occur, seem to be
most visible in the short term, as in the long-term synergy
amongst the aspects of sustainable development seems to be
dominant.
An appropriate and optimal mix of rice cultivation with
livestock known as integrated annual crop-animal system and
traditionally found in West Africa, India and Indonesia and
Vietnam would enhance the net income, improve the condition
of cultivated ecosystems and over all human well being (MA,
2005). Such combinations of livestock and crop farming
especially for rice would prove effective in income generation
even in semi arid and arid areas of the world.
Ground water quality may be enhanced and the loss of
biodiversity slowed by greater use of farmyard manure and more
targeted pesticides. The impact on social and economic aspects
of this mitigation measure remains uncertain. Better nutrient
management can improve environmental sustainability.
Controlling overgrazing through pasture improvement
has a favourable impact on livestock productivity (greater
income from the same number of livestock) and slows/halts
desertification (environmental aspect). It also provides social
security to the poorest people during extreme events such as
drought and other crisis (especially in Sub-Saharan Africa).
One effective strategy to control overgrazing is the prohibition
of free grazing, as was done in China (Rao, 1994).
This critical sector of the world economy is the biggest, user
of the water. In low-income countries, agriculture uses almost
90% of the total extracted water (World Bank, 2000). Policies
on free or very cheap energy (electricity, petroleum) as present
is some areas for political reasons, contribute to misuse of
water as the true economic cost inclusive of environmental and
social costs are not reflected in the pricing and other incentive
structures. Rationalization of electricity tariffs would aid in
improving water allocation across users and over time. Through
proper institutions and effective functioning of markets, water
management can be operationalized with favourable impact
on environmental and economic goals. In the short term,
social cohesiveness might come under stress due to a clash of
divergent interests.
Land cover and tillage management could encourage
favourable impacts on environmental goals. A mix of
horticulture with optimal crop rotations would promote
carbon sequestration and could also improve agro-ecosystem
function. Societal well-being would also be enhanced through
provisioning of water and enhanced productivity. Whilst the
environmental benefits of tillage/residue management are
clear, other impacts are less certain. Land restoration will have
positive environmental impacts, but conversion of floodplains
732

Chapter 12

and wetlands to agriculture could hamper ecological function
(reduced water recharge, bioremediation, and nutrient cycling)
and therefore, could have an adverse impact on sustainable
development goals (Kumar, 2001).
Livestock management and manure management mitigation
measures are context and location specific in there influence on
sustainable development. Appropriate adoption of mitigation
measures is likely to help achieve environmental goals, but
farmers may incur additional costs, reducing their returns and
income.
12.3.4	 Waste and wastewater management sector
Better waste and wastewater management is an important
sustainable development goal because it can lead directly
to improved health, productivity of human resources, and
better living conditions. It can also have direct economic
benefits in terms of higher value of property due to improved
living conditions. The 2002 Johannesburg World Summit on
Sustainable Development added a new goal on sanitation,
calling for the reduction by 50% of the number of people living
without access to safe sanitation by 2015.
Chapter 10 emphasizes that environmentally-responsible
waste management to reduce GHG emissions at an appropriate
level of technology can promote sustainable development. In
many developing countries, uncontrolled open dumpsites,
open burning of waste, and poor sewerage practices result in
major public health hazards due to vermin, pathogens, safety
concerns, air pollution, and contamination of water resources.
Often, waste in rural areas is neither collected nor properly
managed.
The challenge is to develop improved waste and wastewater
management using low to medium-technology strategies that can
provide significant public health benefits and GHG mitigation
at affordable cost. Some of these strategies include small-scale
wastewater management such as septic tanks and recycling of
grey water, construction of medium-technology landfills with
controlled waste placement and use of daily cover, composting
of organic waste, and implementation of landfill bio covers to
optimize microbial CH4 oxidation.
The major impediment in developing countries is the lack
of capital. Another challenge is the lack of urban planning
so that waste treatment and disposal activities are segregated
from community life. A third challenge is often the lack of
environmental regulations enforced within urban infrastructure.
In many developing countries, waste recycling occurs through
the scavenging activities of informal recycling networks.
Sustainable development includes a higher standard for these
recycling activities so that safety and health concerns are
reduced via lower technology solutions that are effective,
affordable, and sustainable.

Chapter 12	

In some cases, landfill gas might be used to provide heating
fuel for a factory or commercial venture that can be an alternative
source of local employment. Also, compost can be used for
agriculture or horticulture applications, and closed re-vegetated
landfills can become public parks or recreational areas.
12.3.5	 Implications of climate policies for
sustainable development
A major policy development since the TAR is the
implementation of a large range of climate policies at the
international level (e.g., Kyoto Protocol), regional level (e.g.,
EU Emissions Trading Scheme), national and sub-national
level (see the review in Section 13.3.3.4).
The implications of these policies for sustainable
development are not assessed in the literature, except for those
of the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) (Michaelowa,
2003; Spalding-Fecher and Simmonds, 2005; Sutter, 2003;
UNEP, 2004; Winkler, 2004; Winkler and Thorne, 2002). For
extensive discussion, see Section 13.3.3.4.2. The sustainable
development implications of particular mitigation activities
that can be implemented under the CDM are discussed further
in Section 12.3. This section focuses on the sustainable
development implications of CDM as a policy. Key findings
from this literature that relate to the implications of climate
policies on sustainable development are as follows:
•	 The CDM channels non-trivial amounts of money towards
developing countries. In 2005, the CDM channelled about
US$2.5 billion to purchase carbon credits in developing
countries (Capoor and Ambrosi, 2006), or 0.75% of the
(record) net foreign direct investment (FDI) inflow in
developing countries for that year (UNCTAD, 2006). In
addition, it can be argued that the CDM leverages new
private capital to developing countries.
•	 Since carbon payments are payable in strong currencies,
and usually originate from buyers with strong credit ratings,
they provide the seller with additional opportunities to raise
additional capital and debt from banks and other finance
institutions (Mathy et al., 2001; Lecocq and Capoor, 2005).
•	 The geographical distribution of CDM projects tends to
follow FDI flows with most of the financial flows towards
large middle-income countries (Fenhann, 2006), and very
little financial flows towards least developed countries,
notably in Sub-Saharan Africa (Capoor and Ambrosi,
2006).
•	 Projects mitigating non-CO2 gases (HFC23, N2O and CH4)
represent the bulk of the volume of emission reductions
exchanged under the CDM. However, projects with the
highest direct benefits for local communities deliver fewer
emission reductions and are in general accompanied by
higher transaction costs. Resolving the tension between
global emission reductions and local benefits is a key
challenge for the future of climate change regime (Ellisa et
al., 2007).

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

12.4	 Gaps in knowledge and future
research needs
As noted in Section 12.1, changing development paths
will be critical to addressing mitigation and the scale of effort
required is unlikely to be forthcoming from the environmental
sector on its own. If climate policy on its own will not solve the
climate problem, future research on climate change mitigation
and sustainable development will need to focus increasingly on
development sectors. A better understanding is needed of how
countries might get from current development trajectories onto
lower-carbon development paths – how to make development
more sustainable.
The global GHG emissions reduction potential of such
actions varies from a few tens to million tons of carbon, and
empirical research is needed to identify and quantify actions
that will yield the most emissions savings.
A fundamental yet important step would be to identify
relevant non-climate policies affecting GHG emissions/sinks,
including trade, finance, rural and urban development, water,
energy, health, agriculture, forestry, insurance, and transport
among others. Future research will also need to access and use
local knowledge. More case studies would help illustrate the
link between sustainable development and climate mitigation
in developed, developing and transition countries. A particular
challenge in this regard is that such policies will necessarily
be context specific and will work only when structured within
local and national realities. This means that a lot of the research
required is at the local and national levels to identify policy
options and choices that might best work within the contexts of
specific regions, countries and localities.
This chapter has noted that development-oriented scenarios
could be enriched by taking global climate change explicitly into
account. Future research might develop and analyse scenarios
for development paths at different scales and their implications
for reducing or avoiding GHG emissions. This may require
broadening and deepening the current set of models to better
analyse the GHG implications of non-climate scenarios. This
also applies to industrialized countries on their development
paths and choices.
This chapter has suggested that the capacity to mitigate
is rooted in development paths. Considerable research must
be carried out to further investigate how mitigation capacity
can be turned into actual mitigation, and its connection with
components of the underlying development path. Paradoxically,
the reviewed literature suggests that a fundamental discussion
on the implications of development pathways for climate change
in general and climate change mitigation in particular has been
and is being explored more extensively for the developing
countries than for the industrialized countries. Although the
adaptive and mitigative capacity literature does not claim
733

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

that building capacity will necessarily lead to improved
responses to the climate change risk, little work has been done
to explicate the widely noted variation in response to climate
change among communities and nations with similar capacities.
It is apparent, therefore, that capacity is a necessary, but not
sufficient, condition for mitigative action. Phenomena such as
risk perception, science/policy interactions, and relationships
between industry and regulators, for instance, may play some
role in determining whether or not capacity is turned into action
in response to the climate change risk.
Section 12.1.3 cites several macro-indicators of sustainable
development that are being used to track its progress at the
national and international level. Few of these take climate
change mitigation directly into consideration. Inclusion of
this aspect in the use of macro-indicators is identified as an
important area of research.
Changing development pathways involves multiple actors,
at multiple scales. The roles of different actors and joint actions
in changing development pathways need further research,
particularly the private sector and civil society (and how they
relate to government). A key question revolves around the
complex process of decision-making, theories of which need
to be applied to sustainable development and mitigation. A
particular focus in this area might be identifying patterns of
investment and their implications for GHG emissions. Again,
much of this research will have to be contextually specific and
related to specific local and national contexts.
While future research must focus on multiple sectors, actors
and scales, a key area of investigation will remain the role for
international agreements. Reconciling the role for international
coordination mechanisms with decentralized policy approaches
is challenging and requires further evaluation. An area of
particular importance in this context is international agreements
that are not specific to climate change but whose structure and
implementation can affect development paths. These include
voluntary international agreements, such as those on the
implementation of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs)
to specific Multilateral Environmental Agreements (MEAs),
such as those on desertification, on biodiversity, to the related
provisions of international policy instruments within the World
Trade Organization (WTO). All these agreements, including
the WTO, now claim sustainable development as their ultimate
goal.
Future research will continue to examine the implications
of climate change mitigation for sustainable development.
Understanding of the sustainable development implications in
each of many sectors is growing, but further analysis will be
needed for key sectors and where least information is available.
Synergies beyond those in air pollution require more attention,
including water, soil management; forest management and
others. Apart from investigating synergies, the question of
734

Chapter 12

trade-offs between sustainable development and mitigation
(and also adaptation) requires further analysis.

REFERENCES
Adger, W.N., N. Brooks, M. Kelly, S. Bentham, S. Eriksen (eds.), 2004:
New indicators of vulnerability and adaptive capacity. Centre for
Climate Research.
Agrawala, S., A. Moehner, A. Hemp, M. van Aalst, S. Hitz, J. Smith, H.
Meena, S.M. Mwakifwamba, T. Hyera and O.U. Mwaipopo, 2003a:
Development and Climate Change in Tanzania: focus on Mount
Kilimanjaro. OECD, Paris.
Agrawala, S., A. Moehner, M. El Raey, D. Conway, M. van Aalst, M.
Hagenstad and J. Smith, 2004b: Development and Climate Change in
Egypt: Focus on Coastal resources and the Nile. OECD, Paris.
Agrawala, S., T. Ota, T., Ahmed, A.U., Smith, J. and M. van Aalst, 2003b:
Development and Climate Change in Bangladesh: Focus on coastal
flooding and the Sundarbans. OECD, Paris.
Agrawala, S., T. Ota, J. Risbey, M. Hagenstad, J. Smith, M. van Aalst, K.
Koshy and B. Prasad, 2003c: Development and Climate Change in
Fiji: Focus on coastal mangroves. OECD, Paris.
Alcamo, J., D. van Vuuren, C. Ringler, W. Cramer, T. Masui, J. Alder,
and K. Schulze, 2005: Changes in nature’s balance sheet: Modelbased estimates of future worldwide ecosystem services. Ecology and
Society, 10(2), pp.19.
Aldy, J.E., 2005: An environmental Kuznets Curve analysis of U.S.
state-level carbon dioxide emissions. Journal of Environment and
Development, pp. 48-72.
An, F. and A. Sauer, 2004. Comparison of passenger vehicles fuel economy
and greenhouse gas emission standards around the world. Pew Center
on Global Climate Change, Washington D.C., US, pp. 36.
Anderson, R., 1998: Mid-Course Correction. The Peregrinzilla Press,
Atlanta.
Anderson, R., 2004: Climbing Mount Sustainability. Quality Progress,
February 2004, pp. 32.
Andriof, J. and M. McIntosh, 2001: Perspectives on Corporate Citizenship.
Greenleaf Publishing Ltd, Sheffield.
Angelsen, A. and D. Kaimowitz, 1999: Rethinking the causes of
deforestation: lessons from economic models. The World Bank
Research Observer, 14(1), pp. 73-98. <http://www.worldbank.org/
research/journals/wbro/obsfeb99/pdf/article4.pdf> accessed 06/07/07.
Angelsen, A. and D. Kaimowitz (eds.), 2001: Agricultural technologies
and tropical deforestation. CABI Publishing, New York, USA, 422
pp.
Arthur, W.B., 1989: Competing technologies, increasing returns, and
lock-in by historical events. The Economic Journal, 99, pp. 116-131.
Athanasiou, T., 1996: The age of greenwashing. In Divided planet: The
ecology of rich and poor. University of Georgia Press, Athens, GA,
pp. 227-297.
Azapagic, A., 2004: Developing a framework for sustainable development
indicators for the mining and minerals industry. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 12(6), pp. 639-662.
Bäckstrand, K. and E. Lövbrand, 2006: Planting trees to mitigate climate
change: Contested discourses of ecological modernisation, green
governmentality and civic environmentalism. Global Environmental
Politics, 6(1), pp. 50-75.
Banuri, T., G. Hyden, Banuri, T., C. Juma, M. Rivera, 1994: Sustainable
human development: from concept to operation. United Nations
Development Programme, New York.
Banuri, T. and A. Najam, 2002: Civic Entrepreneurship - A Civil Society
Perspective on Sustainable Development. Gandhara Academy Press,
Islamabad, <http://www.tellus.org/seib/publications/civic/VOLUME1.
pdf> accessed 06/07/07.

Chapter 12	

Banuri, T., J. Weyant, G. Akumu, A.Najam, L. Pinguelli Rosa, S. Rayner,
W. Sachs, R. Sharma, G. Yohe, 2001: Setting the stage: Climate change
and sustainable development. In Climate Change 2001: Mitigation,
Report of working group III, Intergovernmental Panel On Climate
Change (IPCC) [Metz, B., O. Davidson, R. Swart, and J. Pan (ed.)],
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Barnett, J., 2001: The meaning of environmental security, ecological
politics and policy in the new security era. Zed Books, London.
Barrett, J., J.A. Hoerner, S. Bernow, B.Dougherty, 2002: Clean energy and
jobs: A comprehensive approach to climate change and energy policy.
Economic Policy Institute and Center for a Sustainable Economy,
Washington D.C.
Bartelmus, P., 2001: Accounting for sustainability: greening the national
accounts. In Our Fragile World, Forerunner to the Encyclopaedia of
Life Support System. Tolba, M.K. (ed.), pp. 1721-1735.
Baumert, K. and J. Pershing, T. Herzog, M. Markoff, 2004: Climate
data: insights and observations. Pew Centre on Climate Change,
Washington, D.C.
Beck, U., 1992: Risk Society: Towards a New Modernity. Sage, London.
Beg, N., J.C. Morlot, O. Davidson, Y. Afrane-Okesse, L. Tyani, F. Denton,
Y. Sokona, J.P. Thomasc, E.L. La Rovere, J.K. Parikh, K. Parikh, A.A.
Rahman, 2002: Linkages between climate change and sustainable
development. Climate Policy, 2, pp. 129-144.
Behera, B. and S. Engel, 2005: Institutional analysis of evolution of joint
forest management in India: A new institutional economics approach.
Forest Policy and Economics, (8)4, pp. 350-362.
Bell, S. and S. Morse, 1999: Sustainability Indicators: Measuring the
Immeasurable. Earthscan, London.
Benhin, J.K.A. and E.B. Barbier, 2004: Structural Adjustment Programme,
deforestation and biodiversity loss in Ghana. Environment and
Resources Economic, 27, pp. 337-366.
Berger, S. and R. Dore, 1996: National diversity and global capitalism.
Cornell Press.
Berkhout, F., 2002: Technological regimes, path dependency and the
environment. Global Environmental Change, 12, pp. 1-4.
Betsill, M.M. and H. Bulkeley, 2004: Transnational networks and global
environmental governance: The cities for climate protection program.
International Studies Quarterly, 48, pp. 471-493.
BIAC/OECD/IEA, 1999: Workshop on Climate Change: Industry view
on the Climate Change challenge with special emphasis on the Kyoto
Mechanisms - Industry Sector Reports. OECD/IEA, Paris, 54 pp.
Biermann, F. and K. Dingwerth, 2004: Global environmental change and
the nation state. Global Environmental Politics, 4, pp. 1-22.
Boer, R., 2001: Economic assessment of mitigation options for enhancing
and maintaining carbon sink capacity in Indonesia. Mitigation and
Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 6, pp. 257-290.
Bojo, J., K.-G. Mäler, L. Unemo, 1992: Environment and development:
An economic approach. Second Revised Edition. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 211 pp.
Borchers, M., N. Qase, C.T. Gaunt, J. Mavhungu, H. Winkler, Y. AfraneOkese, C. Thom, 2001: National Electrification Programme evaluation:
Summary report. Evaluation commissioned by the Department of
Minerals & Energy and the Development Bank of Southern Africa.
Energy & Development Research Centre, University of Cape Town,
Cape Town.
Borsky, S., D. Arbelaez-Ruiz, C. Cocklin, D. Holmes, 2006: International
trends in socially-responsible investment: implications for corporate
managers. In International Handbook on Environmental Technology
Management. D. Annadale, D. Marinova, and J. Phillimore (ed.),
Edward Elgar, London.
Bossel, H., 1999: Indicators for sustainable development: Theory, methods,
applications. International Institute for Sustainable Development,
Winnipeg, MB, <http://www.iisd.org/pdf/balatonreport.pdf> accessed
06/07/07.
Boulanger, P.-M., 2004: Les indicateurs du développement durable: un
défi scientifique, un enjeu démocratique. IDDRI, Paris.

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

Boyle, A. and D. Freestone, 1999: International law and sustainable
development: past achievements and future challenges. Oxford
University Press, Oxford.
Brickman, R., S. Jasanoff, T. Ilgen, 1985: Controlling chemicals: the
politics of regulation in Europe and the United States. Cornell
University Press, Ithaca, New York.
Brown, L., 1981: Building a sustainable society. Worldwatch Institute,
Washington, D.C.
Buitenkamp, M., H. Venner, T. Wams, 1993: Action Plan Sustainable
Netherlands. Dutch Friends of the Earth, Amsterdam.
Bulkeley, H. and M.M. Betsill, 2005: Rethinking sustainable cities:
Multilevel governance and the ‘urban’ politics of Climate Change.
Environmental Politics, 14, pp. 42-63.
Bulkeley, H. and A.P.J. Mol, 2003: Participation and environmental
governance: Consensus, ambivalence and debate. Environmental
Values, 12, pp. 143-154.
Cabeza Gutes, M., 1996: The concept of weak sustainability. Ecological
Economics, 17(3), pp. 147-156.
Capoor, K. and P. Ambrosi, 2006: State and trends of the carbon market
2006. Prototype Carbon Fund and International Emissions Trading
Association, Washington D.C.
Carpenter, S., P.L. Pingali, E.M. Bennett, M.B. Zurek, 2005: Ecosystems
and human well-being: Scenarios. Findings of the Scenarios Working
Group v. 2 (Millennium Ecosystem Assessment S.), Island Press.
Cash, D.W. and S.C. Moser, 2000: Linking global and local scales:
designing dynamic assessment and management processes. Global
Environmental Change, 10, pp. 109-120.
CGD, 2004: Millions saved: Proven successes in global health. Centre for
Global Development.
Chandler, W., R. Schaeffer, D. Zhou, P.R. Shukla, F. Tudela, O. Davidson,
S. Alpan-Atamer, 2002: Climate change mitigation in developing
countries: Brazil, China, India, Mexico, South Africa, and Turkey. Pew
Center on Global Climate Change, Washington D.C.
Chomitz, K., 2007: At Loggerheads? Agricultural expansion, poverty
reduction, and environment in the tropical forests. World Bank:
Washington D.C.
Chomitz, K. and D. Gray, 1996: Roads, land use, and deforestation: A
spatial model applied to Belize. The World Bank Economic Review,
10, pp. 487-512.
CIESIN, 1996-2001: Environmental Treaties and Resource Indicators.
Center for International Earth Science Information Network (CIESIN),
Palisades, NY, <http://sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/entri/> accessed
06/07/07.
Cocklin, C., 1995: Agriculture, society, and environment: discourses on
sustainability. International Journal of Sustainable Development and
World Ecology, 2, pp. 240-256.
Cogan, 2006: Corporate Governance and Climate Change: Making the
Connection. CERES, Boston, MA, 300 pp.
Metwalli, A.A.M., H.H.J de Jongh, M.A.J.S. van Boekel, S. Cohen, D.
Demeritt, J. Robinson, D. Rothman, 1998: Climate Change and
Sustainable Development: Towards Dialogue. Global Environment
Change, 8(4), pp. 341-371.
Colman, R., 2002: Corporate sustainability a hot commodity. CMA
Management, 76(Sep), 9 pp.
Colombier, M. and J.C. Hourcade, 1989: Développement des réseaux et
modulations spatio-temporelles des tarifs: l’équité territoriale revisitée.
Revue Economique, 40(July), pp. 649-676.
Coondoo, D. and S. Dinda, 2002: Causality between income and emission:
a country group-specific econometric analysis. Ecological Economics,
40, pp. 351-367.
Copeland, B.R. and M.S. Taylor, 2004: Trade, growth, and the environment.
Journal of Economic Literature, 42(March), pp. 7-71.
Corell, E. and M. Betsill, 2001: A comparative look at NGO influence on
international environmental negotiations: Desertification and Climate
Change. Global Environmental Politics, 2(1), pp. 86-107.

735

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

Cork, S., G. Peterson, G. Petschel-Held, J. Alcamo, J. Alder, E. M. Bennett,
E. Carr, D. Deane, G. Nelson, and T. Ribeiro, 2005: Four scenarios. In
Ecosystems and Human Well-being: Scenarios, Volume 2. Findings
of the Scenarios Working Group of the Millennium Ecosystems
Assessment. S.R. Carpenter, P.L. Pingali, E.M. Bennett, M.B. Zurek,
(eds.), Island Press.
Cornillie, J. and S. Fankhauser, 2002: The energy intensity of transition
countries. Working Paper N.72 EBRD, London, U.K., 25 pp.
Corson, W. (ed.), 1996: Measuring sustainability: indicators, trends, and
performance. M.E. Sharpe, Armonk, NY, pp. 325-352.
Cowan, B. and N. Mohlakoana, 2005: Barriers to access modern fuels
in low-income households: Khayelitsha. Energy Research Centre,
University of Cape Town, Cape Town.
Cowan, J., E. Eidinow, Laura Likely, 2000: A scenario-planning process
for the new millennium. Deeper News, 9(1).
Dalal-Clayton, B. (ed.), 2003: The MDGs and sustainable development:
the need for a strategic approach. IIED, London, pp. 73-91.
Das, A.K and C. Dutta, 2004: Strengthening rural information infrastructure
through E-Choupals. In Proceedings 21st IASLIC National Seminar,
S.B. Ghosh (ed) Kolkata, India.
Dasgupta, P., 1993: An Inquiry into Well-being and Destitution. Clarendon
Press, Oxford.
Dasgupta, S., K. Hamilton, K. Pandey, D. Wheeler, 2004: Air pollution
during growth: accounting for governance and vulnerability. Policy
Research Working Paper No.3383, World Bank, Washington D.C,
USA, 30 pp.
Davidson, O., K. Halsnaes, S. Huq, M. Kok, B. Metz, Y. Sokona, J.
Verhagen, 2003: The development and climate nexus: the case of subSaharan Africa. Climate Policy, 3(S1), pp. S97-S113.
Davidson, O. and Y. Sokona, 2002: Think bigger, act faster: a new
sustainable energy path for African development. Energy &
Development Research Centre, University of Cape Town & ENDA
Tiers Monde, Cape Town and Dakar.
Davis, T.S., 1999: Reflecting on voluntary environmental partnerships:
Lessons for the next century. Corporate Environmental Strategy, 6(1),
pp. 55-59.
De Cara, S., M. Houzé, P.-A. Jayet, 2005: Methane and nitrous oxide
emissions from agriculture in the EU: A spatial assessment of sources
and abatement costs. Environmental and Resource Economics, 32, pp.
551-583.
De Gouvello, C. and Y. Maigne (eds.), 2000: LElectrification Rurale
Décentralisée à lheure des négociations sur le changement
climatique. Systèmes Solaires, Paris, France, pp. 35-60.
De Marchi, B., 2003: Public participation and risk governance. Science
and Public Policy, 30(171-176).
De Moor, A., 2001: Towards a grand deal on subsidies and climate change.
Journal Natural Resources Forum, 25(2).
Decleris, M., 2000: The law of sustainable development - General
principles. European Commission.
Deme, P.A., 2003: Le cas du GPL au Sénégal. In ESMAP: Énergies
modernes et réduction de la pauvreté: Un atelier multi-sectoriel. Actes
de latelier Régional, Dakar, Sénégal, 4-6 February 2003, 22 pp.
Dietz, T., 2003: The Darwinian trope in the drama of the commons:
Variations on some themes by the Ostroms. In Academic Conference
in Honor of the Work of Elinor and Vincent Ostrom, George Mason
University, Arlington, Virginia.
Dietz, T. and P.C. Stern, 1995: Toward a theory of choice: Socially
embedded preference construction. The Journal of Socio-Economics,
24, pp. 261-279.
DOE,1989: Compendium of options for government policy to encourage
private sector responses to potential climate change. US Department
of Energy, Washington D.C.
Doppelt, B., 2003: Leading change toward sustainability: A changemanagement guide for business, government and civil society.
Greenleaf Publishing Ltd., Sheffield.
Dorian, J.P., H.T. Franssen, D.R. Simbeck, 2006: Global challenges in
energy. Energy Policy, 34(15), pp. 1984-1991.
Dovers, S. and J. Handmer, 1993: Contradictions in sustainability.
Environmental Conservation, 20(3), pp. 217-222.
736

Chapter 12

Dow, R.M. and C.R. Dow, 1998: using solar cookers and gardens to
improve health in urban and rural areas. Journal of American Dietetic
Association, 99(9), pp. A58.
Driscoll, C. and M. Starik, 2004: The primordial stakeholder: Advancing
the conceptual consideration of stakeholder status for the natural
environment. Journal of Business Ethics, 49(1), pp. 55-73.
Dryzek, J., 1990: Designs for environmental discourse: The greening
of the administrative state. In Managing Leviathan: Environmental
Politics and the Administrative State. R. Paehlke and D. Torgerson
(ed.), Belhaven Press, London, pp. 97-111.
Dryzek, J., 1997: The politics of the earth: Environmental discourse.
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Dudhani, S., A.K. Sinha, S.S. Inamdar, 2006: Assessment of small
hydropower potential using remote sensing data for sustainable
development in India. Energy Policy 34(17), pp. 3195-3205.
Dunphy, D., A.Griffiths, S. Benn, 2003: Organizational change for
corporate sustainability: A guide for leaders and change agents of the
future. Routledge, London.
Elkington, J., 2001: The Chrysalis Economy: How citizen CEOs and
corporations can fuse values and value creation. Capstone, Oxford.
Ellisa, J., H. Winkler, J. Corfee-Morlot, F, Gagnon-Lebrun, 2007: CDM:
Taking stock and looking forward. Energy Policy, 35(1), pp. 15-28.
Elzen, B. and A. Wieczorek, 2005: Transitions towards sustainability
through system innovation. Technological Forecasting and Social
Change, 72, pp. 651-661.
Estache, A. and J. Strong, 2000: The rise, the fall, and the emerging
recovery of project finance in transport, private sector development.
Working Paper 2385, Washington: World Bank Institute.
ESMAP, 2002: Energy strategies for rural India: Evidence from six states.
World Bank, Washington D.C. Report 258/02.
Fairhead, J. and M. Leach, 2003: Science, society and power: Environmental
knowledge and policy in West Africa and the Carribbean. Cambridge,
Cambridge University Press.
Farsari, Y. and P. Prastacos, 2002: Sustainable development indicators: an
overview. Foundation for the Research and Technology Hellas.
Fearnside, P., 2001: The potential for Brazil’s forest sector for mitigating
global warming under the Kyoto Protocol. Mitigation and Adaptation
Strategies for Global Change, 6, pp. 355-372.
Fenhann, J., 2006: Overview of the CDM Pipeline, version 09-08-2006.
CD4CDM, UNEP-Risoe Centre, Denmark.
Fisher, D.R., 2004: National governance and the global Climate Change
regime. Rowman and Littlefield Publishers, Inc., Lanham MD.
Forsyth, T., 2005: Building deliberative public-private partnerships for
waste management in Asia. Geoforum, 36(4), pp. 429-439.
Frankel, J.A. and A.K. Rose, 2002: Is trade good or bad for the
environment? Sorting out the causality. National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper 9201, Cambridge, MA.
Frenk, J., J.L. Bobadilla, C. Stern, T. Frejka, R. Lozano, 1993: Elements
for a theory of the health transition. In Health and social change in
international perspective. L.C. Chen, A. Kleinman, and N.C. Ware
(eds.), Harvard University Press, Boston.
Funtowicz, S. and J. Ravetz, 1993: Science for a post-normal age. Futures,
25(739-755).
Furuseth, O. and C. Cocklin, 1995: An institutional framework for
sustainable resource management: the New Zealand model. Natural
Resources Journal, 35(2), pp. 243-273.
Gallagher, K.S., 2006: Limits to leapfrogging in energy technologies?
Evidence from the Chinese automobile industry. Energy Policy,
34(383-394).
Gallopin, G.C. and F. Rijsberman, 2000: Three global water scenarios.
International Journal of Water, 1(1), pp. 16-40.
Geels, F., 2004: From sectoral systems of innovation to socio-technical
systems: Insights about dynamics and change from sociology and
institutional theory. Research Policy, 33, pp. 897-920.
Geist, H.J. and E.F. Lambim, 2002: Proximate causes and underlying
driving forces of tropical deforestation. Bioscience, 52(2), pp. 142150.

Chapter 12	

Geller, H., R. Schaeffer, A. Szklo, M. Tolmasquim, 2004: Policies for
advancing energy efficiency and renewable energy use in Brazil.
Energy Policy, 32, pp. 1437-1450.
Giddens, A., 1991: Modernity and self-identity: Self and society in the late
modern age. Stanford, Stanford University Press.
Giddens, A., 1998: Risk society: The context of British politics. In The
Politics of Risk Society, J. Franklin, ed., Polity Press, Cambridge, pp.
23-34.
Goklany, I.M., 2006: Integrated Strategies to Reduce Vulnerability and
Advance Adaptation, Mitigation, and Sustainable Development.
<http://members.cox.net/igoklany/Goklany-Integrating_A&M_
preprint.pdf> accessed 09/07/07.
Goodwin, M., 1998: The governance of rural areas: some emerging
research issues and agendas. Journal of Rural Studies, 14(1), pp. 512.
Gough, C. and S. Shackley, 2001: The respectable politics of Climate
Change: The Epistemic Communities and NGOs. International
Affairs, 77(2).
Government of India, 2006: Towards faster and more inclusive growth:
An approach to the 11th Five Year Plan. Planning Commission,
Government of India.
GRI, 2005: Global Reporting Initiative. <http://www.globalreporting.org>
accessed 06/07/07.
Grossman, G.M. and A.B. Krueger, 1991: Environmental impacts of a
North American Free Trade Agreement. National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper 3914, NBER, Cambridge, MA.
Grubb, M., 1991: Energy policies and the greenhouse effect. Energy
and environmental programme, Dartmouth for The Royal Institute of
International Affairs, Aldershot.
Gueorguieva, A. and K. Bolt, 2003: A critical review of the literature on
structural adjustment and the environment. World Bank Environmental
Economics Series Paper 90, Washington, D.C.
Gutmann, A. and D. Thompson, 2004: Why Deliberative Democracy?
Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Haas, P., 1990: Saving the Mediterranean: the politics of international
environmental cooperation. Columbia University Press, New York
City.
Haas, P., R.O. Keohane, M.A. Levy (eds.), 1993: Institutions for the earth.
The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Haas, P.M., 2004: When does power listen to truth? A constructivist
approach to the policy process. Journal of European Public Policy,
(11), pp. 569-592.
Hajer, M., 1995: The politics of environmental discourse. Oxford
University Press, Oxford.
Hajer, M. and H. Wagenaar (eds.), 2003: Deliberative policy analysis:
Understanding governance in the network society. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Hale, T., 2004: Thinking globally and acting locally: Can the Johannesburg
Partnerships coordinate action on sustainable development? Journal of
Environment and Development, 3, pp. 220-239.
Hamilton, K., G. Anderson, D. Pearce, 1997: Genuine savings as an
indicator of sustainability. CSERGE Working Paper GEC 97-03,
Centre for Social and Economic Research and the World Bank
Hamilton, K., T.L Brewer, T. Aiba, T. Sugiyama, J. Drexhage, 2003:
Module 2: Corporate engagement in US, Canada, the EU and Japan
and the influence on domestic and international policy. In The KyotoMarrakech System: A Strategic Assessment. M. Grubb, T. Brewer, B.
Müller, J. Drexhage, K. Hamilton, T. Sugiyama, T. Aiba, <http://www.
iccept.ic.ac.uk/a5-1.html> accessed 06/07/07.
Hamilton, K. and M. Kenber, 2006: Business views on international
climate and energy. The Climate Group, UK, 56 pp.
Handley, P., 1997: A critical view of the Build-Operate-Transfer
privatisation process in Asia. Asian Journal of Public Administration,
19(2), 203-243.
Harbaugh, W.T., A. Levinson, D. Wilson, 2002: Reexamining the
empirical evidence for an environmental Kuznets curve. The Review
of Economics and Statistics, 84(3), pp. 541-551.

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

Hardi, P. and T. Zdan (eds.), 1997: Assessing Sustainable Development:
Principles in practice. International Institute for Sustainable
Development, Winnipeg.
Hasselmann, K., M. Latif, G. Hooss, C. Azar, O. Edenhofer, C. C. Jaeger,
2003: The challenge of long-term climate change. Science, 302, pp.
1923-1925.
Hawken, P., A. Lovins, L. Hunter, 1999: Natural capitalism: The next
industrial revolution. Earthscan, London.
Heil, M.T. and T.M. Selden, 2001: Carbon emissions and economic
development: future trajectories based on historical experience.
Environment and Development Economics, 6(1), pp. 63-83.
Heller, T.C. and P.R. Shukla (eds.), 2003: Development and climate:
Engaging developing countries. Pew Center on Global Climate
Change, Arlington, 111 pp.
Helm, D., 2002: Energy policy: security of supply, sustainability and
competition. Energy Policy, 30, pp. 173-184.
Herzog, T., K.A. Baumert, J. Pershing, 2006: Target: Intensity. An analysis
of greenhouse gas intensity targets. World Resources Institute,
Washington D.C. <http://www.wri.org/climate/pubs_description.
cfm?pid=4195> accessed 06/07/07.
Holliday, C., 2001: Sustainable growth, the DuPont Way. Harvard Business
Review, September, pp. 129-134.
Holliday, C., S. Schmidheiny, P. Watts, 2002: Walking the talk: The
business case for sustainable development. Greenleaf Publishing, San
Francisco.
Hollingworth, J.R. and R. Boyer, 1997: Contemporary Capitalism: The
embeddedness of institutions, Cambridge Press.
Hourcade, J.C. and M. Kostopoulou, 1994: Quelles politiques face aux
chocs énergétiques. France, Italie, Japon, RFA: quatre modes de
résorption des déséquilibres. Futuribles, 189, pp. 7-27.
Hourcade, J.C., P. Shukla, L. Cifuentes, D. Davis, J. Edmonds, B. Fisher,
E. Fortin, A. Golub, O. Hohmeyer, A. Krupnick, S. Kverndokk, R.
Loulou, R. Richels, H. Segenovic, K.Yamaji , 2001: Global, Regional
and National Costs and Ancillary Benefits. In 2001 Climate Change
2001: Mitigation, B. Metz, O. Davidson, R. Swart, and J. Pan (ed.),
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Howes, M., 2005: Politics and the environment: Risk and the role of
government and industry. Allen and Unwin, Sydney.
Hueting, R. (ed.), 1993: Calculating a sustainable national income. A
practical solution for a theoretical dilemma. Nagard, Milan.
Hulme, D. and M. Edwards, 1997: NGOs, states and donors: An overview.
In NGOs, States and Donors: Too Close for Comfort? D. Hulme and
M. Edwards (ed.), St. Martin’s Press, New York.
Huq, S., H. Reid, L. Murray, 2003: Mainstreaming adaptation to Climate
Change in least developed countries. Working Paper 1: Country by
Country Vulnerability to Climate Change, IIED, <http://www.iied.org/
pubs/pdf/full/10002IIED.pdf> accessed 09/07/07.
IEA, 2003a: Energy balance of OECD Countries. International Energy
Agency/OECD, Paris. <www.iea.org> accessed 06/07/07.
IEA, 2003b: Key World Energy Statistics from the IEA. International
Energy Agency/OECD, Paris.
IEA, 2004a: Analysis of the impact of high oil prices on the global economy.
International Energy Agency, Paris, 15 pp.
IEA, 2004b: CO2 emissions from fuel combustion 1971-2002. International
Energy Agency, Paris, France.
IEA, 2004c: Oil Crises and Climate Challenges: 30 Years of Energy Use
in IEA Countries. International Energy Agency, Paris.
IEA, 2005: World Energy Outlook. International Energy Agency, Paris.
IEA, 2006: CO2 emissions from Fuel Combustion, 1971-2004. International
Energy Agency, Paris.
IISD, 2006: Compendium of Sustainable Development Indicator Initiatives.
International Institute for Sustainable Development, Winnipeg, MB,
Canada, <http://www.iisd.org/measure/compendium/> accessed
06/07/07.
Innovest, 2005: Carbon Disclosure Project 2005. Carbon Disclosure
Project, London, 154 pp.

737

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

IPCC, 1996: Estimating the costs of mitigating greenhouse gases.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, UK., pp. 263-296.
IPCC, 2000: Special Report on Emissions Scenarios. Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, UK.
IPCC, 2001: Setting the stage: climate change and sustainable
development. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC),
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
IPCC, 2001b: Climate Change 2001: Mitigation - Contribution of Working
Group III to the Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) [Metz, B., O. Davidson, R. Swart,
and J. Pan (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 700 pp.
IPCC, 2007: Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability.
Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [M.L. Parry, O.F.
Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden, C.E. Hanson (eds.)].
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New
York, NY, USA.
Irwin, T., M. Klein, G.E. Perry, M. Thobani, 1999: Managing government
exposure to private infrastructure risks. World Bank Research
Observer., 14, pp. 229-245.
IUCN, 1980: World conservation strategy: Living resources conservation
for sustainable development. International Union for the Conservation
of Nature, United Nations Environment Programme, Worldwide Fund
for Nature, Switzerland.
Jacoby, H.G., 2000: Access to markets and the benefits of rural roads.
Economic Journal, 110, pp. 713-737. <http://europa.sim.ucm.es/
compludoc/GetSumario?r=/W/10001/00130133_7.htm&zfr=0>
accessed 06/07/07.
Jahan, S. and A. Umana, 2003: The environment-poverty nexus.
Development Policy Journal, 3, pp. 53-70.
Jannuzzi, G.M., 2005: Power sector reforms in Brazil and its impacts on
energy efficiency and research and development activities. Energy
Policy, 33, pp. 1753-1762.
Jasanoff, S., 1986: Risk management and political culture: a comparative
study of science in the policy context. Russell Sage Foundation, New
York.
Jasanoff, S., 1990: The fifth branch: Science advisers as policymakers.
Cambridge, Mass.
Jasanoff, S. and B. Wynne, 1998: Science and decisionmaking. In Human
Choice and Climate Change, S. Rayner and E.L. Malone (ed.), Battelle
Press., Columbus, OH, pp. 1-87.
Jessop, R., 1997: Capitalism and its future: Remarks on regulation,
government and governance. Review of International Political
Economy, 4, pp. 561-581.
Jiang, K., Z. Dadajie, J. Hui, L. Eda, 2003: Country Study: China. Energy
Research Institute and Academy for Agriculture Science, Beijing,
China.
Jochem, E., J. Sathaye, D. Bouille, 2001: Society, behaviour, and climate
change mitigation. Kluwer Academic Publishers, The Netherlands.
Jordan, L. and P. van Tuijl (eds.), 2006: NGO Accountability: politics,
principles and innovations. Earthscan, London.
Kahane, A., 2002: An overview of multi-stakeholder civic scenario work.
Global Business Network, <http://www.generonconsulting.com/
publications/> accessed 06/07/07.
Kaimowitz, D., G. Thiele, P. Pacheco, 1999: The effects of structural
adjustment on deforestation and forest degradation in lowland Bolivia.
World Development, 27(3), pp. 505-520.
Kaivo-oja, J., J. Luukkanen, M. Wilenius, 2004: Defining alternative
national-scale socio-economic and technological futures up to 2100:
SRES scenarios for the case of Finland. Boreal Environment Research,
9, pp. 109-125.
Karekezi, S. and L. Majoro, 2002: Improving modern energy services for
Africa’s urban poor. Energy Policy, 30(Special Issue), pp. 1015-1028.

738

Chapter 12

Kaya, Y., 1990: Impact of Carbon Dioxide Emission Control on GNP
Growth: Interpretation of Proposed Scenarios. Paper presented to the
IPCC Energy and Industry Subgroup, Response Strategies Working
Group, Paris.
Kaygusuz, K., 2002 Sustainable development of hydropower and biomass
energy in Turkey. Energy Conversion and Management, 43(8), pp.
1099-1120.
Kelman, S., 1981: Regulating America, regulating Sweden: a comparative
study of occupational safety and health policy. MIT Press, Cambridge,
Mass.
Kessides, I.N., 2004: Reforming infrastructure: privatization, regulation
and competition. Washington D.C, World Bank, 306 pp.
Kok, M., W. Vermeulen, W.J.V. Vermeulen, A.P.C. Faaij, D. de Jager, 2000:
Global warming and social innovation: The challenge of a climateneutral society. Earthscan, United Kingdom, 242 pp.
Kok, M.J.T. and H.C. de Coninck, 2004: Beyond climate: Options for
broadening climate policy. RIVM report 500019001, Bilthoven, The
Netherlands.
Kotov, V., 2002: Policy in transition: New framework for Russia’s climate
policy. Fondazione Eni Enrico Mattei (FEEM), Milano, Italy, Report58.2002.
KPMG Global Sustainability Services, 2005: KPMG International
Survey of Corporate Responsibility Reporting 2005.
Kumar, P., 2001: Valuation of ecological services of wetland ecosystems:
A case study of Yamuna flood plains in the corridors of Delhi.
Mimeograph, Institute of Economic Growth, Delhi.
Kunreuther, H., J. Linnerooth, R. Starnes, (eds.), 1982: Liquified energy
gas facility siting: International comparisons. IIASA, Laxenburg,
Austria.
La Rovere, E.L. and B. Americano, 1999: Assessment of global
environmental impacts of PROCEL: GHG emissions avoided by
PROCEL 1990-2020. Final Report to Electrobrás, Rio de Janeiro,
Brazil.
La Rovere, E.L. and A.R. Romeiro, 2003: Country study: Brazil.
Centroclima - COPPE/UFRJ and UNICAMP/EMBRAPA, Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil.
Lafferty, W., 1996: The politics of sustainable development: global norms
for national development. Environmental Politics, 5, pp. 185-208.
Lecocq, F. and K. Capoor, 2005: State and trends of the carbon market
2005. Prototype Carbon Fund and International Emissions Trading
Association, Washington D.C.
Lehtonen, M., 2004: The environmental-social interface of sustainable
development: capabilities, social capital, institutions. Ecological
Economics, 49(2), pp. 199-214.
Levi-Faur, D., 2005: The global diffusion of regulatory capitalism. Annals
of the American Academy of Political and Social Sciences, 598, pp.
12-32.
Levine, P., 2000: The new progressive era: Toward a fair and deliberative
democracy. Rowman & Littlefield Pub. Inc.
Levy, D. and P. Newell, 2000: Oceans apart? Business responses to global
environmental issues in Europe and the United States. Environment,
42(9), pp. 9-20.
Levy, D.L. and P.J. Newell, 2005: The Business of Global Environmental
Governance. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA and London.
Lewis, J.L. and R.H. Wiser, 2007: Fostering a renewable energy technology
industry: An international comparison of wind industry policy support
mechanism. Energy Policy 35, pp. 1844-1857.
Lewis, N., W. Moran, C. Cocklin, 2002: Restructuring, regulation and
sustainability. In The Sustainability of Rural Systems: Geographical
Interpretations. I. Bowler, C. Bryant, and C. Cocklin (ed.), Kluwer
Academic, Dordrecht, pp. 97-121.
Liberatore, A., and S. Funtowicz, 2003: ‘Democratising’ expertise,
‘expertising’ democracy: what does this mean, and why bother?
Science and Public Policy, 30, pp. 146-155.
Lindquist, L., 1980: The hare and the tortoise: Clean air policies in the
United States and Sweden. University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor.

Chapter 12	

Lindseth, G., 2004: The cities for climate protection campaign (CCPC)
and the framing of local climate policy. Local Environment, 9, pp. 325336.
Liverman, D.M., 1999: Geography and the global environment. Annals of
the Association of American Geographers, 89.
Lyon, T., 2003: ‘Green’ firms bearing gifts. Regulation, Fall, pp. 36-40.
MA, 2005: Current state and trends. Millenium Ecosystems Assessment,
Island Press, Washington D.C.
Machado, G., R. Schaeffer, E. Worrell, 2001: Energy and carbon embodied
in the international trade of Brazil: an input-output approach. Ecological
Economics, 39, pp. 409-424.
Markandya, A. and K. Halsnaes (eds.), 2002: Climate change and
sustainable development: prospects for developing countries.
Earthscan Publications, London.
Marsden, C., 2000: The new corporate citizenship of big business: Part
of the solution to sustainability? Business and Society Review, 105(1),
pp. 9.
Masera, O.R., B.D. Saatkamp, D.M. Kammen, 2000: From linear fuel
switching to multiple cooking strategies: A critique and alternative to
the energy ladder model. World Development, 28(12), pp. 2083-2103.
Mathy, S., J.-C. Hourcade, C. de Gouvello, 2001: Clean development
mechanism: leverage for development? Climate Policy, 1, pp. 251268.
McCully, P., 2001: Silenced rivers: The ecology and politics of large dams.
Zed Books, London.
Meadowcroft, J., 1997: Planning for sustainable development: Insights
from the literatures of political science. European Journal of Political
Research, 31, pp. 427-454.
Meadowcroft, J., 2000: Sustainable development: a new(ish) idea for a
new century. Political Studies, 48(2), pp. 370-387.
Meadows, D.H., 1998: Indicators and information systems for sustainable
development. A Report to the Balaton Group. The Sustainability
Institute, Hartland Four Corners, VT, <http://sustainabilityinstitute.
org/pubs/Indicators&Information.pdf> accessed 06/07/07.
Mebratu, D., 1998: Sustainability and sustainable development: historical
and conceptual review. Environmental Impact Assessment Review, 18,
pp. 493-520.
Metz, B., M. Berk, M. den Elzen, B. de Vries, D. van Vuuren, 2002: Towards
an equitable climate change regime: compatibility with Article 2 of the
climate change convention and the link with sustainable development.
Climate Policy, 2, pp. 211-230.
Metz, B., O. Davidson, H. de Coninck, M. Loos, L.A. Meyer, (eds.),
2005: Special Report on Carbon Dioxide Capture and Storage Special
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC),
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Michaelowa, A., 1998: Climate policy and interest groups: A public choice
analysis. Intereconomics, 33(6), pp. 251-259.
Michaelowa, A., 2003: CDM host country institution building. Mitigation
and Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 8, pp. 201-220.
Millimet, D.L., J.A. List, T. Stengos, 2003: The environmental Kuznets
curve: Real progress or misspecified models? Review of Economics
and Statistics, 85(4), pp. 1038-1047.
Mills, E., 2003: The insurance and risk management industries: New
players in the delivery of energy-efficient products and services.
Energy Policy, 31, pp. 1257-1272.
Mills, E., 2005: Insurance in a climate of change. In Science, 12(August),
pp. 1040-1044.
MNP, 2005: Quality and the future. Sustainability outlook. Netherlands
Environmental Assessment Agency, Bilthoven, Netherlands,
500013010, 28 pp.
Modi, V., S. McDade, L. Lallement, J. Saghir, 2006: Energy Services
for the Millenium Development Goals. Energy Sector Management
Assistance Program, United Nations Development Programme, UN
Millennium Project, World Bank, New York, USA, 109 pp.
Moldan, B., S. Billharz, R. Matravers (eds.), 1997: Sustainability
indicators: A report on the project on indicators of sustainable
development. SCOPE Report no. 58. Wiley, Chicester, UK.

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

Moomaw, W.R. and G.C. Unruh, 1997: Are environmental Kuznets
curves misleading us? The case of CO2 emissions. Environment and
Development Economics, 2, pp. 451-463, <http://ase.tufts.edu/gdae/
publications/archives/moomawpaper.pdf> accessed 06/07/07.
Morita, T. and H. Lee, 1998: IPCC Scenario Database. Mitigation and
Adaptation Strategies for Global Change, 3(2-4), pp. 121-131.
Morita, T., N. Nakicenovic, J. Robinson, 2000: Overview of Mitigation
Scenarios for Global Climate Stabilization Scenarios based on the new
IPCC Emissions Scenarios (SRES). Environmental Economics and
Policy Studies, 3(2).
Morita, T., J. Robinson, A. Adegbulugbe, J. Alcamo, D. Herbert, E.L. La
Rovere, N. Nakicenovic, H. Pitcher, P. Raskin, K. Riahi, A. Sankovski,
V. Sokolov, B. de Vries, D. Zhou, 2001: Greenhouse gas emission
mitigation scenarios and implications (Chapter 2). In Climate Change
2001 - Mitigation. Report of working group III of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). B. Metz, O. Davidson, R. Swart, and
J. Pan (ed.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 115-166.
Munasinghe, M., 1992: Environmental economics and sustainable
development. The World Bank, Washington D.C.
Munasinghe, M. and W. Cruz (eds.), 1995: Economy wide policies and
the environment: Lessons from experience. World Bank Environment
Paper, Washington D.C, USA, 86 pp.
Munasinghe, M. and R. Swart (eds.), 2000: Climate change and its linkages
with development, equity and sustainability. Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change, Geneva.
Munasinghe, M., 2000, Development, equity and sustainability (DES) in
the context of Climate Change. In Climate Change and its linkages
with development, equity and sustainability, M. Munasinghe and R.
Swart (eds.), Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, Geneva.
Nadel, S., 1997: Energy efficiency and economic development in New
York, New Jersey, and Pennsylvania. American Council for an Energy
Efficient Economy, Washington D.C.
Najam, A., 1996: Understanding the Third Sector: Revisiting the prince,
the merchant and the citizen. Nonprofit Management and Leadership,
7(2), pp. 203-19.
Najam, A., 1999: World business council for sustainable development:
The greening of business or a greenwash? In Yearbook of International
Co-operation on Environment and Development 1999/2000, H.O.
Bergesen, G. Parmann, and Ø.B. Thommessen ed. Earthscan
Publications, London, pp. 65-75.
Najam, A., 2000: The four C’s of third sector-government relations:
Cooperation, confrontation, complementarity, and co-optation.
Nonprofit Management and Leadership, 10(4), pp. 375-396.
Najam, A., I. Christopoulou, W.R. Moomaw, 2004: The emergent ‘system’
of global environmental governance. Global Environmental Politics,
4(23-35).
Najam, A. and C. Cleveland, 2003: Energy and sustainable development
at global environmental summits: An evolving agenda. Environment,
Development and Sustainability, 5(2), pp. 117-138.
Najam, A. and T. Page, 1998: The Climate Convention: Deciphering the
Kyoto Convention. Environmental Conservation, 25(3), pp. 187-194.
Najam, A., A. Rahman, S. Huq, Y. Sokona, 2003: Integrating sustainable
development into the fourth IPCC assessment. Climate Policy, Special
Issue on Climate Change and Sustainable Development, 3(Supplement
1), pp. S9-S17.
Nakicenovic, N. and R. Swart (eds), 2000: Emissions Scenarios. Special
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
Cambridge University Press, London.
Nelson, R.R. (ed.), 1993: National innovation systems. A comparative
analysis. Oxford, New York.
Newell, P., 2000: Climate for change: Nonstate actors and the global
politics of the greenhouse. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK.
Newman, P.W.G. and J.R. Kenworthy, 1991: Cities and automobile
dependence, an international sourcebook. Avebury Technical
Publishing, Aldershot, UK.

739

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

NIC, 2004: Mapping the global future. National Intelligence Council,
Washington, D.C.
Nivola, P.S., 1999: Laws of the landscape: How policies shape cities in
Europe and America. Brookings Institution Press, Washington, D.C.,
USA, 126 pp.
O’Riordan, T., C.L. Cooper, A. Jordan, S. Rayner, K. Richards, P. Runci,
and S. Yoffe, 1998: Institutional frameworks for political action.
Human Choice and Climate Change. Battelle Press, Ohio, 345-370
pp.
O’Riordan, T. and S. Stoll-Kleeman, 2002: Deliberative democracy and
participatory biodiversity. In Biodiversity, Sustainability and Human
Communities: Protecting Beyond the Protected. T. O’Riordan, and
S.S.-K. (eds.) ed. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 87112.
OECD, 1998: Sustainable development indicators. In OECD Expert
Workshop, Organization of Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD), Paris.
OECD, 2001: Sustainable development: Critical issues. Organization of
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Paris.
OECD, 2005: Health at a Glance, OECD Indicators. Organization of
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Paris.
OECD, 2002: Reforming energy subsidies. UN Environmental Programme
and Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development.
OECD/IEA, Oxford, UK, 31 pp.
Ogilvy, J. and P. Schwartz, 2000: China’s futures: Scenarios for the
world’s fastest growing economy, ecology, and society. Jossey-Bass,
San Francisco.
Opschoor, J.B., 1995: Ecospace and the fall and rise of throughput
intensity. Ecological Economics, 15, pp. 137-141.
Ostrom, E., 1990: Governing the commons: The evolution of institutions
for collective action. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Ostrom, E., 2000: Collective actions and the evolution of norms. Journal
of Economic Perspectives, 14, pp. 137-158.
Ostrom, E., T. Dietz, N. Dolsak, P.C. Stern, S. Stonich, E.U. Weber
(eds.), 2002: The drama of the commons. National Academy Press,
Washington, D.C.
Ott, H.E., H. Winkler, B. Brouns, S. Kartha, M. Mace, S. Huq, Y.
Kameyama, A.P. Sari, J. Pan, Y. Sokona, P.M. Bhandari, A. Kassenberg,
E.L. La Rovere, A. Rahman, 2004: South-North dialogue on equity
in the greenhouse. A proposal for an adequate and equitable global
climate agreement. Eschborn, GTZ.
Palmer, K. and R. Newell, K. Gillingham, 2004: Retrospective Examination
of Demand-side Energy-efficiency Policies, Discussion Papers dp-0419, Resources for the Future. <http://www.rff.org/documents/RFFDP-04-19REV.pdf> accessed 06/07/07.
Pan, J., 2003: Emissions rights and their transferability: equity concerns
over climate change mitigation, International Environmental
Agreements. Politics, Law and Economics, 3(1), pp. 1-16.
Pan, J., 2004a: China’s industrialization and reduction of greenhouse
emissions. China and the World Economy 12, no.3. <old.iwep.org.cn/
wec/2004_5-6/china’s%20industrialization.pdf> accessed 31/05/07.
Pan, J., 2004b: Meeting human development needs: emissions reductions
from a developing country perspective. IDS Bulletin on Climate
Change and Development, July 2004, 35(3), pp. 90-97.
Pan, J. 2004: Industrialisation and emissions reductions: challenges and
opportunities. China and World Economy, 3, pp. 1-16.
Pandey, K.D. and D. Wheeler, 2001: Structural adjustment and forest
resources: The impact of World Bank operations. World Bank Policy
Research Working Paper 2584, Washington, D.C.
Parris, T. and R. Kates, 2003: Characterizing and measuring sustainable
development. Annual Review of Energy & the Environment, 28, pp.
559-586.
Paterson, M., D. Humphreys, l. Pettiford, 2003: Conceptualizing global
environmental governance: from interstate regimes to counterhegemonic struggles. Global Environmental Politics, 3, pp. 1-10.
Pearce, D., 2000: The policy relevance and use of aggregate indicators:
Genuine savings. In OECD Proceedings, Frameworks to Measure
Sustainable Development. An OECD Expert Workshop. OECD, Paris.
740

Chapter 12

Pearce, D., A. Markandya, E.B. Barbier, 1989: Blueprint for a green
economy. Earthscan, London.
Petrich, C.H., 1993: Indonesia and global climate change negotiations:
potential opportunities and constraints for participation, leadership,
and commitment. Global and Environmental Change, 3(1), pp. 5377.
Pezzoli, K., 1997: Sustainable development: A transdisciplinary overview
of the literature. Journal of Environmental Planning and Management,
40(5), pp. 549-574.
Phadke, A., J. Sathaye, S. Padmanabhan, 2005: Economic benefits of
reducing Maharashtra’s electricity shortage through end-use efficiency
improvement. LBNL-57053.
Pharaoh, A., 2003: Corporate reputation: the boardroom challenge.
Corporate Governance, International Journal of Business in Society,
3(4), pp. 46-51.
Pimbert, M. and T. Wakeford, 2001: Overview - deliberative democracy
and citizen empowerment. PLA Notes, 40(February), pp. 23-28.
Pintér, L., P. Hardi, B. Bartelmus, 2005: Sustainable Development
Indicators - The way forward. December 15-17, 2005 Expert Group
Meeting of the United Nations Division for Sustainable Development,
Winnipeg, IISD for the UN-DSD, <http://www.iisd.org/pdf/2005/
measure_indicators_sd_way_forward.pdf> accessed 06/07/07.
Porritt, J., 2005: Healthy environment-healthy people: The links between
sustainable development and health. Public Health, 119(11), pp. 952953.
Porter, M. and M. Kramer, 2002: The competitive advantage of corporate
philanthropy. Harvard Business Review, 80(12), pp. 56-68.
Porter, M. and C. van der Linde, 1995: Green and competitive: Ending the
stalemate. Harvard Business Review, 73(5), pp. 120-133.
Post, J., L.E. Preston S. Sauter-Sachs, 2002: Redefining the corporation:
Stakeholder management and organizational wealth. Stanford
Business Books, Stanford.
Prasad, G. and H. Ranninger, 2003: The social impact of the basic
electricity support tariff (BEST). Domestic use of energy. Cape
Technikon, pp. 17-22, Cape Town.
PRC, 2004: Initial National Communication on Climate Change. China
Planning Press, Beijing, People’s Republic of China, 80 pp.
Prud’homme, R. and J.P. Bocarejo, 2005: The London congestion charge:
a tentative economic appraisal. Transport Policy, 12, pp. 279-287.
Putnam, R., 1993: Making democracy work: Civic traditions in modern
Italy. Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Rabinovitch, J. and J. Leitman, 1993: Environmental innovation and
management in Curitiba, Brasil. UNDP/UNCHS/World Bank,
Washington, D.C, 62 pp.
Rahman, A., M. Alam, Z. Karim, K. Islam, 2003: Bangladesh country case
study. Bangladesh Centre for Advanced Studies, Dhaka, Bangladesh.
Rao, C.H., 1994: Agricultural growth, rural poverty and environmental
degradation in India. Oxford University Press, Delhi.
Raskin, P., G. Gallopin, P. Gutman, A. Hammond, R. Swart, 1998: Bending
the curve: Toward global sustainability. A Report of the Global
Scenario Group. Stockholm Environment Institute, Boston.
Ravallion, M., M. Heil, J. Jalan, 2000: Carbon emissions and income
inequality. Oxford Economic Papers, 52, pp. 651-669.
Ravindranath, N.H. and J.A. Sathaye, 2002: Climate Change and
Developing Countries. Kluwer, 300 pp.
Rayner, S. and E. Malone (eds.), 1998: Human choice and climate change
(4 volumes). Batelle Press, Columbus, Ohio.
Rayner, S. and E. Malone, 2000: Security, governance and the environment.
In: Environment and Security: Discourses and Practices. Lowi, M.
and B. Shaw (ed.) Macmillan, Basingstoke.
Rayner, S. and K.R. Richards, 1994: I think that I shall never see ... a
lovely forestry policy. Land use programs for conservation of forests.
In Workshop of IPCC WGIII, Tsukuba.
Rayner, S., 1993: National case studies of institutional capabilities to
implement greenhouse gas reductions. Global Environmental Change,
3(Special issue), pp. 7-11.

Chapter 12	

Redclift, M. and T. Benton (eds.), 2006: Social movements and
environmental change. WHO (World Health Organization), 2006.
London and New York: Routledge, pp. 150-168.
Reed, D. (ed.), 1996: Structural adjustment, the environment, and
sustainable development. Earthscan, London.
Rees, W.E., 1996: Revisiting carrying capacity: Area based indicators
of sustainability. Population and Environment. A Journal of
interdisciplinary Studies, 17(39).
Renn, O., 2001: The role of social science in environmental policy making:
experiences and outlook. Science and Public Policy 28, pp. 427-437.
Rhodes, R., 1996: The new governance: Governing without government.
Political Studies, XLIV, pp. 652-657.
Richardson, J., G. Gustafsson, G. Jordan (eds.), 1982: The concept of
policy style. George Allen & Unwin, London.
Rieu-Clarke, A.S., 2004: Sustainable use and the EC Water Framework
Directive: From principle to practice? In International Law and
Sustainable Development. N. Schrijver and F. Weiss (ed.), Martinus
Nijhoff Publishers, The Netherlands, pp. 714.
Robinson, J., M. Bradley, P. Busby, D. Connor, A. Murray, B. Sampson, W.
Soper, 2006: Climate change and sustainable development: Realizing
the opportunity. Ambio, 35(1), pp. 2-8.
Robinson, J., 2004: Squaring the circle? Some thoughts on the idea of
sustainable development. Ecological Economics, 48, pp. 369-384.
Robinson, J. and D. Herbert, 2001: Integrating climate change
and sustainable development. International Journal of Global
Environmental Issues, 1(2), pp. 130-148.
RSA, 1998: National Environmental Management Act (Act 107 of 1998).
Republic of South Africa, Department of Environmental Affairs and
Tourism, Pretoria.
Ruebbelke, D., 1998: Entropic limits of irreversible processes and possible
adaptation mechanism for a sustainble development. World Resources
Review, 10(2).
Sachs, W., 1999: Sustainable development and the crisis of nature: On the
political anatomy of an oxymoron. In Living with Nature. F. Fischer
and M. Hajer (ed.), Oxford Scholarship Online, Oxford, pp. 23-42.
Santos, G. and G. Fraser, 2006: Road pricing: Lessons from London.
Economic Policy (April), pp. 263-310.
Sarkar, A.U. and S. Karagoz, 1995: Sustainable development of
Hydroelectric Power. Energy 20(10), pp. 977-981.
Sathaye, J., S. de la Rue du Can, S. Kumar, M. Iyer, C. Galitsky, A.
Phadke, M. M’cNeill, L. Price, R. Bharvirkar, 2006: Implementing
end-use efficiency improvements in India: Drawing from experience in
the US and other countries. LBNL-60035.
Sathaye, J., P. Monahan, A. Sanstad, 1996: Costs of reducing carbon
emissions from the energy sector: China, India, and Brazil, AMBIO,
25(4).
Sathaye, J. and S. Murtishaw, 2005: Market failures, consumer preferences,
and transaction costs in energy efficiency purchase decisions. Lawrence
Berkeley National Laboratory for the California Energy Commission,
PIER Energy-Related Environmental Research. CEC-500-2005-020/
LBNL-57318.
Schaefer, A. and A. Crane, 2005: Addressing sustainability and
consumption. Journal of Macromarketing, 1, pp 76-92.
Schaeffer, R. and A. Szklo, 2001: Future electric power technology choices
of Brazil: a possible conflict between local pollution and global climate
change. Energy Policy, 29(5), pp. 355-369.
Schaltegger, S., R. Burritt, H. Petersen, 2003: An introduction to corporate
environmental management: Striving for sustainability. Greenleaf
Publishing, UK.
Schipper, L., M. Ting, M. Khrushch, W. Golove, 1997: The evolution of
carbon dioxide emissions from energy use in industrialized countries:
An end-use analysis. Energy Policy, 25, pp. 651-672.
Schipper, L., S. Murtishaw, F. Unander, 2001: International comparisons of
sectoral carbon dioxide emissions using a cross-country decomposition
technique. The Energy Journal, 22(2), pp. 35-75.

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

Schmalensee, R., T.M. Stoker, R.A. Judson, 1998: World carbon dioxide
emissions 1950-2050. Review of Economics and Statistics, 80(1), pp.
15-27.
Schmidt, V., 2002: The Futures of European Capitalism. Oxford University
Press.
Schneider, S.H., W. Easterlig, L.O. Mearns, 2000: Adaptation: Sensitivity
to natural variability, agent assumptions and dynamic climate changes.
Climatic Change, 45(1), pp. 203-221.
Schumacher, K. and J. Sathaye, 2000: Carbon emissions trends for
developing countries and countries with economies in transition.
LBNL-44546. Quarterly Journal of Economic Research, 4(Special
Issue: Energy Structures Past 2000).
Senge, P. and G. Carstedt, 2001: Innovating our way to the next industrial
revolution. MIT Sloan Management Review, Winter, pp. 24-38.
Sharma, S., 2002: Research in corporate sustainability: What really
matters? In Research in Corporate Sustainability: The Evolving Theory
and Practice of Organisations in the Natural Environment. S. Sharma
and M. Starik (ed.), Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, pp. 1-22.
Shell, 2005: The Shell Global Scenarios to 2025: The business environment:
trends, trade-offs and choices. Shell, London.
Shove, E., L. Lutzenhiser, S. Guy, B. Hackett, H. Wilhite, 1998: Energy
and social systems. In Human Choice and Climate Change, Vol. 2
Resources and Technology. S. Rayner and E.L. Malone (ed.), Battelle
Press, Columbus, OH.
Shui, B. and R.C. Harriss, 2006: The role of CO2 embodiment in USChina trade. <http://www.globalchange.umd.edu/publications/94/>
accessed 06/07/07.
Shukla, P., R. Nair, M. Kapshe, A. Garg, S. Balasubramaniam, D. Menon,
K.K. Sharma, 2003: Development and climate: An assessment for
India. Indian Institute of Management, Ahmedabad.
Shukla, P.K., T. Heller, D.G. Victor, D. Biswas, T. Nag, A. Yajnik, 2005:
Electricity reforms in India: Firm choices and emerging generation
markets. Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi.
SID/IEA, 2000: Kenya at the crossroads: scenarios for our future. Society
for International Development and the Institute of Economic Affairs,
Nairobi, Kenya.
Siebenhuner, B., 2002: How do scientific assessments learn? Conceptual
Framework and Case Study of the IPCC. Environmental Science and
Policy, 5(5), pp. 411-420.
Sims, R.E.H., 2003: Bioenergy to mitigate for climate change and meet
the needs of the society, the economy and the environment. Adaptation
and Mitigation Strategies for Global Change, 8(4), pp. 349-370.
<http://www.springerlink.com/app/home/contribution.asp?wasp=23tl
pnyvqm1j502g9m7j&referrer=parent&backto=issue,2,7;journal,5,31;
searchpublicationsresults,1,2;> acessed 06/07/07.
SLG, 2001: Learning to manage global environmental risks: A comparative
history of climate change, ozone depletion and acid precipitation.
Social Learning Group, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Smit, B., O. Pilifosova, I. Burton, B. Challenger, S. Huq, R.J.T. Klein, G.
Yohe, 2001: Adaptation to climate change in the context of sustainable
development and equity. I Climate Change 2001: Impacts, Adaptation
and Vulnerability. J. McCarthy, O. Canziani, N. Leary, D. Dokken, and
K. White (ed.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Smith, A., 2003: Transforming technological regimes for sustainable
development: a role for alternative technology niches? Science and
Public Policy, 2, pp. 127-135.
Smith, K., 2002: In praise of petroleum? Science, 298, pp. 1847.
Smith, K.R., 1997: Development, health, and the environmental risk
transition. In International Perspectives in Environment, Development,
and Health. G. Shahi, B.S. Levy, A. Binger, T. Kjellstrom, and R.
Lawrence (ed.), Springer, New York, pp. 51-62.
Smith, K.R., J.M. Samet, I. Romieu, N. Bruce, 2000: Indoor air pollution
in developing countries and acute lower respiratory infections in
children. Thorax, 55, pp. 518-532.
Sohn, J., S. Nakhooda, K. Baumert, 2005: Mainstreaming climate change
considerations at the multilateral development banks. World Resources
Institute, Washington, D.C.
741

Sustainable Development and Mitigation	

Sohngen, B. and R. Sedjo, 2001: Forest set-asides and carbon sequestration.
In World Forests, Markets and Policies. M. Palo, J. Uusivuori, and G.
Mery (ed.), Kluwer Academic.
Sokona, Y., J.-P. Thomas, O. Touré, 2003: Development and climate:
Sengal country study. Environnement et Développement du Tiers
Monde (ENDA-TM), Dakar, Senegal.
Spalding-Fecher, R., A. Clark, M. Davis, G. Simmonds, 2002: The
economics of energy efficiency for the poor - a South African case
study. Energy: The International Journal, 27(12), pp. 1099-1117.
Spalding-Fecher, R. and G. Simmonds (eds.), 2005: Sustainable energy
development and the Clean Development Mechanism: African
Priorities. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, 124-135 pp.
Sparkes, R., 2002: Socially responsible investment: A global revolution.
John Wiley, Chichester.
Srivastava, L. and T. Heller, 2003: Integrating sustainable development
and climate change in AR4 (AR4 SCOP-2/Doc. 8, 12.VIII.2003).
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
SSEB, 2006: American energy security: Building a bridge to energy
independence and to a sustainable energy future. Southern States
Energy Board, Northcross, USA.
Stern, D.I., 2004: The rise and fall of the environmental Kuznets Curve.
World Development, 32(8), pp. 1419-1439.
Stern, P.C., 2000: Toward a coherent theory of environmentally significant
behavior. Journal of Social Issues, 56, pp. 407-424.
Stern, P.C. and H.V. Fineberg (eds.), 1996: Understanding risk: Informing
decisions in a democratic society. National Academy Press, Washington
D.C.
Stewart, R., 2001: A New generation of environmental regulation? Capital
Law Review, 21, pp. 182.
Stiglitz, J.E., 1998: Distinguished lecture on economics in government:
the private uses of public interests: incentives and institutions. Journal
of Economic Perspective, 12(2), pp. 3-22.
Stoll, S., 2003: Participatory Research.
Streets, D.G., K.J. Jiang, X. Hu, J.E. Sinton, X.-Q. Zhang, D. Xu, M.Z.
Jacobson, J.E. Hansen, 2001: Recent reductions in China’s greenhouse
gas emissions. Science, 294, pp. 1835-1837.
Sutter, C., 2003: Sustainability check-up for CDM projects: How to assess
the sustainability of international projects under the Kyoto Protocol.
Wissenschaftlicher Verlag, Berlin.
Suzuki, D. and A. McConnell, 1997: The sacred balance: Rediscovering
our place in nature. David Suzuki Foundation and Greystone Books,
Vancouver.
Swanson, D.A., L. Pinter, F. Bregha, A. Volkery, K. Jacob, 2004: National
strategies for sustainable development: challenges, approaches and
innovations in strategic and co-ordinated action. IIED-GTZ.
Swart, R., J. Robinson, S. Cohen, 2003: Climate change and sustainable
development: expanding the options. Climate Policy, Special Issue on
Climate Change and Sustainable Development, 3(S1), pp. S19-S40.
Szklo, A.S., R. Schaeffer, M.E. Schuller, W. Chandler, W., 2005: Brazilian
energy policies side-effects on CO2 emissions reduction. Energy
Policy, 33(3), pp. 349-364.
Tam, C.M., 1999: Build-Operate-Transfer model of infrastructure
developments in Asia: Reasons for successes and failures. International
Journal of Project Management, December 1999, pp. 377-382.
The Economist, 2000: Sins of the secular missionaries. January 29, 2000.
Thompson, D., 2002: Tools for environmental management: A practical
introduction and guide. New Society Publishers, Gabriola, British
Columbia.
Toman, M.A. and B. Jemelkova, 2003: Energy and economic development:
an assessment of the state of knowledge. Energy Journal, 24(4), pp.
93-112.
Transport for London, 2005: Central London congestion charging,
Impacts monitoring. Third 45 annual report, April 2005.
Turton, H. and L. Barreto, 2006: Long-term security of energy supply and
climate change. Energy Policy, 34(15).

742

Chapter 12

UCT, 2002: Options for a basic electricity support tariff: Analysis, issues
and recommendations for the Department of Minerals & Energy and
Eskom. Cape Town.
UNCSD, 2006: Johannesburg Plan of Implementation. United Nations
Commission for Sustainable Development, New York.
UNCTAD, 2006: World Investment Report 2006: FDI from developing and
transition economies: Implications for development. United Nations
Conference on Trade and Development, UN, New York and Geneva.
UNDP, 2004: Human Development Report, 2004. United Nations
Development Programme, Oxford University Press.
UNDP, 2005: Human Development Report 2005. United Nations
Development Programme Oxford, University Press Oxford.
UNDSD, 2006: United Nations Division for Sustainable Development.
<http://www.un.org/esa/sustdev/natlinfo/indicators/egmIndicators/
egm.htm> accessed 09/07/07.
UNEP, 2002: Global Environmental Outlook 3. United Nations
Environment Programme (UNEP), Nairobi, Earthscan, London.
UNEP, 2004: Energy subsidies: Lessons learned in assessing their impact
and designing policy reforms. Economic and Trade Branch, United
Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), Geneva, Switzerland.
UNEP/RIVM, 2004: The GEO-3 scenarios 2020-2032: quantification and
analysis of environmental impacts. UNEP/DEWA/RS.03-4, RIVM
Report 402001022.
United Nations, 1993: Agenda 21: Earth Summit- The United Nations
Programme of Action from Rio. New York, United Nations, <http://
www.springerlink.com/app/home/contribution.asp?wasp=23tlpnyvq
m1j502g9m7j&referrer=parent&backto=issue,2,7;journal,5,31;search
publicationsresults,1,2;> accessed 06/07/07.
US EPA, 2006: Clean energy-environment guide to action: Policies, best
practices, and action steps for states. United States Environmental
Protection Agency, EPA430-R-06-001.
USGBC, 2005: U.S. Green Building Council, <http://www.usgbc.org/>
accessed 10/07/07.
Vellinga, P.V., E. Mills, G. Berz, L. Bouwer, S. Huq, L.A. Kozak, J.
Palutikof, B. Schanzenbächer, G. Soler, 2001: Insurance and other
financial services. Chapter 8: Climate Change 2001: Impacts,
Vulnerability, and Adaptation. Contribution of Working Group II to the
Third Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
Venetoulis, J., D. Chazan, C. Gaudet, 2004: The ecological footprint of
nations. Redefining Progress, <http://www.redefiningprogress.org/>
accessed 06/07/07.
Vennemo, H., K. Aunan, J. Fang, P. Holtedahl, T. Hu, H.M. Seip, 2006:
Domestic environmental benefits of China’s energy related CDM
potential. Climatic Change, 75(1-2), pp. 215-239.
Victor, D. and T.C. Heller, 2007: The political economy of power sector
reform: The experience of five major developing countries, Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge.
Vitousek, P., P.R. Ehrlich, A.H. Ehrlich, P. Matson, 1986: Human
appropriation of the products of photosynthesis. Bioscience, 34(6), pp.
368-373.
Wackernagel, M. and W.E. Rees, 1996: Our ecological footprint: reducing
human impact on the earth. New Society Publishers, Gabriola Island,
BC. Philadelphia, PA. ISBN 086571312X.
Wagner, M. and G. Müller-Fürstenberg, 2004: The Carbon Kuznets Curve:
A cloudy picture emitted by lousy econometrics? Discussion Paper 0418. University of Bern, 36 pp.
Walker, W., 2000: Entrapment in large technology systems: institutional
commitment and power relations. Research Policy, 29, pp. 833-846.
WBCSD, 2004: The Greenhouse Gas Protocol: A corporate accounting
and reporting standard. (Revised edition), World Business Council for
Sustainable Development (WBCSD)/WRI.
WCED, 1987: Our common future. World Commission on Environment
and Development. Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Weiner, J., 2002: Comparing precaution in the United States and Europe.
Journal of Risk Research, 5(4), pp. 317-349.

Chapter 12	

Welsch, H., 2001: The determinants of production-related carbon emissions
in West Germany 1985-1990: assessing the role of technology and
trade. Structural Change and Economic Dynamics, 12, pp. 425-455.
Wheeler, D., 2001: Racing to the bottom? Foreign investment and air
pollution in developing countries. World Bank, Policy Research
Working Paper 2524, Washington D.C, USA, 24 pp.
WHO, 2002: The world health report 2002 - reducing risks, promoting
healthy life. World Health Organisation, Geneva, Switzerland, 248
pp.
Wilbanks, T., 2003: Integrating climate change and sustainable
development in a place-based context. Climate Policy, 3(S1), pp.
S147-S154.
Wilson, D. and C. Change, 2003: CEMEX promotes a sustainable approach
with manufacturing excellence. Environmental Quality Management,
12(4).
Windsor, D., 2004: Stakeholder influence strategies for smarter growth.
In Research in Corporate Sustainability: The Evolving Theory and
Practice of Organisations in the Natural Environment. S. Sharma and
M. Starik, et al. (eds), Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, pp. 93-116.
Winkler, H., 2004: National policies and the CDM: Avoiding perverse
incentives. Journal of Energy in Southern Africa, 15(4), pp. 118-122.
Winkler, H., K.A. Baumert, O. Blanchard, S. Burch, J. Robinson, 2007:
What factors influence mitigative capacity? Energy Policy, 35(1), pp.
692-703.
Winkler, H., B. Brouns, S. Kartha, 2006: Future mitigation commitments:
Differentiating among non-Annex I countries. Climate Policy, 5(5),
pp. 469-486.
Winkler, H., R. Spalding-Fecher, S. Mwakasonda, O. Davidson, 2002a:
Sustainable development policies and measures: starting from
development to tackle climate change. World Resources Institute,
Washington, D.C, pp. 61-87.
Winkler, H., R. Spalding-Fecher, L.Tyani, 2002b: Comparing developing
countries under potential carbon allocation schemes. Climate Policy,
2(4), pp. 303-318.
Winkler, H. and S. Thorne, 2003: Baselines for suppressed demand: CDM
projects contribution to poverty alleviation. South African Journal of
Economic and Management Sciences, 5(2), pp. 413-429.
Winters, L.A., N. McCullough, A. McKay, 2004: Trade liberalization
and poverty, the evidence so far. Journal of Economic Literature,
42(March), pp. 72-115.

Sustainable Development and Mitigation

World Bank, 1994: World development report 1994, infrastructures for
development. Washington D.C., USA.
World Bank, 1999: The effect of a shadow price on carbon emission in
the energy portfolio of the World Bank: A carbon backcasting exercise.
Report No. ESM 212/99.
World Bank, 2000: World Development Report. World Bank.
World Bank, 2003: World Development Report. Sustainable development
in a dynamic world: Transforming institutions, growth, and quality of
life. World Bank, Washington, D.C, 250 pp.
World Bank, 2004: World Development Report. Oxford University Press,
Oxford.
Wu, L., S. Kaneko, S. Matsuoka, 2005: Driving forces behind the
stagnancy of China’s energy-related CO2 emissions from 1996 to
1999: the relative importance of structural change, intensity change
and scale change. Energy Policy, 33, pp. 319-335.
Wyatt, A.B., 2002: The privatisation of public infrastructure in transitional
Southeast Asian economies: The case of build-own-operate-transfer
projects in Vietnam and Laos. In Collective Goods, Collective Futures
in Asia, S. Sargeson (ed.), London: Routledge.
Yamin, F. and J. Depledge, 2004: The international Climate Change
regime: A guide to rules, institutions and procedures. Cambridge
University Press.
Yearley, S., 1994: Social movements and environmental change. In Social
Theory and the Global Environment. M. Redclift, and T. Benton (eds.),
Routledge, London and New York, pp. 150-168.
Yohe, G., 2001: Mitigative capacity - the mirror image of adaptive capacity
on the emissions side: An editorial. Climatic Change, 49, pp. 247262.
Yohe, G. and R. Moss, 2000: Economic sustainability, indicators and
climate change. In Climate Change and its linkages with development,
equity and sustainability. Proceedings of the IPCC Expert Meeting
[Munasinghe, M. and R. Swart (eds.)]. IPCC and World Meteorological
Organization, Geneva (2000), Colombo, Sri Lanka (27-29 April,
1999).
Zaelke, D., D. Kaniaru, E. Kruz̆íková (eds), 2005: Making Law Work:
Environmental Compliance & Sustainable Development. Vol. 1 & 2.
INECE.
Zanetti, A., S. Schwartz, R. Enz, 2005: Natural catastrophes and manmade disasters in 2004: more than 300,000 fatalities, record insured
losses. Swiss Reinsurance Company, Vol. sigma 1/2005.

743

