 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

V 1.0 November, 2010 

CYBERSECURITY 

The protection of data and systems in networks that 

connect to the Internet 

10 Best Practices 

For The Small Healthcare Environment 

Your  Regional Extension Center Contact 

[Name] 
[Address 1] 
[Address 2] 
[City], [State] [Zip Code] 
[Phone Number] 
[Email Address] 

1 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

V 1.0 November, 2010 

This document is for duplex printing. 

2 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

V 1.0 November, 2010 

Table of Contents 

Background ............................................................................................................................5 
How to Use This Guide..........................................................................................................6 
Introduction............................................................................................................................7 
Why Should Healthcare Practices Worry About Security? .............................................. 7 
Practice 1: Use strong passwords and change them regularly ...............................................8 
Practice 2: Install and Maintain Anti-Virus Software..........................................................10 
Practice 3: Use a Firewall ....................................................................................................11 
Practice 4: Control Access to Protected Health Information ...............................................12 
Practice 5: Control Physical Access ....................................................................................14 
Practice 6: Limit Network Access .......................................................................................15 
Practice 7: Plan for the Unexpected.....................................................................................15 
Practice 8: Maintain Good Computer Habits.......................................................................16 
Configuration Management ............................................................................................ 17 
Software Maintenance .................................................................................................... 17 
Operating Maintenance ................................................................................................... 18 
Practice 9: Protect Mobile Devices......................................................................................19 
Practice 10: Establish a Security Culture.............................................................................21 
Practice 1: Password Checklist ............................................................................................25 
Practice 2: Anti-Virus Checklist ..........................................................................................27 
Practice 3: Firewall Checklist ..............................................................................................29 
Practice 4: Access Control Checklist ...................................................................................31 
Practice 5: Physical Access Checklist..................................................................................33 
Practice 6: Network Access Checklist .................................................................................35 
Practice 7: Backup and Recovery Checklist ........................................................................37 
Practice 8: Maintenance Checklist.......................................................................................39 
Practice 9: Mobile Devices Checklist ..................................................................................41 
List of Acronyms .................................................................................................................43 
References & Resources ......................................................................................................44 

3 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

V 1.0 November, 2010 

This page intentionally left blank. 

4 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

V 1.0 November, 2010 

Background 
Cybersecurity: The protection of data and systems in networks that connect to 
the Internet - 10 Best Practices for the Small Healthcare Environment 

Good  patient  care  means  safe  record-keeping  practices.  Never  forget  that  the 
electronic health record (EHR) represents a unique and valuable human being: it  is 
not just a collection of data that you are guarding. It is a life. 

Stage 1 Meaningful Use criteria make it virtually certain that eligible providers will have 
to  have  an  Internet  connection.  To  exchange  patient  data,  submit  claims  electronically, 
generate electronic records for patients requests, or e-prescribe, an Internet connection is a 
necessity,  not  an  option.  To  protect  the   confidentiality,   integrity,   and   availability  of 
electronic health record systems, regardless of how they are delivered; whether installed in a 
physicians office, accessed over the Internet, basic cybersecurity practices are needed. 

The  U.S.  Department  of  Health  and  Human  Service  (HHS),  through  the  Office  of  the 
National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC) is providing this guide as a 
first take on the key security points to keep in mind when protecting EHRs. 

Depending on the configuration of the EHR, some of these best practices may be more 
applicable  than  others. ONCs Regional Extension Centers (RECs) can be of assistance in 
determining which are applicable and which are not. 

We also remind small practices that the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability 
Act (HIPAA)  Privacy and Security Rules provides federal protections for protected health 
information (PHI) held by covered entities and gives patients an array of rights with respect 
to  that  information.  Individuals,  organizations, and  agencies  that  meet  the  definition  of  a 
covered  entity  under  HIPAA must  comply  with  the  Rules  requirements  to  protect  the 
privacy  and  security  of  health  information,  including  the  requirement  under  the  HIPAA 
Security Rule to perform a risk analysis as part of their security management processes. It is 
important to understand that the following cybersecurity practices are not intended to provide 
guidance regarding how to comply with HIPAA; rather, they are a first step to the effective 
setup of new EHR systems in a way that minimizes the risk to health information maintained 
in EHRs. Guidance about how to comply with the HIPAA Privacy and Security Rules can be 
found on the HHS Office for Civil Rights (OCR) website at 
http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/summary/index.html. 

5 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

V 1.0 November, 2010 

How to Use This Guide 

This guide contains explanations for each of the ten identified best practices, as well as 
checklists  to   support  healthcare  practices  validating  that  they  are  meeting  the  basic 
requirements  outlined  in  each  section.  The  document  has  been  formatted  for  ease  of  use. 
Simply print out the guide in a duplex (double-sided) format. The checklists, numbered by 
section, are at the end of the document and can be removed to be used as standalone pages. In 
electronic form, each checklist is linked back to the section that references it. 

The information contained in this guide is not intended to serve as legal advice nor should it 
substitute  for  legal  counsel.  The  material  in  this  guide  is  designed  to  provide  information 
regarding best practices and assistance to Regional Extension Center staff in the performance 
of technical support and implementation assistance. The guide is not exhaustive, and readers 
are encouraged to seek additional detailed technical guidance to supplement the information 
contained herein. 

6 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

V 1.0 November, 2010 

Introduction 

Why Should Healthcare Practices Worry About Security? 

at 

these 

The  Threat  of  Cyber  Attacks:  Most  everyone  has  seen  news  reports  of  cyber  attacks 
against,  for  example,  nationwide  utility  infrastructures  or  the  information  networks  of  the 
Pentagon. Healthcare providers may believe that if they are small and low profile, they will 
escape the attentions of the bad guys who are running these attacks. Yet, every day there 
are  new  attacks  aimed  specifically  at  small  to 
mid-size  organizations  for  the  very  reason  that 
they  are  low  profile  and  less  likely  to  have  fully 
protected themselves. Criminals have been highly 
successful 
smaller 
organizations,  carrying  out  their  activities  while 
their  unfortunate  victims  are  unaware  until  it  is 
too late. 

What is cyber security? 
 
The protection of data and systems in 
networks that connect to the Internet. 
 
This definition applies to any 
computer or other device that can 
transmit electronic health records to 
another device over a network 
connection, whether it uses the 
Internet or some other network. 

penetrating 

information 

It is vital to do as much as possible to protect 
sensitive  health 
in  EHRs.  The 
consequences  of  a  successful  cyber  attack  could 
be  very  serious,  including  loss  of  patient  trust, 
violations of the Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability  Act  (HIPAA),  or  even  loss  of  life  or  of  the  practice  itself.  Real-world 
examples large and small abound. Barely a day goes by that the press does not have reports 
of the latest cyber-attacks. 

Until now, relatively few healthcare practices have been targeted by these criminals. With 
increasing  adoption  of  EHRs,  many  more  practices  will  soon  have  new  systems  in  place, 
which could increase the level of attacks. 

Our  Own  Worst  Enemy:  Even  though  cyber  attacks  from  hackers  and  other  criminals 
grab a lot of headlines, research indicates that often times, well-meaning computer users can 
be their own worst enemies. Why? Because they fail to follow basic safety principles. This 
might be due to lack of training, time pressures, or any of a range of reasons. Yet, following 
these practices can sometimes be just as important and just as basic to patient safety as good 
hand-washing practice. 

This document will discuss ten simple best practices that should be taken to reduce the 
most  important  threats  to  the  safety  of  electronic  health  records.  This  core  set  of  best 
practices was developed by a team of cybersecurity and healthcare subject matter experts to 
address the unique needs of the small healthcare practice. They are based on a compilation 
and  distillation  of  cybersecurity  best  practices,  particularly  those  developed  under  the 
auspices of the Information Security Alliance. 

7 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 

11/22/2010 

Practice 1: Use strong passwords and change them regularly 

Passwords are the first line of defense in preventing unauthorized access to any computer. 
Regardless of type or operating system, a password should be required to log in and do any 
work. Although a strong password will not prevent attackers from trying to gain access,  it 
can  slow  them  down  and  discourage  all  but  the  most  determined.  In  addition,  strong 
passwords,  combined  with  effective  access  controls,  help  to  prevent  casual  misuse,  for 
example, staff members pursuing their personal curiosity about a case even though they have 
no legitimate need for the information. 

Strong passwords are ones that are not easily guessed. Since attackers may use automated 

What about forgotten passwords? 
 
Anyone can forget a password. The 
longer the password, the more likely 
this occurrence. To discourage 
people from writing down their 
passwords and leaving them in 
unsecured locations, plan for 
password recovery. This could 
involve allowing two different staff 
members to be authorized to add, 
delete and/or re-set passwords, 
storing passwords in a safe, or 
selecting a product that has built-in 
password recovery tools. 

methods to try to guess a password, it is important to 
choose a password that  does not have  characteristics 
that   could  make  it  vulnerable.  Strong  passwords 
should not include: 

  Words  found  in  the  dictionary,  even  if 
they  are  slightly  altered,  for  example  by 
replacing a letter with a number. 

  Personal  information  such  as  birth  date, 
names  of  self,  or  family,  or  pets,  social 
security   number,   or  anything  else  that 
could  easily  be 
learned  by  others. 
Remember: if a piece of information is on 
a social networking site, it should never be 
used in a password. 

 
 

Strong passwords should: 

  Be at least 8 characters in length 
 

 
 

Include a combination of upper case and lower case letters, at least one number 
and at least one special character, such as a punctuation mark 

 
 

Finally, systems should be configured so that passwords must be changed on a regular basis. 
While this may be inconvenient for users, it also reduces some of the risk that a system will 
be easily broken into with a stolen password. 
Passwords and Strong Authentication 
Strong,  or  multi-factor,  authentication  combines  multiple  different  authentication  methods 
resulting  in  stronger  security.  In  addition  to  a  user  name  and  password,  another  method  is 
used.  While  a  username  is  something  you  know  and  a  password  is  something  you  know, 
multi-factor  authentication also  includes  either  something  you  have,  like  a  smart  card  or  a 
key-fob, or something that is part of who you are, such as a fingerprint or a scan of your iris. 

8 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

11/22/2010 

Under  Federal  regulations  permitting  e-prescribing  of  controlled  substances,  multi-factor 
authentication must be used. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

9 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

11/22/2010 

Practice 2: Install and Maintain Anti-Virus Software 

 
How can users recognize a computer 
virus infection? 
 
Some typical symptoms of an 
infected computer include: 
  System will not start normally 
(e.g., blue screen of death) 

  System repeatedly crashes for no 

obvious reason 

  Internet browser goes to 

unwanted web pages 

  Anti-virus software appears not to 

be working 

  Many unwanted advertisements 

pop up on the screen 

  The user cannot control the 

The   primary   way   that   attackers   compromise 
computers  in  the  small  office  is  through  viruses  and 
similar   code   that   exploits   vulnerabilities   on   the 
machine. These  vulnerabilities are ubiquitous due to 
the  nature  of  the  computing  environment.  Even  a 
computer that has all of the latest security updates to 
its operating  system  and  applications  may still be at 
risk   because   of   previously   undetected   flaws.   In 
addition,  computers  can   become 
infected  by 
seemingly  innocent  outside  sources  such  as   CD- 
ROMs,  e-mail,  flash  drives,  and  web  downloads. 
Therefore,  it  is  important  to  use  a  product  that 
provides   continuously   updated   protection   against 
these  exploits.  Anti-virus    software  
is  widely 
available,   well-tested   to  be  reliable,   and    costs 
relatively little. 

After implementation it  is important to keep 
anti-virus  software  up  to  date.  Anti-virus  products 
require regular updates from the vendor in order to protect from the newest computer viruses 
and  malware.  Most  anti-virus  software  automatically  generates  reminders  about  these 
updates and many are configurable to allow for automated updating.. 

mouse/pointer 

 
 

Without anti-virus software to combat infections, data may be stolen, destroyed, or 

defaced, and attackers could take control of the machine. 

 
 

 
 

10 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

11/22/2010 

Practice 3: Use a Firewall 

Unless  a  small  practice  uses  an  EHR  system  that  is  totally  disconnected  from  the 
Internet1,  it  should  have  a  firewall  to  protect  against  intrusions  and  threats  from  outside 
sources. While anti-virus software will help to find and destroy malicious software that has 
already   entered,   a   firewalls   job   is   to   prevent 
intruders from entering in the first place. In short, the  When should a hardware firewall be 
anti-virus can be thought of as infection control while 
the firewall has the role of disease prevention. 

A firewall can take the form of a software product 
or  a  hardware  device.  In  either  case,  its  job  is  to 
inspect all messages coming into the system from the 
outside  (either  from  the  internet  or  from  a  local 
network) and determine, according to pre-determined 
criteria, whether the message should be allowed in. 

used? 
 
Large practices that use a local area 
network (LAN) should consider a 
hardware firewall. A hardware 
firewall sits between the LAN and 
the internet, providing centralized 
management of firewall settings. This 
increases the security of the LAN, 
since it ensures that the firewall 
settings are uniform for all users. 
 
If a hardware firewall is used, it 
should be configured, monitored, and 
maintained by a specialist in this 
subject. 

 technically 
 can  be 
Configuring  a    firewall 
complicated,  and  hardware 
 firewalls  should  be 
configured  by  trained  technical  personnel.  Software 
firewalls, on the other hand, are often pre-configured 
with common settings that tend to be useful in many 
situations. Software firewalls are included with some 
popular operating systems, providing protection at the 
installation   stage.   Alternatively,   separate   firewall 
software is widely available from computer security vendors, including most of the suppliers 
of  anti-virus  software.  Both  types  of  firewall  software  normally  provide  technical  support 
and  configuration  guidance  to  enable  successful  configuration  by  users  without  technical 
expertise. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

1  

An unlikely case, but theoretically possible. 

11 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 

11/22/2010 

Practice 4: Control Access to Protected Health Information 

All health  care  providers,  health  plans,  and  health  care  clearinghouses  that  transmit  health 
information in  electronic  form in connection with a transaction for which the Secretary of 
HHS has adopted standards under HIPAA are covered entities and must comply with the 
HIPAA Privacy and Security Rules. The HIPAA Rules define protected health information 
(PHI) as all individually identifiable health information held or transmitted by a covered 
entity  or  its  business  associate,  in  any  form  or  media,  whether  electronic,  paper,  or  oral. 
Generally,  individually  identifiable  health  information  is  information  that  relates  to  an 
individuals health and that identifies an individual or for which there is a reasonable basis to 
believe can be used to identify an individual. 

To minimize  the  risk  to  protected  health  information  when  effectively  setting  up  EHR 
systems,  Practice  1 discussed the importance of passwords. The password, however, is only 
one half of what makes up a computer users credentials. The other half is the users identity, 
or   user   name.   In   most   computer   systems,   these 
credentials (user name and password) are used as part 
of  an   access   control  system  in  which  users  are 
assigned certain rights to access the data within. This 
access  control  system  might  be  part  of  an  operating 
system  (e.g.,  Windows)  or   built   into  a  particular 
application (e.g., an e-prescribing module), often both 
are true. In any case, an EHR implementation needs to 
be configured to grant access to PHI  only  to  people 
with a need to know it. The need to know is narrowly 
defined,   so   EHR   systems   should   be   configured 
carefully  to  allow  limitation  of  access  in  all  but  the 
smallest practices. 

What if protected health information 
is accessed without permission? 
 
If protected health information is 
accessed by a person not authorized 
to access it, then this could indicate a 
violation of both the HIPAA Privacy 
and Security Rules. Under certain 
circumstances, such an incident may 
have to be reported to HHS and/or a 
state agency as a breach of 
unsecured protected health 
information. Having good access 
controls and knowledge of who has 
viewed or used information (i.e., 
access logs) can help to prevent or 
detect these data breaches. 

 
 

For many situations in small practices, setting file 
access  permissions may be done manually, using an 
access control list. This can only be done by someone 
with administrative rights to the system, which means 
that  this  individual  must  be  fully  trusted.  Prior  to 
setting  these  permissions,  it  is  important  to  identify 
which files should be accessible to which staff members. 

 
 

Add 
 

itional access controls that may be configured include role-based  access  control, in 
which a staff  members role within the practice  (e.g.,  physician,  nurse,  billing) determines 
what  information  may  be  accessed.  In  this  case,  care  must  be  taken  to  assign  staff  to  the 
correct roles and then to set the access permissions for each role correctly with respect to the 
need to know. 

The combination of regulations and the varieties of access control possibilities make this 

one of the more complex processes of setting up an EHR system in the small practice. 

12 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

11/22/2010 

13 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

11/22/2010 

Practice 5: Control Physical Access 

is 

the 

through 

Not only must assets like files and information to be secured, the devices themselves that 
make  up  an   EHR  system  must  also  be  safe  from  unauthorized  access.  The  single  most 
common  way  that  protected  health  information  is 
compromised 
loss  of  devices 
themselves,  whether  this  happens  through  theft  or 
accidentally.  Incidents  reported  to  HHSs  Office  for 
Civil Rights show that more than half of all these data 
loss   cases   consist   of   missing   devices,   including 
portable  storage  media  (e.g.,  thumb  or  flash  drives, 
CD   or   DVD   disks),   laptops,   handhelds,  desktop 
computers,   and   even   hard   drives   ripped   out   of 
machines,  lost  and  stolen  backup  tapes,  and    entire 
network servers. 

Where should I place my server that 
stores PHI? 
 
When considering where to locate a 
server with EHR, PHI or other PII 
two main factors should be 
considered: physical and 
environmental protection. Physical 
protection should be focused on 
preventing unauthorized individuals 
from accessing the server (e.g. 
storing the server in locked room 
accessible only to staff). 
Environmental protections should 
focus on protecting the server from 
fire, water and other elements (e.g. 
never store a server in a restroom, 
instead store the server off the floor, 
away from water and windows and in 
a temperature regulated room). 

Should a data storage device disappear, no matter 
how  well  an  office  has  taken  care  of  its  passwords, 
access control, and file permissions, it is still possible 
that  a  determined 
the 
information  on  it.  Therefore,  it  is  important  to  limit 
the   possibility   of   devices   disappearing   or   being 
tampered with. 

individual  could  access 

Securing  devices   and 

information  physically 
should  include  policies  limiting  physical  access,  for 
example,  securing  machines 
rooms, 
managing physical keys, and restricting the ability to 
remove devices from a secure area. 

locked 

in 

 
 

 
 

 
 

14 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 

11/22/2010 

Practice 6: Limit Network Access 

Ease of use and flexibility make contemporary networking tools very appealing. Web 2.0 
technologies  like  peer-to-peer  file  sharing  and  instant  messaging  are  popular  and  widely 
used. Wireless routing is a quick and easy way to set up broadband capability within a home 
or office. However, because of the sensitivity of healthcare information and the fact that it is 
protected by law; tools that might  allow outsiders to gain access  to a healthcare practices 
network must be used with extreme caution. 

Wireless routers that allow a single incoming cable or DSL line to be used by multiple 
computers are readily available for less than $100. For the small practice that intends to rely 
on  wireless  networking,  special  precautions  are  in  order.  Unless  the  wireless  router  is 
secured, its signal can be picked up from some  distance  away,  including,  for  example,  the 
buildings parking lot, other offices in the same building, or even nearby homes. Since PHI 
data flowing over the wireless network must be protected by law, it is crucial to secure the 
wireless signal so that only those who are permitted to access the information can pick up the 
signal. When a wireless router is used, it must be set up to operate only in encrypted mode2. 
Devices  brought  into  the  practice  by  visitors  should  not  be  permitted  access  to  the 
network, since it is unlikely that such devices can be fully vetted for security on short notice. 
Setting up a network to safely permit guest access is expensive and time-consuming, so the 
best defense is to prohibit casual access. In configuring a wireless network, each legitimate 
device must be identified to the router and only those devices permitted access. 

Peer-to-peer  applications,  such  as  file  sharing  and  instant  messaging  can  expose  the 
connected  devices  to  security  threats  and  vulnerabilities,  including  permitting  unauthorized 
access to the devices on which they are installed. Check to make sure these and other peer-to- 
peer  applications  have  not  been  installed  without  explicit  review  and  approval.  It  is  not 
sufficient  to just  turn  these  programs  off or  uninstall them.  A machine containing peer-to- 
peer  applications  may  have  exploitable  bits  of  code  that  are  not  removed  even  when  the 
programs are removed. 

 
 

A good policy is to prohibit staff from installing software without prior approval.. 

 
 

Practice 7: Plan for the Unexpected 

Sooner or later, the unexpected will happen. Fire, flood, hurricane, earthquake and other 
 
natural or man-made disasters can strike at any time. Important healthcare records and other 
 
vital assets must be protected against loss from these events. There are two key parts to this 
practice: creating backups and having a sound recovery plan. 

2  Encryption modes are specified in IEEE standard 802.11i. This standard is commonly referenced on the 
packaging of wireless routers. The correct encryption modes are WPA2 or WPA, not WEP. 

15 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

11/22/2010 

In  the  world  of  business,  creating  a  backup  is  routine  practice.  In  the  small  practice, 
however,  it  may  be  that  the  staff  members  are  only  familiar  with  a  home  computing 
environment, where backups are rarely considered until a crash happens, by which time it is 
too late. From the first day a new EHR is functioning in a practice, the data must be backed 
up regularly and reliably. A reliable backup is one that can be counted on in an emergency, 
so it is important not only that all the data be correctly captured, but that it can quickly and 
accurately  be  restored.  Backup  media  must  be  tested  regularly  for  their  ability  to  restore 
properly. 

Whatever medium is used to hold the backup data 
(e.g.,   magnetic  tape,   CD,  DVD,   removable  hard 
drive),  it  must  be  stored  safely  so  that  it  cannot  be 
wiped out by the same  disaster that befalls the  main 
system. Depending on the local geography or type of 
risk,  this  could  mean  that  backups  should  be  stored 
many  miles  away.  One  emerging  option  for  backup 
storage  is  cloud  computing,  which  may  be  a  viable 
option   for   many,   since   it  involves   no   hardware 
investment  and  little  technical  expertise.  However, 
cloud backup must be selected with care. The backed- 
up data must be as secure as the original and must be 
stored according to HIPAA regulatory requirements. 

Critical files can be manually copied onto backup 
media,  although  this  can  be  tedious  and  potentially 
error-prone. If possible, an automated backup method 
should be used. 

 
 

 
Is it OK to store my backup media at 
home? 
 
A fireproof, permanently installed 
home safe, which only the healthcare 
provider knows the combination for, 
may be the most feasible choice for 
many practices to store backup 
media. This would not place the 
backup out of the danger zone of a 
widespread disaster (earthquake, 
hurricane, nuclear), but it would 
provide some safety against local 
emergencies such as fire and flood. 
Fireproof portable boxes or safes 
where non-staff have the combination 
are inadequate. 

Some types of backup media are reusable, such as 

magnetic  tape  and  removable  hard  drives.  These  media  can  wear  out  over  time  and  after 
multiple backup cycles. It is especially important to test them for reliable restore operations 
as they age. 

Storage  of  backup  media  must  be  protected  with  the  same  type  of  access  controls 

described above in Practices 4 and 5. 

 
 

Recovery  planning  must  be  done  so  that  when  an  emergency  occurs  there  is  a  clear 
procedure in place. In a disaster, it is possible that healthcare practices will be called upon to 
supply  medical  records  and  information  rapidly.  The  practice  must  be  prepared  to  access 
their backups and restore functionality, which requires knowledge about where the backups 
are stored, how they were prepared, and what types of equipment are needed to read them. If 
possible,  this  information  must  be  placed  for  safekeeping  at  a  remote  location  where 
someone has responsibility for producing it in the event of emergency. 

 
 

Practice 8: Maintain Good Computer Habits 

The  medical  practitioner  is  familiar  with  the  importance  of  healthy  habits  to  maintain 
good health and reduce the risk of infection and disease. The same is true for EHR systems; 
they must be properly maintained so that they will continue to function properly and reliably 

16 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

  Uninstall  any  software  application  that  is  not 
essential to running the  practice  (e.g., games, 
IM clients, photo sharing tools). If the purpose 
of a software application is not obvious, check 
with the EHR vendor and look it up by name 
on  any  of  the  several  web  sites  that  maintain 
databases of applications and their purpose. 

  Do  not  simply  accept  defaults  or  standard 
configurations  when  installing  software.  Step 
through  each  option,  understand  the  choices, 
and  obtain 
assistance  where 
necessary3. 

technical 

How do you know if staff has 
downloaded programs they are not 
supposed to? 
 
There are several applications and 
services available commercially that 
perform desktop audits. These 
applications/services can be set up to 
report or even stop the download of 
rogue/unapproved software. Some of 
these also have other useful 
functions, like doing a general 
security audit. Product 
recommendations are beyond the 
scope of this guide, but a quick 
search on software audit will turn 
up many hits. 

 

11/22/2010 

in a manner that respects the importance and the sensitive nature of the data stored within 
them. As with any health regimen, simple measures go a long way. 

Configuration Management 

New computers and software packages are delivered with a dizzying array of options and 
little  guidance  on  how  to  configure  them  so  that  the  system  is  secure.  In  the  face  of  this 
complexity, it can be difficult to know what options to permit and which to turn off. While a 
booklet  of  this  length  cannot  go  into  detail  on  this 
topic, there are some rules of thumb: 

 
 

  Find  out  whether  the  EHR  vendor  maintains 
an open connection to the installed software (a 
back  door)  in  order  to  provide  updates  and 
support. If so, this  connection must be well- 
secured at the firewall and its traffic monitored closely in case it is found by intruders. 
  Disable   remote   file   sharing   and   remote   printing   within   the   operating   system 
configuration. Allowing these could result in the accidental sharing or printing of files 
to locations where unauthorized individuals could view them. 

Software Maintenance 

 
 

 
 

Most software requires periodic updating to keep it secure and to add features. Vendors 
may send out updates in various ways, including automated downloads, customer-requested 
downloads, and on portable media. Keeping software up-to-date is critical to maintaining a 
secure  system,  since  many  of  these  updates  address  newly-found  vulnerabilities  in  the 
product.  In  larger  enterprises,  this  patching  can  be  a  daily  task,  where  multiple  vendors 
may  issue  frequent  updates.  In  the  small  practice,  there  may  not  be  the  resources  to 
continually  monitor  for  new  updates  and  apply  them  in  good  time.  Small  practices  may 
instead wish to automate updates to occur weekly (e.g. use Microsoft Windows Automatic 
Update). However, practices should monitor for critical and urgent patches and updates that 
require  immediate  attention.  Messages  from  vendors  regarding  these  patches  and  updates 
should be monitored and acted upon as soon as possible. 

3  REC representatives are available to provide technical assistance, visit the ONC website for more information. 

17 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

Operating Maintenance 

11/22/2010 

Over time, an operational system tends to accumulate outdated information and settings 
unless regular maintenance is performed. Just as medical supplies have to be monitored for 
their expiration dates, material that is out-of-date on a computer system must be dealt with. 
Things to check include: 

  User accounts for former employees are appropriately and timely disabled. If an 
employee  is  to  be  involuntarily  terminated,  access  to  the  account  should  be 
disabled before the notice of termination is served. 

  Computers and any other devices, such as copying machines, that have had data 
stored on them are sanitized before disposal. Even if all the data on a hard drive 
has  been  deleted,  it  can  still  be  recovered  with  commonly  available  tools.  To 
avoid  the  possibility  of  an  unintended  data  breach,  follow  the  guidelines  for 
disposal  found  in  NIST  Special  Publication  800-88  Guidelines   for   Media 
Sanitation. 

  Old data files are archived for storage if needed, or cleaned off the system if not 

needed, subject to applicable data retention requirements. 

  Software that is no longer needed is fully uninstalled (including trial software 

and old versions of current software). 

 
 

 
 

 
 

18 

 

11/22/2010 

Practice 9: Protect Mobile Devices 

Mobile deviceslaptop  computers, handhelds,  smart  phones,  portable  storage  media 
have  opened  a  world  of  opportunities  to  un-tether  EHRs  from  the  desktop.  But  these 
opportunities also present threats to information security and privacy. Some of these threats 
overlap those of the desktop world, but others are unique to mobile devices. 

  Because of their very mobility, these devices are easy to lose and because they may 

be used in areas accessible to the public, they are very vulnerable to theft. 

  Mobile devices are more likely than stationary ones to be exposed to electro-magnetic 

interference (EMI), especially from other medical 
devices, such as MRI machines. This interference 
can  corrupt  the  information  stored  on  a  mobile 
device. 

  Because  mobile  devices  may  be  used  in  places 
where the device can be seen by others, extra care 
must be taken by the user to prevent unauthorized 
viewing  of  the  PHI  displayed  on  a  laptop  or 
handheld device. 

But I need to work at home... 
 
In todays increasingly mobile world, 
it is certainly tempting to use mobile 
technology to break away from the 
office and perform work from the 
comfort of home. Those who have 
responsibility for protecting patient 
data must recognize that this 
responsibility does not end at the 
office door and follow good security 
practices wherever they take peoples 
PHI. 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

  Not  all  mobile  devices  are  equipped  with  strong 
authentication  and  access  controls.  Extra  steps 
may  be  necessary  to  secure  mobile  devices  from 
unauthorized  use.  Laptops  should  have  password 
protection  that conforms   to   that  described  in 
Practice 1. Many handheld devices can be configured with password protection and 
this should be enabled when available. Where not available, additional steps must be 
taken  to  protect  PHI  on  the  handheld,  including  extra  precaution  over  the  physical 
control of the device. 

 
 

 
 

  Laptop computers and handheld devices are often used to transmit and receive data 
wirelessly. These wireless communications must be protected from intrusion (Practice 
6 describes wireless network protection). PHI transmitted unencrypted across  public 
networks  (e.g.  the  Internet,  public  Wi-Fi  services)  can  be  done  where  the  patient 
requests  it  and  has  been  informed  of  the  potential  risks.  Generally,  however,  PHI 
should not be transmitted without encryption across these public networks. 

Transporting  data  with  mobile  devices  is  inherently  risky.  There  must  be  an  overriding 
justification for this practice that rises above mere convenience. 
Where  it  is  absolutely  necessary  to  commit  PHI  to  a  mobile  device,  the  data  should  be 
encrypted. Mobile devices that cannot support encryption should not be used. This includes 
the  inexpensive  memory  sticks  or  thumb  drives  that  are  widely  available  and  often  given 
away  by  vendors.  Encrypted  versions  of  these  devices  are  readily  obtainable  at  a  modest 
costmuch less than the cost of mitigating a data breach. 

19 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

11/22/2010 

If it is absolutely necessary to take a laptop out  of a secure area  when the laptop contains 
patient data, the laptops hard drive should be encrypted. 
Policies specifying the circumstances under which devices may be removed from the facility 
are very  important and all due care must be  taken in developing and enforcing these. The 
primary  goal  is  to  protect  the  patients  information,  so  considerations  of  convenience  or 
custom (e.g. working from home) must be considered in that light. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

20 

 
 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

11/22/2010 

Practice 10: Establish a Security Culture 

Security  professionals  are  unanimous:  the  weakest  link  in  any  computer  system  is  the 

user. 

Researchers  who  study  the  psychology  and  sociology  of  information  technology  users 
have demonstrated time and again how very difficult it is to raise peoples awareness about 
threats and vulnerabilities that can jeopardize the information they work with daily. Practices 
1-9  in  this  booklet  describe  some  ways  to  reduce  the  risk,  decreasing  the  likelihood  that 
patients personal health information will be exposed to unauthorized view. But none of these 
measures  can  be  effective  unless  the  healthcare  practice  is  willing  and  able  to  implement 
them,  to  enforce  policies  that  require  these  safeguards  to  be  used,  and  to  effectively  and 
proactively  train all users so  that they are sensitized  to  the  importance  of  data  security.  In 
short,  each  healthcare  practice  must  instill  and  support  a  security-minded  organizational 
culture. 

One  of  the  most  challenging  aspects  of  instilling  a  security  focus  among  users  is 
overcoming the perception that it cant happen to me. People, regardless of their level of 
education or IT sophistication, are alike in believing that they will never succumb to sloppy 
practices. They will never place patient data at risk. That only happens to other people. 

The checklists that follow are one proven  way to overcome the human  blind spot with 
respect to data security. By following a set of prescribed practices and checking them each 
time, at least some of the errors due to over-confidence can be avoided. But checklists alone 
are not enough. It is incumbent on any organization where lives are at stake to support proper 
information  security  through  establishing  a  culture  where  data  security  is  part  of  its  very 
fabric.  Every  person  in  the  organization  must  subscribe  to  a  shared  vision  of  information 
security so that habits and practices are automatic. 

 
 

Security practices must be built in, not bolted on. 
No checklist can adequately describe all that must be done to establish an organizations 

security culture, but there are some obvious steps that must be taken, including: 

 
 

  Education and training must be frequent and on-going. 
  Those who manage and direct the work of others must set a good example and 

resist the temptation to indulge in exceptionalism. 

  Accountability and taking responsibility for information safety must be among 

the organizations core values. 

 
 

Protecting patients through good data security practice should be as much second nature 

to the healthcare practice as disinfection is. 

21 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11/22/2010 

This page intentionally left blank. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

22 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11/22/2010 

Security Checklists 

 
 

 
 

 
 

23 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11/22/2010 

This page intentionally left blank. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

24 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

11/22/2010 

Practice 1: Password Checklist 

 

   

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

 

Policies are in place prescribing password practices for the 
organization. 

All staff understand and agree to abide by password policies. 

Each staff member has a unique username and password. 

Passwords are not revealed or shared with others. 

Passwords are not written down or displayed on screen. 

Passwords are hard to guess, but easy to remember. 

Passwords are changed routinely. 

Passwords are not re-used. 

 
 

Any default passwords that come with a product are changed 
during product installation. 

Any devices or programs that allow optional password protection 
have password protection turned on and in use. 

Strong passwords should: 

 
 

  Be at least 8 characters in length 
 

 
 

Include a combination of upper case and lower case letters, at least one number 
and at least one special character, such as a punctuation mark 

  Be changed often, at least quarterly. 

25 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11/22/2010 

This page intentionally left blank. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

26 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

11/22/2010 

Practice 2: Anti-Virus Checklist 

Policies are in place requiring use of anti-virus software. 

All staff understand and agree that they shall not hinder the 
operation of anti-virus software. 

All staff know how to recognize possible symptoms of viruses or 
malware on their computers. 
 
All staff know what to do to avoid virus/malware infections. 
 
Anti-virus software is installed and operating effectively on each 
computer in compliance with manufacturer recommendations. 
 
Anti-virus software is set up to allow automatic updates from the 
manufacturer. 
 
Anti-virus software is fully up-to-date according to manufacturers 
standards. 
 
Handheld or mobile devices that support anti-virus software have 
it installed and operating. 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

27 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11/22/2010 

This page intentionally left blank. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

28 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

11/22/2010 

Practice 3: Firewall Checklist 

  

  

  

Policies are in place prescribing the use, configuration, and operation 
of firewalls and firewall logs. 

All computers are protected by a properly configured firewall. 

All staff understand and agree that they may not hinder the 
operation of firewalls. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

29 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11/22/2010 

This page intentionally left blank. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

30 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

11/22/2010 

Practice 4: Access Control Checklist 

  

Policies are in place prescribing access controls. 

        Example: When an employee quits, his/her user 
account is disabled immediately 

Every user account can be positively tied to a currently 
authorized individual. 

Users are only authorized to access information which they need to 
know to perform their duties. 

All files have been set to restrict access only to authorized 
individuals. 

All staff understand and agre 
 
Computers running healthcare-related systems are not available for 
other purposes. 

e to abide by access control policies. 

 
 

  

  

  

  

  

 
 

31 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11/22/2010 

This page intentionally left blank. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

32 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

11/22/2010 

Practice 5: Physical Access Checklist 

Policies are in place prescribing the physical safety and security of 
devices and devices. 

All staff understand and agree to abide by physical access 
policies and procedures. 

All devices containing PHI are inventoried and can be accounted for. 

Computers are protected from environmental hazards. 

Physical access to secure areas is limited to authorized individuals. 

Computers running EHR systems are shielded from 
unauthorized viewing. 

Equipment located in high-traffic or less secure areas is 
physically secured. 

 
 

 
 

  

  

  

  

  

  

   

 
 

33 

This page intentio

nally left blank. 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

11/22/2010 

34 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

11/22/2010 

Practice 6: Network Access Checklist 

Policies are in place prescribing network configuration and access. 

All staff understand and agree to abide by network use policy. 

Access to the network is restricted to authorized users and devices. 

Guest devices are prohibited from accessing networks containing 
PHI. 

Wireless networks use appropriate encryption. 

Computers contain no peer-to-peer applications. 

Public instant messaging services are not used. 

Private instant messaging services, where used, are 
secured appropriately. 

 
 

 
 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

 
 

35 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11/22/2010 

This page intentionally left blank. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

36 

 

11/22/2010 

Practice 7: Backup and Recovery Checklist 

Policies are in place prescribing backup and recovery procedures. 

All staff understand the recovery plan and their duties during 
recovery. 

System restore procedures are known to at least one trusted party 
outside the practice. 

A copy of the recovery plan is safely stored off-site. 

Files identified as critical are documented and listed in the 
backup configuration. 

Backup schedule is timely and regular. 

Every backup run is tested for its ability to restore the data 
accurately. 

Backup media are physically secured. 

 
 

Backup media stored offsite are encrypted. 

Backup media are made unreadable before disposal. 

Multiple backups are retained as a failsafe. 

 
 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

   

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

37 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11/22/2010 

This page intentionally left blank. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

38 

 

11/22/2010 

Practice 8: Maintenance Checklist 

Policies are in place prescribing EHR system maintenance 
procedures. 

Staff with responsibilities for maintenance understand and 
agree to system maintenance policies and procedures. 

Computers are free of unnecessary software and data files. 

Remote file sharing and printing (including remote printing) are 
disabled. 

Vendor remote maintenance connections are documented and 
fully secured. 

Systems and applications are updated or patched 
regularly as recommended by the manufacturer. 

 
 

 
 

  

  

  

  

  

  

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

39 

This page intentionally left blank. 

 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

11/22/2010 

40 

 

11/22/2010 

Practice 9: Mobile Devices Checklist 

  

Policies are in place prescribing use of mobile devices. 

      All staff understand and agree to abide by mobile device 

policy and procedures. 

  

  

  

Mobile devices are configured to prevent unauthorized use. 

PHI on mobile devices is encrypted. 

Connections between authorized mobile devices and 
EHRs are encrypted. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

41 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

11/22/2010 

This page intentionally left blank. 

 
 

 
 

 
 

42 

 

List of Acronyms 

Acronym  Acronym Description 

11/22/2010 

AES 
CD 
CD-ROM 
DSL 
DVD 
EHR 
HHS 
HIPAA 
HITRC 
IEEE 
IM 
LAN 
NAT 
NIST 
ONC 
PC 
PDA 
PII 
PHI 
REC 
 
 
USB 
WEP 
WPA 
WPA2 

Advanced Encryption System 
compact disc 
compact disc read-only-memory 
digital subscriber line 
digital video disk 
electronic health record 
Department of Health and Human Services 
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
Health Information Technology Research Center 
Institute of Electrical and Electronic Engineers 
instant message 
local area network 
network address translation 
National Institute of Standards and Technology 
Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology 
personal computer 
Personal Digital Assistant 
Personally Identifiable Information 
protected health information 
Regional Extension Center 
Universal Serial Bus 
Wired Equivalent Privacy 
Wi-Fi Protected Access 
Wi-Fi Protected Access 2 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

43 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

11/22/2010 

References & Resources 

Recognizing  that  this  document  is  not  intended  to  be  and  should  not  be  construed  as  an 
exhaustive  guide  on  protecting  PHI,  we  have  provided  additional  resources  and  references 
that have helped guide the creation of this document. These references and resources may be 
used to obtain additional detailed technical guidance to supplement this document. It should 
be  recognized  that  due  to  the  changing  nature  of  the  information  security  field,  additional 
technical resources may exist or be required to provide sufficient guidance in securing PHI. 

HHS Office for Civil Rights website (http://www.hhs.gov/ocr/privacy/hipaa/understanding/) 

NIST 800 Series Special Publications (http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/PubsSPs.html) 

In particular: 

  NIST SP 800-36 Guide to Selecting Information Technology Security Products 

  NIST SP 800-53 Recommended Security Controls for Federal Information Systems 

and Organizations 

  NIST SP 800-66 An Introductory Resource Guide for Implementing the Health 

Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) Security Rule 

  NIST SP 800-88 Guidelines for Media Sanitization 

 
 

  NIST SP 800-111 Guide to Storage Encryption Technologies for End User Devices 
  NIST SP 800-114 User's Guide to Securing External Devices for Telework and 

Remote Access 

  NIST SP 800-124 Guidelines on Cell Phone and PDA Security 

 
 

 
 

44 

