LIRR Fares
From New York, Brooklyn and Woodside:
One-way $8.00; Round-trip $14.00

From Jamaica:
One-way $7.00; Round-trip $12.00

Round-trip fares from Long Island
with transfer at Jamaica:

Zone 3

Zone 4 

Zone 7

Zone 9

(Rosedale, St. Albans, Queens Village, 
Hollis) -- $12.00

(Far Rockaway, Lynbrook, Hempstead, 
Mineola) -- $13.00

(Long Beach, Massapequa, Hicksville, 
Oyster Bay) -- $15.00

(Babylon, Deer Park, Huntington, 
Northport) -- $19.00

Zone 10

(Bay Shore, Sayville, Ronkonkoma, 
Patchogue, Port Jefferson) -- $25.00

LIRR Tickets
 Buy round-trip tickets in advance at LIRR ticket
windows or ticket machines (on-board fares are 
higher)

 Only Belmont Park tickets will be accepted for 

train service to and from Belmont Park 

 Other ticket types (CityTicket, Monthly, Weekly 
and Ten-Trip tickets) are not valid on Belmont 
Park trains*

*Note: Monthly and weekly ticket holders can use their commuter
tickets for travel to and from Jamaica, but must purchase a
Belmont Park ticket prior to boarding at Jamaica to cover the fare
between Belmont Park and Jamaica. 

LIRR Ticket Machine Instructions
Tickets are available at LIRR Full Service Ticket
Machines (gray, blue or green).  
 Press the Deals & Getaways button on the 

first screen 

 Select Belmont Park 
 Pay with cash, ATM/debit or credit cards

LIRR Travel Tips
 Buy Round-trip Belmont Park tickets in advance 
 Listen for announcements to board trains to and             

from Belmont Park

 Look for LIRR personnel who will be assigned 

to assist you

 No alcohol allowed on LIRR trains
 No alcohol allowed into Belmont Park
 No coolers, back packs or luggage
 No purses larger than 12 in diameter
 This schedule/plan is subject to change
 After the Stakes wait times can range from

15 minutes to 2 hours depending on 
attendance level 

Belmont Stakes Information
For more information on general admission to 
the Belmont Stakes (including complete list of banned
items), visit BelmontStakes.com.
Belmont Park Information
For more information about the Belmont Stakes
Racing Festival, including race time, please visit
BelmontStakes.com

For travel information, see schedules at
www.mta.info/lirr or call 511 and say LIRR or

download the LIRR
Train Time App.

Long Island Rail Road
Belmont Stakes 
Train Service

Effective June 6, 2015 Only

Long Island Rail Road 

is pleased to offer service to the 
2015 Belmont Stakes

Belmont Stakes Train Service - Effective June 6, 2015 Only

Leaving the Park (after the Stakes race)
To ensure the safe and orderly boarding of LIRR trains, the MTA Police Department will employ a color-coded train 
queuing system. LIRR personnel will be assigned at key locations to assist customers. Announcements will provide 
customers with train departure information. WAIT TIMES CAN RANGE FROM 15 MINUTES TO 2 HOURS. ONCE INSIDE
THE QUEUING AREA, CUSTOMERS CAN EXPECT WAIT TIMES OF 15 - 60 MINUTES. CUSTOMERS WAITING TO ENTER
THE QUEUING AREA CAN EXPECT LONGER WAIT TIMES FOR TRAINS, POSSIBLY UP TO 2 HOURS.

Alcohol Policy
 The MTA Police will be enforcing a no-alcohol

policy on trains to Belmont Park

 Bags and coolers are subject to search prior   

to boarding Belmont Park trains at Penn 
Station and at Jamaica Station 

 No alcoholic beverages of any kind will

be permitted to be brought into the Belmont
Park facility

The restriction regarding alcohol has been enacted in the interest 
of patron safety and in an attempt to make sure that people drink responsibly.

NYRA Security Policies
The New York Racing Association has new,
enhanced security protocols for fans attending the
2015 Belmont Stakes Racing Festival on Friday,
June 5 and Saturday, June 6:
 No coolers, back packs, duffle bags, briefcases

or luggage

 No purses larger than 12 in diameter
 No umbrellas, non-folding or folding furniture
 No cameras with detachable lenses or lenses 
more than 6 in length, tripods or camcorders

 No glass containers or alcoholic beverages may 

be brought into the facility

 No selfie sticks
 No drones or radio-controlled aircraft
For a complete listing of prohibited items, please
visit BelmontStakes.com
Belmont Park Admission
Special prices are in effect for Belmont Stakes Day:
Grandstand admission: $15
Clubhouse admission: $40
($1 off Grandstand admission will not apply)
The Belmont Stakes Festival is expected to sell
out on Saturday, June 6.  We encourage all fans
to purchase tickets in advance.  Please visit
BelmontStakes.com to check availability and
to purchase tickets.  

Bus LaneBELMONT PARK  EXIT TO LIRREmergency Access LaneTo BusesTo LIRR TrainsTicketOfficeTicket Collections Station platforms are accessible to mobility-impaired customers.  Please inform the conductor if you need assistance on and off trains.