E-Government 

Services in 

Florida Public Libraries: 

Best Practices for Patron Computers 

 

Mickey Boyd 

Revised June 2014 

 

Best Practice Summary for Libraries and Library Staff 

 

        2 

Configuring Public Access Computers for E-Government Services          3 

Alternate Computing Environments                                                             4-5 

Windows Lockdown Programs                                                                           6  

Hard Drive Protection Programs                                                                    7-9 

Importance of Per-User Reboots                                                                     10 

Reboot Optimization                                                                                           11 

Super Fast Reboot Icon                                                                               12-13 

Computer Security Concerns                                                                      14-15 

Physical Security                                                                                            16-17 

Web Browser Security                                                                                  18-19 

Configuring a Private Mode Web Browser                                             20-21 

Secure Web Browsing Strategies                                                              22-23 

E-Government Services on Home Computers                                        24-25 

 

1 

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

  

 

 

 

Best Practice Summary for 
Libraries and Library Staff 
  
Florida Libraries are experiencing high usage of public access computing 
resources for E-Government activities. Therefore, it is imperative to offer a 
safe computer environment for E-Government and other public access 
activities.  
  
Best practices include: 
  

  Equipping computers used for E-Government with a windows 

lockdown program and a hard drive protection program. 

  

  

  

  

  

 

  Creating library policy mandating proper operation of hard drive 

protection programs. 

  Being aware of security concerns pertaining to E-Government. 

  Educating staff and patrons on safe use of the Web for E-Government. 

  Providing patrons easy access to a privacy mode Web browser. 

  Being familiar with legal concerns associated with delivering E-

Government services in the library. 
  

2 

Configuring Public Access 
Computers for E-Government 
Services 
  
The most common approach used by libraries to provide patrons with a safe 
computing environment is to use consumer-grade PC computers, running 
either Windows 7 or 8 operating systems as a base.  Other useful software is 
installed, and then the computer is protected with several security 
products.  This is the approach described within this document.  
  
There are alternate choices to providing a safe computing environment 
within libraries.  They include sophisticated, managed Windows 
environments, and the use of computers with a non-Microsoft Operating 
System (OS).   
  
There are many economic advantages to using standard consumer-grade 
Microsoft Windows 7 or 8 computers for public access.  Such computers are 
cheap and readily available, often at a steep discount for non-profit 
organizations.  Specialized public access software products are used to 
provide protection against patron vandalism, both intentional and accidental, 
and malicious attacks by computer criminals.  This strategy can produce 
reliable public access computers that are relatively simple to maintain.  
  
Within libraries, patron computers are set up to forget the changes that 
individual users generate during their sessions.  Typically, library computers 
used for E-Government and public access are continuously being reset to a 
known safe configuration through the use of hard drive protection 
products.  Also, library computers usually minimize the features exposed to 
patrons through the use of windows lockdown programs.   
  
  

 

3 

Alternate Choices 
  
There are other alternate approaches to providing a safe computing 
environment within libraries.  They include sophisticated, managed Windows 
environments, and the use of computers with a non-Microsoft OS.  
  
Computers That Use A Non-Microsoft OS 
  
Most malicious attacks are targeted at Microsoft Windows operating 
systems.  Therefore, a large amount of computer risk can be avoided by 
choosing a non-Microsoft OS for public access computers.   
  
Macintosh computers can effectively be used in libraries for E-Government 
and public access.  The guest account features of OSX can work well for public 
access and E-Government use.  To further enhance patron safety and security, 
hard drive protection products are available for OSX with capabilities similar 
to Windows hard drive protection products. 
  
Linux based products are another option.  There is at least one Linux based 
operating system environment specifically designed for libraries, Userful 
Desktop.  This product is in use by at least one Florida library system, and 
numerous libraries in other US states and Canada.  The product can be 
evaluated for free.  It provides a user experience that is in some ways much 
more secure than a Windows session.  
  
Sophisticated, Managed Windows Environments 
  
Highly managed Windows environments are among the most flexible and 
customizable public access computing solutions.  However, they require 
highly trained IT staff, and significant support infrastructure.  In such 
environments, administrators can decide just what Windows functionality is 
exposed to public users.  These decisions are often implemented using Group 
Policy, a Microsoft OS feature that allows the precise definition of rules to 
control the environment of user accounts.  While Group Policy is endlessly 
flexible, it is also easy to make a mistake, or omission, when trying to provide 
a safe computing environment.  Many commercial Windows lockdown 

 

4 

programs are essentially simplified interfaces to the types of changes that can 
be made with Group Policy. 
  
Such environments might include specialized client models, such as Remote 
Desktop Services, thin clients or virtual desktops.  These client models use the 
computers at each public access seat as remote keyboard/video/mouse units, 
with most of the work for each user session being performed by a central 
server, or set of servers.   
  

 

5 

Windows Lockdown Programs 
  
Windows lockdown programs allow staff to turn off unwanted features on 
patron computers.  There are many commercial Windows lockdown 
programs to choose from.  Choosing a specific lockdown program involves a 
compromise between cost, features, integration with other public access 
software and ease of use.  
  
Most Windows lockdown programs offer the following features: 
  

  Disable or restrict start menu. 
  Disable or restrict control panel. 
  Disable or restrict printer changes. 
  Disable or restrict desktop changes. 
  Disable run button. 
  Disable command prompt. 
  Control access to USB/Firewire devices. 

  
In addition to these basic functions, lockdown programs often include the 
ability to customize the way various common applications behave.  For 
example, most such programs allow staff to configure the features that 
Internet Explorer provides.  Some lockdown programs allow for 
customization of any application, and the ability to rigidly define what 
applications are allowed to run at all. 
  
Sample Windows Lockdown Programs: 
  

  Winselect by Faronics. 
  Fortres 101 by Fortres Grand. 

  
  

 

6 

Hard Drive Protection 
Programs 
  
In a library setting, it is important to guarantee as much as possible that 
patrons cannot affect each other with their computer sessions, particularly 
those engaged in E-Government work.  In other words, each patron should 
have a fresh computer environment that is completely free of any changes 
made by past patrons.  Fortunately, it is easy and inexpensive to add this 
capability to a computer. 
  
Hard drive protection programs form the core security for library computers 
used for public access and E-Government.  These products not only protect 
patrons from each other, they also save staff time and effort that would 
otherwise be needed to fix computer problems.  When properly deployed, a 
computer using a hard drive protection program can simply be rebooted to 
fix most issues, as it will go back to a known good state.  
  
These programs work by tricking Windows into seeing a hard drive that is 
actually simulated in software.  This software hard drive pretends to work 
normally while Windows is being used, allowing changes as 
expected.  However, these changes are not actually being recorded on the real 
hard drive, they are instead a part of the simulation.  When the computer is 
rebooted, the simulated changes are discarded, and the computer boots back 
up to a known good state.  
  
To set up a new computer for E-Government and public access use, one begins 
with a freshly installed and updated Windows operating system.  Commonly 
used software, such as Microsoft Office or Adobe Reader, should be installed 
and updated, including antivirus or other security software.  A Windows 
Protection Program should be installed and configured.  At this point, the 
computer is in a known good state, before it has been used for any type of 
general computer tasks.  This would be a great time to install and activate a 
hard drive protection program.  After activation, unwanted changes to the 
computer will simply go away upon reboot.  
  

 

7 

All hard drive protection programs provide the ability to turn their protection 
on and off, both by hand and automatically, via a schedule.  Most libraries will 
want to take advantage of both types of control.  There are some permanent 
hard drive changes that are desirable.  Common examples include: Windows 
updates; Office updates; Adobe updates; and security updates, such as 
antivirus.  In other words, the portions of the computer that protect patrons 
from security and reliability problems should be allowed to make changes to 
the hard drive.  
  
Typically, this is done in a scheduled fashion.  The hard drive protection 
program is configured to disable protection at a certain time in the evening, 
usually after the library is closed.  The operating system and security 
programs are then given an opportunity to download and install their 
updates.  After completing the updates, the computer either resets or turns 
itself off.  The next time it is turned on, it will boot up in protected mode, 
freshly updated for security and reliability.  
  
Most hard drive protection programs offer the following features. 
  

  Enable/Disable Hard Drive Protection via password. 
  Enable/Disable Hard Drive Protection via time schedule. 
  Create a Temporary Writeable Drive. 
  Create a Persistent Writeable Drive. 
  Enterprise Console Capability. 

  
Writeable drive features allow library staff to define drive letters on the 
computer (for example, D: or E:) where changes are allowed to occur.  These 
writeable drives can either be temporary, and thus erased on every reboot, or 
persistent.  These features can be useful in some situations.  Any use of such 
features should be carefully considered with respect to risk.  
  
Most commercial hard drive protection products can be used either in a 
standalone fashion, where each computer must be visited to make changes, or 
from an enterprise console.  An enterprise console is a, master control 
program, for all the library's computers on the network that are using the 
correct hard drive protection program.  From the enterprise console, a staff 
member can see the status of all library computers intended for patron 

 

8 

use.  That staff member can also reboot any computer, or enable/disable the 
hard drive protection.  Enterprise console capability is very useful when a 
large number of computers are being managed.  The importance of that 
feature should be considered when evaluating hard drive protection 
programs.  Some vendors include this capability at no extra charge, while 
others require a more expensive version of the product license.  
  
Sample Hard Drive Protection Programs: 
  

  Deep Freeze by Faronics 
  Clean Slate by Fortres Grand 
  SmartShield by Centurion Technologies 

  

 

9 

Importance of Per-User 
Reboots 
Sadly, it is not uncommon to encounter library systems that have 
deployed hard drive protection products, but do not use them to their full 
advantage.  Most hard drive protection products function using a, reboot and 
restore, method, where a computer reboot is necessary to erase all 
changes.  A computer reboot will also destroy any memory resident copies of 
malicious software, and generally resets everything completely for each user.  
  
When using a, reboot and restore, hard drive protection program, it is 
very important to reboot between every user!  
  
This simple point cannot be stressed enough.  Unfortunately, some libraries 
misunderstand how the products work, or do not realize how easily users can 
affect each other when the computers are not reset.  The result is 
compromised security, and ultimately, reduced safety for patrons.   
  
A common way that hard drive protection products are misused is to leave 
library computers booted up all day, without any reboots.  The hard drive 
protection product erases all changes that occur within that day when the 
computer is turned off in the evening, which does help both security and 
reliability.  However, this means that every user of that computer for an 
entire day may have accidentally left privacy information or malicious 
software behind.  Other users during that day might find this privacy 
information, or be attacked by the malicious software.  Indeed, each user 
could potentially be both a source, and a victim, of various malicious 
attacks.  Library computers are often heavily used, sometimes serving dozens 
of people each day.  Failing to reset computers between each user creates 
significant risk for patrons. 
  
Simply put, it is a best practice for library computers used for E-Government 
and public access to be rebooted between users, thus allowing a hard drive 
protection product to completely reset the system.  Libraries should develop 
computer policies that include a mandatory reboot between each patron, 
either initiated or verified by a staff member.   

 

10 

  
Reboot Optimization 
  
One way to encourage compliance of a mandatory, reboot between each 
patron, policy is to make the reboot process as quick and easy as possible.   
  
There are many technical websites that have tips on how to reduce reboot 
time; try search terms like, "speed up windows boot," to find them.  Most 
modern computers can be configured to boot Windows 7 or 8 in 
approximately 20-30 seconds.  There are also techniques to speed up the 
Windows shutdown process, which must also be endured during a 
reboot.  Common reboot speed-up techniques include: 
  

  Configuring the BIOS to eliminate timeouts, default to hard drive and 

enabling the quickboot feature. 

  Using free Microsoft boot optimization tools, such as msconfig. 

  
In addition to improving the boot speed of the computer, one can also reduce 
the effort that goes into the chore of actually initiating the reboot.  It is easy to 
create a super fast reboot button on the desktop of each library 
computer.  Just one click, and the computer will reboot, which is much better 
than the several clicks, and waiting for the start menu, that are usually 
required.   
  
It is important to clearly label the super fast reboot icon, as patrons can lose 
their work if it is accidentally clicked.  An easy way to do this is to put it in the 
middle of the desktop.  A sticker on the monitor could suggest that patrons, 
Close all windows and click REBOOT when done. Library staff should verify 
that each patron computer is rebooted as the patron departs. 
  

 

11 

Super Fast Reboot Icon 
  
In Windows 7 or 8, follow these steps to create a Super Fast Reboot Icon: 
  

1.  Right click on the Desktop; choose New; then Shortcut.  A window will 

appear with a box labeled, What item would you like to create a 
shortcut for?   

2.  Click the Browse button; then Computer; then navigate to 

C:\Windows\System32\shutdown.exe.  Depending on your settings, it 
may be shown as just, Shutdown, with no .exe extension.  Click OK. 
3.  You should be back at the window with the box labeled, What item 

would you like to create a shortcut for?  The box should now contain 
C:\Windows\System32\shutdown.exe.  Click Next. 

4.  A window will appear with a box labeled, Type a name for this 

shortcut.  

5.  Type in REBOOT; Click Finish. 
6.  A plain icon named REBOOT will appear on the desktop.  Right click the 

icon; then click Properties. 

7.  You should be looking at the Shortcut tab.  One box will be labeled, 
Target: and will contain, C:\Windows\System32\shutdown.exe. 
8.  Click at the end of this box, and add, -r t 0 to the end of the line.  It 

should be, C:\Windows\System32\shutdown.exe r t 0.  There must 
be a space before and after the -r.  There must be a space between t 
and 0. That is a numeric zero, not the letter o. 

9.  Click, Change Icon in the lower part of the window, and choose a good 

icon.  The square red shutdown button icon is a common choice.  

10. Click OK. 

  
The super fast reboot icon is simply a shortcut to the standard Windows 
shutdown program.  The -r change instructs the shutdown program to 
reboot, and the -t 0 instructs the program to wait zero seconds.  Using such 
an icon is much quicker than rebooting via the start menu, and will assist in 
compliance with a, reboot between each patron, policy.   
 

 

 

 

12 

 

 

13 

Computer Security Concerns 
  
The security environment present on today's Windows computers is high risk 
to innocent users.  While some computer vulnerabilities are fixed before they 
are exploited, computer criminals seem to be able to find an endless stream of 
new vulnerabilities.   Unfortunately, it is common for computer criminals to 
possess many effective Web exploits at any given moment.  These exploits are 
mixed with malicious payloads in endlessly changing combinations, and then 
delivered to victim computers by many different means.  If a particular patron 
makes poor, or gullible, choices while browsing the Web, or if they are 
successfully tricked by one of the many Web scams present on the Internet, 
the chances are high that malicious software will be present on that 
computer, no matter what security software is present.  
  
Unfortunately, even a careful user with a fully updated computer can be 
successfully attacked by malicious software on the Web.  There have been 
many documented cases of innocent websites being subverted by computer 
criminals into sources of malicious software.  Subsequent visitors to these 
innocent websites are attacked with, drive-by download, methods that 
deliver malicious software to their computers without their knowledge.  
  
There are best practices that can help reduce the risk of computer and Web 
interactions, but there is no way to guarantee complete safety. This is why it 
is critically important to completely erase all of the changes caused by a 
particular patron before the next patron uses the computer.  Any previous 
patron could have infected the computer with malicious software, either 
intentionally or not.  While the library cannot protect patrons from 
themselves, it can effectively protect patrons from each other through the 
proper use of security software, in particular, a hard drive protection 
program.   
  
Windows computers accrue damage, malicious software and personal 
information, with time and use.  This is a bad combination.  Hard drive 
protection products allow library staff to effectively, turn back the clock, on 
patron computers.  Properly used, they are powerful tools that mitigate 
significant risk.  By simply rebooting a computer equipped with a hard drive 

 

14 

protection product, all changes made since the last reboot are 
discarded.  Doing so between each patron will help ensure that E-Government, 
and other private activities remain private. For example, temporary Web 
browser files created during patron Web sessions can contain private 
information. These files would be completely expunged upon reboot. 
  
The additional security software installed on patron computers will vary 
based on the specific needs of each library system.  There are many vendors 
that offer such products.  If possible, libraries should avoid the most common 
security products.  Computer criminals have become adept at concealing their 
malicious software from the most popular security products.  To do so 
requires tricks specific to each security product.  In other words, criminals 
generally cannot hide their malicious software from all security products, but 
they can hide it from specific products if they make the effort.  Of course, they 
pick the most popular examples of security software for this special 
treatment.  The conclusion is that the best security products are those that 
have excellent features, but not much market share.  Fortunately, the security 
marketplace is rich with good choices.   
  
An interesting trend that is beneficial to libraries is the inclusion of security 
software within popular hard drive protection programs.  Several vendors 
now offer integrated antivirus and security features within their hard drive 
protection product.  This is a convenient combination of functionality, as it 
allows for easier coordination of security updates on machines using a hard 
drive protection program. 
  

 

15 

Physical Security 
  
Library patron computers should be protected from physical mischief and 
vandalism.  This contributes not only to the reliability of the equipment, but 
also to patron safety and privacy.  Special furniture can be used to protect 
patron computers, essentially locking away the vulnerable areas of the 
computer.  Alternately, keeping computers completely exposed, and in easy 
view, is another approach to discourage tampering.  The areas where cables 
plug into the computer are particularly important. 
  
Keystroke logging devices (or "keyloggers") are a serious physical threat to 
library patron computers.  These devices are cheap and easy to obtain.  They 
appear to be cable adapters, and often blend right in when connected to a 
computer.  They are available in both PS/2 and USB versions, and plug in 
where the keyboard normally connects to the computer.  These devices are 
essentially small computers, with their own memory and other resources.   
Keyloggers "listen" in on the keystrokes coming from the keyboard, recording 
usernames, passwords, URLs, and any other information input by the 
keyboard.  The keyloggers record these keystrokes into their own 
memory.  When the keylogger is retrieved and connected to another 
computer, the memory contents can be examined.  In other words, the devices 
must be placed on computers, time goes by while the computers are used, and 
finally the keyloggers are retrieved by the criminals and taken to some other 
location. 
  
Pictured below are example PS/2 and USB keyloggers: 

 

16 

 

 
 
Keylogging devices cannot be detected by software, and must be discovered 
via physical inspection.  It is important to regularly inspect patron computers 
for foreign devices.  Any suspicious activity associated with the cabling areas 
of the computers should be noted and investigated.  It would be logical for 
criminals to use minors to place and retrieve keylogger devices.   
  
Libraries should develop a set of procedures to be followed in the event of a 
keylogger discovery.  Involve law enforcement in the discussion if possible, as 
there may be special resources that can be deployed for computer crime. 

 

17 

Web Browser Security 
  
Web browsers are the workhorses of modern computers.  They are also 
under continuous scrutiny and attack by computer criminals.  Some browsers 
are perceived to be more secure than others.  This is a continuously changing 
situation, and to some degree is a game of numbers.  For example, even if a 
careful user uses a browser that is considered highly secure, and does so in a 
conservative and cautious way, that user could still be successfully attacked 
by malicious software.  It would be bad luck, but it could happen.  However, 
the odds of that careful person and secure browser being a victim are much 
lower than that of a careless user running an old and poorly updated version 
of Internet Explorer. 
  
Internet Explorer gets a lot of bad press.  It is a program that many love to 
hate, or at least criticize.  It is important to note that the newest version of 
Internet Explorer is an excellent modern browser with many new safety 
features.  However, there are many millions of users on the Internet that use 
old versions of Internet Explorer.  To understand why this is a serious concern 
requires a bit of history. 
  
In the early 2000s, the Internet was a very different place.  Internet Explorer 5 
and 6 commanded 95% of the browser market.  Both of these browsers had 
their own idea of how webpages should work.  In other words, they did not 
adhere well to Internet standards.  Often, webpages required many 
nonstandard tricks and workarounds to appear correctly on these 
browsers.  Since alternative browsers only made up a tiny percentage of the 
market during that time, many websites only worked correctly with Internet 
Explorer. 
  
As time went on, more alternate browser choices appeared and 
matured.  These alternate browsers offered powerful features that were not 
present in Internet Explorer.  Some of these features include, Browser Tabs, 
Popup Blockers and the ability to install add-ons.  As the market share for 
alternate browsers increased, businesses and organizations began to publish 
webpages that would work well with them.  For the most part, alternate 
browsers tend to follow Internet standards closely, so fewer special 

 

18 

exceptions are needed for webpages to display properly.  This has led to an 
Internet that is based more on standards, which is a good thing for 
compatibility and security.  
  
Unfortunately, there are still plenty of people using old versions of Internet 
Explorer.  These old browsers lack the advanced security features built into 
modern browsers.  Internet Explorer is one of the most popular Web browsers 
in the world, particularly for nontechnical users.  As a result, a large 
percentage of the Web-based malicious software is aimed specifically at 
weaknesses within Internet Explorer, particularly older versions.  Entire 
classes of malicious software will only work against Internet Explorer.  In 
other words, avoiding the use of Internet Explorer is a way to sidestep a lot of 
potential danger.   
  
That is not to say that alternate browsers do not have their own malicious 
software concerns.  Because of their popularity, Firefox and Chrome have also 
become popular targets for criminals.  As a particular browser grows in 
popularity, malicious software attacks targeted at that browser grow as well. 
This leads to the conclusion that the safest Web browser to use for E-
Government, and other activities involving privacy information, is one that has 
excellent security features and modest browser market share.   
  
One important caveat is that there are still websites that require a particular 
version of Internet Explorer to work correctly.  This can sometimes be a 
problem with E-Government websites, particularly those that have not been 
updated recently.  Because of this, it is important for libraries to retain the 
capability to run Internet Explorer as a last resort.  However, patron safety 
will be enhanced if Internet Explorer is not the default recommended Web 
browser on the computer.  
  
  

 

19 

Configuring a Private Mode 
Web Browser 
  
Many modern Web browsers have a privacy mode that can be used for 
private activities.  When the browser is in this mode, it behaves in ways that 
increase security and privacy.  No history is recorded during a privacy mode 
session, nor are temporary files or Web cookies saved.  When the Web session 
ends and the browser is exited, all traces of the session are expunged.  This 
behavior is ideal for E-Government use. Patrons who wish to engage in E-
Government activities on library computers should be encouraged to use a 
browser in privacy mode. 
  
At the time of this writing, the Google Chrome browser is a strong 
recommendation.  It has powerful security features.  Chrome calls its privacy 
mode, "Incognito Mode."  It is easy to modify the Chrome desktop shortcut so 
that it brings up Chrome in Incognito Mode every time. To do this: 
  
1.  Download and install Google Chrome. 
2.  Find the Google Chrome icon on the desktop.  Right click the icon and select 
Properties. 
5.  You should be looking at the Shortcut tab.  One box will be labeled 
Target: and will contain a long line of text that ends in chrome.exe. 
6.  Click at the end of this box, and add the text, "-incognito" to the end of the 
line.  Then click OK to close the window. 
 
 
  

 

 

20 

 

21 

Secure Web Browsing 
Strategies 
  
The World Wide Web contains many websites that will attempt to infect 
visitors with malicious software, in a variety of direct and indirect ways.  In 
some cases, such websites are obviously seedy or questionable.  In other 
cases, such websites appear to be entirely innocent, and may even radiate 
legitimacy or a sense of security.  It is best to assume that the chance of 
encountering malicious software during a typical Internet session is quite 
high. Such software can come from unexpected sources. Even security 
conscious users can be successfully attacked, as there have been many 
examples of highly trusted websites being tricked into distributing malicious 
software.  An obvious observation is that as the number of websites visited 
during a session grows, so does the risk of being infected with malicious code. 
  
In other words, the scope of a malicious software attack is restricted to the 
amount of Internet activity in a particular computer session.  If the computer 
is using a hard drive protection product, then each time the computer is 
rebooted, all private data will be erased, including any that may have been left 
behind after performing an E-Government task.  The ability to completely 
erase all changes is an advantage that patron computers in libraries have over 
typical home computers.  
  
Put simply, patrons should be advised to not mix tasks for which security is 
important with recreational Web browsing. The safest approach is to perform 
secure work on a freshly reset computer, then log out and reset it again 
before engaging in other activities.  The idea is to minimize the chance of 
malicious software having access to privacy information that may be present 
in the memory of the computer, within temporary files or even on other tabs 
of the Web browser. 
  
Some situations might not allow patron computers to be reset more than once 
per user.  For example, extra reboots might not integrate well with the 
computer reservation system.  In such cases, the recommended approach is to 
use a Web browser in privacy mode to perform E-Government and other 

 

22 

secure work.  The work should be performed, and then the browser should be 
completely exited.  Doing so will trigger the privacy mode behavior, erasing 
any temporary data associated with that Internet session.  Afterward, the 
user can run a fresh browser and continue using the Internet.  
  

 

23 

E-Government Services on Home 
Computers 
  
Home computers must be configured in a secure fashion if they are to be used 
for E-Government services.  Install security software on the computer, and 
check often to make sure the security software is updating regularly.  For 
most commercial security products, this implies a recurring fee.  Many new 
computers come with commercial security software that receives updates for 
a short time, and then begins to request payment for more updates.  It is very 
important for security software to receive updates.  
  
As an alternative, Microsoft offers free security software for Windows, 
called Security Essentials.  Updates are also free.  
  
Make sure the operating system is up to date.  Activating Automatic 
Updates for Windows is recommended.   
  
Understand what a Web browser is, and is not.  Tutorial movies are available 
that explain this clearly. 
  
Avoid using Internet Explorer.  If Internet Explorer is required, update to a 
new version. 
  
Install a Web browser that offers a privacy mode.  A recommended choice 
is Google Chrome.  Within Chrome, the privacy mode is called Incognito 
Mode.  Incognito Mode is designed for privacy, and will safely erase all history 
and temporary data associated with a Web session each time the browser is 
exited.  
  
Do not mix private Web tasks that require private information, such as E-
Government activities, with recreational Web browsing. Doing so increases 
exposure of private data to malicious software attacks. Perform private Web 
tasks separately, and then completely exit the browser.  
  

 

24 

While privacy mode is ideal for secure activities, it can be inconvenient for 
general Web browsing.  For example, many websites use cookies in useful 
ways, such as to remember what has already been seen during a previous 
visit.  Such websites usually work best with a Web browser that is not in 
privacy mode. 
  
Use good passwords. Passwords should be at least eight (8) characters long, 
use letters and numbers and ideally have at least one symbol 
character.  Longer passwords are more secure, so use the greatest number of 
password characters you are comfortable memorizing.  In general, it is better 
to use a small number of good passwords rather than a large number of poor 
passwords. 
  
Avoid using the password save feature within Web browsers.  These features 
can be attacked by malicious software, in the worst case resulting in the 
compromise of all saved passwords.  
  
  

 

 

25 

