 

SCOR Working Group Proposal 

Title:  BIOgeochemistry of COral REef systems (BIOCORE) 

 

 
Summary/Abstract 
Coral reefs are home to more than 25% of all marine species, making them the most diverse 
marine ecosystem. However, globally coral reefs are threatened by human activities at both 
large- (ocean warming and acidification) and local-scales (e.g. pollution, overfishing).The 
impact and extent of these disturbances vary between ocean regions, due to factors such as 
proximity to land and local human activity. While some anthropogenic activities have been 
clearly demonstrated to cause decline of dominant reef taxa, it is currently unclear how 
such changes impact the overall biogeochemistry and function of these ecosystems. This is 
caused by the fragmented knowledge of impacts, derived from observations from relatively 
few locations. Because many anthropogenic impacts are fundamentally chemical in nature, 
understanding the biogeochemical context of coral reefs in a changing world is critical to 
improve preservation efforts and enhance the health quality of these endangered 
ecosystems. Therefore, a coordinated international effort is needed to obtain a global 
understanding of biogeochemical processes in coral reef systems. 
 
The BIOCORE working group would take a major step towards understanding the global 
variability in coral reef system biogeochemistry by 1) creating an accessible internet-enabled 
data platform, 2) summarizing the latest scientific insights by publishing a series of open 
access manuscripts, 3)  hosting international workshops geared toward identifying gaps in 
our understanding of coral reef biogeochemistry, and 4) pursue capacity building in the 
research field for scientist from developing countries. The BIOCORE working group would 
thereby not only advance our understanding of coral reefs, but also provide knowledge of 
crucial importance for predicting how future changes will impact these unique ecosystems. 
 
Scientific Background and Rationale 
Coral reefs are vibrant, living assemblies which are amongst the most impressive and varied 
ecosystems on the planet. They are primarily found in tropical and semitropical waters 
(between 30N and 30 S), where they provide food and income and a variety of services to 
hundreds of millions of people, mainly from tourism and fisheries (Moberg and Folke 1999), 
and are home to a myriad of marine species that are dependent on coral reefs to feed, 
reproduce, and obtain shelter. Globally, coral reefs are threatened by a combination of local 
(e.g. pollution, overfishing, growing coastal populations) and global stressors (ocean 
warming, acidification)(e.g. Cyronak et al. 2013), which, across large parts of the ocean have 
caused the steady decline of dominant coral communities (Burke et al. 2011; Fabricius 2011; 
Hughes et al. 2010). Corals are ecosystem engineers and thus play a crucial role in physically 
shaping the ecosystems they live in, mainly by their ability to produce large calcium 
carbonate structures. In order for corals to calcify and grow, they need stable environmental 
conditions, temperatures typically around 25C, and oligotrophic, sunlit, and alkaline waters 
(Atkinson & Falter 2003; Uthicke et al. 2014). Understanding the interactions of biological, 
chemical, and geochemical fluxes and processes, that is the biogeochemistry, that control 
environmental conditions and the response of coral ecosystems to change is therefore 
crucial. However, much of the research on coral reefs to-date has been biological, with 
some geological and geochemical work. 

 

1 

 
We propose to form a SCOR Working Group which would focus on the biogeochemistry of 
coral reef systems (BIOCORE) across global and local scales to determine how coral reef 
systems have been and are being altered by environmental change. As coral reefs are 
globally spread over large geographical areas, the work we propose, naturally includes a 
strong international element, providing a unique framework to link existing information. 
Human pressures on coral reefs are increasing globally in both developed and developing 
countries. But the impact and extent of these disturbances varies between regions due to 
factors such as proximity to land, coral reef community composition, local human activities 
and the extent to which strategies for coral reef management are followed. The BIOCORE 
working group would provide the first step towards a more complete understanding of 
global variability in the biogeochemistry of coral reef systems. Many relevant data sets have 
been collected by independent researchers, agencies and nations, but comparing and 
synthesising this data from different reef systems, is a huge task, which requires sustained 
activity of a co-ordinated group of researchers. One example of such an analysis would be to 
summarize and understand why the daily and seasonal patterns in the partial pressure of 
carbon dioxide (pCO2) are different between coral reef systems globally. It can easily be 
visualized using the NOAA Coral Reef Moorings data 
(http://www.pmel.noaa.gov/co2/story/Coral+Reef+Moorings), that the amplitude and 
patterns in the pCO2 varies between systems, but understanding why this is the case would 
be one of the questions addressed by the BIOCORE working group. Another example of a 
detailed analysis would be to review and comprehend why the limiting nutrients for primary 
production varies between systems. While primary productivity in some coral reef systems 
is suggested to be limited by phosphorus (e.g. Florida Keys) others are limited by nitrogen 
(e.g. Great Barrier Reef) when assuming a Redfield Nitrogen: Phosphorus ratio of 16:1 
(Redfield et al. 1963). This points to the nutrient biogeochemistry of these systems being 
different. Understanding the causes of these fundamental differences would be another 
valuable endeavour for the BIOCORE working group.  As international efforts requiring 
prolonged activities are rarely funded by national research agencies a SCOR Working group 
would be an ideal platform to gather experts from key coral reef areas from around the 
world.  
The BIOCORE working group would be comprised of an international consortium of coral 
reef researchers. Our major focus would be on increasing knowledge of coral reef 
biogeochemical processes that can be utilised for scientific, management and public 
outreach activities. This would be accomplished through; 1) providing a synthesis and 
review of coral biogeochemical processes by publishing a special issue in an open-access 
journal, 2) developing a strategic plan to fill in gaps in our knowledge, 3) pursuing capacity 
building for developing country scientists and 4) improving access to information by creating 
online databases and use other available communication tools. 
 
Terms of Reference 
The working group on BIOgeochemistry of COral REef systems (BIOCORE) would: 
 

1.  Identify and combine datasets of key biogeochemical measurements in coral reefs 

to centralize the information and improve accessibility; 

 

2 

2.  Write a short perspectives paper after the first meeting, to be submitted to an open-

access journal (PeerJ or Frontiers in Marine Science), highlighting the importance 
and knowledge gaps in coral reef biogeochemistry;  

3.  Identify gaps in scientific knowledge and develop priorities and recommendations 

for future efforts within coral reef biogeochemistry studies; 

4.  Organize a series of invited, peer-reviewed manuscripts as a special issue in an 

open-access journal to enhance our understanding of coral reef processes;  

5.  Conduct active outreach to coral reef researchers in developing countries to build 

capacity through participation in the working group activities; 

6.  Engage with the wider scientific and management coral reef community by inviting 

them to the regular working group meetings.  
 

These actions would be achieved during the working group meetings (annually for three 
years), building webbased resources and publishing of scientific manuscripts. This would 
establish the platform for the coral reef science community to build an international 
programme on coral reef biogeochemistry similar to existing international oceanic programs 
such as GEOTRACES.  
 
Working plan/Timeline  
Year 1 In order to provide high international visibility the first working group meeting would 
piggyback on the 13th International Coral Reef Symposium (ICRS: Hawaii, USA, June 19-24, 
2016). The meeting would consist of an organized presentation session and subsequent 2-
day workshop after the symposium so that participants from the symposium would be able 
to attend. Local coral reef authorities (e.g. NOAA-CRED and OAP) would also be invited to 
attend the workshop in order to provide end-user inputs and perspectives on the working 
program. This would ensure that the coral reef community is well informed of the working 
group objectives and targets. Other goals for the first working group meeting would 
specifically include the following:   
 

Inform the coral reef community of working group goals and targets;  

- 
-  Obtain input from the coral reef research community and authorities on priorities 

- 

and targets for future studies;  
Identify and distribute specific tasks to working group participants and set targets for 
deliverables, to ensure that all of the terms of reference would be covered during 
the 3-year period;  

-  Present the outline of the working group database and facilitate discussion for 

- 

improvement; 
Launch social media platforms (e.g. Facebook, Twitter) which would be updated 
during the meeting and over the following 3 years; 

-  Draft a brief perspectives paper to be submitted to open-access journal highlighting 

the importance and research needs;  

-  Coordinate a special issue of an open-access journal (e.g. PeerJ or Frontiers in 

Marine Science) using papers presented in the special session at ICRS to report the 
current state of reef biogeochemistry and future research goals.  

 
Year 2 Working group meeting 2. We would apply for a topical session at the aquatic science 
Meeting 2017 (Hawaii, USA; February 26  March 3) and furthermore organize a 2-day 

 

3 

workshop following the meeting. This would ensure participation and input from the wider 
oceanographic community. Goals of the meeting would include the following: 
 

-  Focus progress on database synthesis and get the data webpage operational;  
-  Publish special issue in open-access research (PeerJ or Frontiers); 
- 

Inform oceanographic community of working group goals and targets and discuss 
with the ASLO community the major goals and knowledge gaps; 

-  Develop final list of future challenges and research needs. 

 
Year 3 Working group meeting 3 would be a 4 days meeting hosted by the Australian 
Institute of Marine Science, Townsville (AIMS) in 2018, with venue and accommodation 
costs covered as an in-kind contribution from AIMS. Representatives from the Great Barrier 
Reef Marine park authority would also be invited to this meeting to provide end-user inputs. 
Goals for the meeting would include the following:  
 

-  Finalize data access portal; 
-  Produce working group outcome document as open-access perspectives article in 

the journal Coral Reefs; 

-  Discuss future plans for continuing working group efforts to build a robust platform 

for an international programme similar to the GEOTRACES program. 

 
Capacity Building 
Understanding coral reef biogeochemistry is essential for our understanding and capability 
to predict how coral reefs will respond to environmental changes and to develop and test 
strategies for coral reef management. Currently, this knowledge is often restricted to single 
locations and individual research groups. Many coral reef systems are located in developing 
nations with growing, but limited, research capacity. The BIOCORE working group would 
therefore link key geographical areas and experts to enhance our understanding and 
develop new capability in coral reef biogeochemistry. To ensure that these links are 
created, we would have full participation from Full Members in the meetings to be held in 
2016, 2017 and 2018. We would also identify important knowledge gaps which would 
encourage new research efforts in this area. All working group members would furthermore 
participate individually and collectively in efforts to increase public and scientific 
understanding of coral reef biogeochemistry. Specifically we would develop capacity on 
several levels by:  
 

- Creating a Facebook page and a Twitter account to promote public interaction. Activities 

of outreach are also anticipated through national and regional user groups and media.  
- Including experts from around the globe to increase interactions, knowledge transfer, 
student exchanges and mentoring. The inclusion of scientists from developing nations 
provide links to ecosystems and research institutions in their respective regions and this 
ensure capacity building for developing country scientists through participation in the 
working group meetings and sessions hosted at international conferences, otherwise 
difficult to archive.   

- Publishing of the working group outcomes in an openaccess journal to provide a new 

resource to help expand the field and provide information to policy makers and 
managers. To build new capacity and sustain young researcher we would encourage all 

 

4 

working group members to involve early career scientist in the writing of these open-
access publications.   

- Invite end-user groups to attend and contribute to working group meetings (e.g. Great 

Barrier Reef Park Authority, NOAA).  
 

Start and End Date 
July 2016 to September 2018 
 
Deliverables 

If approved, this working group would:  
 

1.  Establish a database, hosted at AIMS, to connect available data of reef 

biogeochemical measurements.  

2.  Publish a scientific perspectives manuscript in an open-access journal, highlighting 

the importance and knowledge gaps in coral reef biogeochemistry. 

3.  Produce a series of publications to be included in a special issue of an open-access 

journal to enhance our understanding of coral reef processes. The papers would 
summarize current knowledge and identify gaps in our scientific knowledge and help 
us prioritise and make recommendations for future efforts within the research area.  

4.  Build and maintain at AIMS a support network for coral reef researchers in 

developing countries, including resources for grants, supplies, data repositories, and 
management guidelines.  

 
Working Group Members  
Full members of this Working Group were selected to assemble the appropriate scientific 
expertise and to span over the different geographical areas where coral reefs exist, 
including developing countries where a large fraction of the worlds coral reefs are found.  
 
Associate Members were chosen to expand the scientific and geographical working area, 
and they would assist with specific working group deliverables. As costs of attending the 3 
working group meetings wont be covered for these members, we have mainly chosen 
associate members from countries where funding is likely to be available to cover such 
expenses in order to maximize meeting attendance. 
 
The researchers included represent a broad geographical spread, from Asia, Australia, 
Europe, Middle East, North and South America. The working group members also span from 
early to mid-career international researchers to international leading experts in coral reef 
biogeochemistry.  
 

 

5 

 

 

 
Funding 
In order to reduce overall costs and ensure sufficient funding is available for all full members 
to attend all meetings we have 1) arranged that the Australian Institute of Marine Science, 
Townsville would cover the venue and accommodation costs for the third meeting in 2018 
and 2) agreed that full members from developed countries, where possible, would cover 
parts of the cost of their own travel and accommodation from other sources.  

 

References 
Atkinson M.J., Falter J.  2003. Biogeochemistry of coral reefs. In: Biogeochemistry of Marine 

Ecosystems, Eds. Black K., Shimmield G. Blackwell Publishing, CRC Press, pp. 40-64. 
Burke L., Reytar K., Spalding M., Perry A. 2011. Reefs at risk revisited. World Resources 

Institute, Washington, DC. 

Cyronak T., Santos I. R., Schulz K. G., Eyre B.D. 2014. Enhanced acidification of global coral 

reefs driven by regional biogeochemical feedback. Geophysical Research Letters 41, 
5538-5546.  

Fabricius K.E. 2011. Factors determining the resilience of coral reefs to eutrophication: a 

review and conceptual model. In: Coral Reefs: An Ecosystem in Transition, Eds. Dubinsky 
Z., Stambler N. Springer Press, pp. 493-505.       

Hughes T.P., Graham N.A.J., Jackson J.B.C., Mumby P.J., Steneck R.S. 2010. Rising to the 

challenge of sustaining coral reef resilience. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 25, 633-642. 

Moberg F., Folke C. 1999. Ecological goods and services of coral reef ecosystems. Ecological 

Economics 29, 215-233. 

Redfield A.C., Ketchum B.K., Richards F.A. 1963. The influence of organisms on the 

composition of seawater. In: The Sea vol. 2, The Composition of Sea Water: 
Comparative and Descriptive Oceanography, Ed. Hill M.N. WileyInterscience, pp. 26 77. 

Uthicke S., Furnas M., Lnborg C. 2014. Coral reefs on the edge? Carbon Chemistry on 

inshore GBR Reefs. PloS One 9, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0109092 

 
 

 

6 

Full membersName Gender Place of work ExpertiseNicholas Bates MBIOS, Bermuda Coral biogeochemistry Beatriz Casareto(cid:160)FShizuoka University, JapanMicrobial ecology and biogeochemistry Ruy Kenji Kikuchi MUniversidade Federal da Bahia, Brazil Coral biogeochemistryChristian Lnborg*MAIMS, AustraliaMicrobial ecology and biogeochemistry Craig E. Nelson*MCMORE, USAMicrobial ecology and biogeochemistry Xose Anxelu G. MoranMKaust, Saudi ArabiaMicrobial ecology and  biogeochemistry Aazani MujahidFUniversity Malaysia Sarawak, MalaysiaPhysical oceanoghraphy  Anond Snidvongs MPhuket Marine Biological Center, ThailandCoral biogeochemistryAdrienne J. SuttonFNOAA, USAOcean acidification  Aline TribolletFIRD, FranceCoral ecology and biogeochemistry * = cochairsAssociate membersName Gender Place of work ExpertiseEric De CarloMUniversity of Hawaii,  USACoral biogeochemistry and acidification Henrieta Dulaiova FUniversity of Hawaii,  USACoral geochemistry Bradley D. EyreMSouthern cross University, AustraliaCoral biogeochemistry Andrea G. GrottoliFThe Ohio State University, USACoral and isotope biogeochemistryJoanie KleypasFCGD/NCAR, USAOcean acidification Nichole PriceFBigelow, USAOcean acidification Jing Zhang MState Key Laboratoryh, ChinaCoral biogeochemistry