Pelham Public Schools 

Pelham, New York 

Board of Education 

Governance and Communication Practices and Protocols 

BOE Meetings 

1.  Board Members should make an effort to pose questions that they have to 
any of the central office administrators in advance of the Board meeting via 
Google Docs except for executive session items, which will be done via phone 
or in person. There will be a running Doc, but for meeting weeks, all 
questions should be posed by 9 am on the day of the meeting. 

2.  The Board President will decide how consent agenda items will be taken at 

the meeting in advance. 

3.  Board Members may access the District Clerk as a resource to obtain 

information, or to clarify technology problems in media such as email or 
Google Docs. 

4.  The Board will publish annually a pamphlet online describing their protocols 

and practices related to the functioning of the meetings. 

5.  The Board agrees to use BoardDocs to archive and provide access to 
information from weekly packets and Board of Education meetings. 

6.  The Board President will manage public comment at meetings. Board 

Members will be attentive, respectful, and refrain from side comments, 
unrelated use of electronics, etc. 

7.  Unless otherwise indicated, all Board Members are free to respond to public 

questions at Board of Education meetings. 

8.  Board meetings will include updates on finance and facilities, the Four Pillars 

of the Strategic Plan or other items as needed. 

9.  The Board will meet quarterly and/or as needed, in executive session 

without the Superintendent, to review progress on Board development, 
adherence to Board protocols, and to review his/her perfonnance. It shall be 
the responsibility of the Board President and Vice President to provide the 
Superintendent with timely updates on all on such matters. 

Inspiring a Standard ofExceUencejor All Students 

With Superintendent of Schools 

10. The Board President is the primary contact of the Superintendent of Schools. 

As such, it is expected that the Superintendent shall maintain regular 
communication with the Board President on matters of importance.  It is the 
President's responsibility to share appropriate information with the entire 
Board in a timely fashion. 

11. It is the responsibility of the Superintendent to maintain regular 

communication with all Members ofthe Board of Education. 

12. The Superintendent will provide the Board with a detailed update of items of 

importance via the Board letter, which will be uploaded to BoardDocs as 
needed, but at least bi-weekly by Thursday before a Tuesday meeting. 
Materials to be discussed at Board meetings will be available on BoardDocs, 
typically by the Thursday before a Tuesday meeting. Board Members will be 
responsible for reading the packet and contacting the Superintendent with 
any questions by Tuesday morning. 

13. The Superintendent will use email or Google Docs as a tool to provide 

information to the full Board of Education, mindful at all times that emails 
are subject to Freedom ofInformation Law (FOIL). 

14. The Superintendent will immediately inform the Board of major issues 
pertaining to student matters (medical emergencies, arrests, significant 
altercations, etc.).  This may be done through email or telephone. 

15. Any Board Member may contact the Superintendent at any time regarding 

issues or questions.  Emails regarding Board business should be copied to the 
Board President.  Replies from the Superintendent should also include a copy 
to the Board President.  The Superintendent generally will share the 
response with the rest of the Board. 

16. The Superintendent will meet on a regular basis with the President and Vice 
President to plan Board meeting agendas and items for discussion with the 
full Board of Education. 

17. The Superintendent will refer requests for information from members of the 

Board that are considered to take substantial amounts of time to the full 
Board for consideration. 

18. Comments regarding the performance and/or actions of individual Board 
Members and/or the Superintendent are always done in person and not in 
email. 

Inspiring a Standard of Excellence for All Students 

19. Communication Vehicles. Emails will be used for routine, informational 

communication. Email is subject to FOIL and care should be taken to assure 
that email discussion does not violate the Open Meetings Law. Civility of 
content and tone is essential in all communication, including email, as the 
Board and Superintendent have a responsibility to show respect and mutual 
consideration for all. 

With Board Members 

20. Communication should flow from Board President to Members and vice 
versa.  The Board President will be responsible for sharing information 
pertaining to Board work with all Board Members on a timely basis, 
including substantive communications between the President and the 
Superintendent, staff members, community members or other Board 
Members. 

21. All substantive issues brought to individual Board Members from community 

members should be raised with the Superintendent 

22. Relevant emails of concern should be forwarded to the Board President. 

23. The Board President will be responsible for communicating and/or sharing 

information to the full Board. 

24. Intra-Board Communication - by telephone, email or in person - is essential, 

but should be consistent with guidelines for public and executive session 
decision-making. 

Central Administration 

25. All Assistant Superintendents will provide a brief weekly update that will be 

sent to the Board in the weekly packet with all corresponding back-up 
materials.  All issues should be referenced and explained so that the issue 
could be put into its proper context. 

26. Board Members will have the prerogative to call the Superintendent or an 
Assistant Superintendent to ask clarifying questions or raise issues.  Board 
Members will use their judgment when contacting Assistant 
Superintendents, remembering at all times that they and all other personnel 
report to the Superintendent, and no individual Board Member has authority 
to issue directives. 

27. Questions regarding process or more substantial issues should be brought to 

the Superintendent with a copy to the Board President for follow-up. 

Inspiring a Standard of Excellence for All Students 

28. All communication with administrators other than Assistant Superintendents 

will go through the Superintendent. 

29. Committee members and liaisons are responsible for providing the Board 

with an update from their committee meetings on a regular basis. Any 
minutes prepared by the committees shall be made available to all Board 
members and, as practicable, a Board Member on each committee shall be 
responsible for providing the Board with timely updates on the committee's 
work. Upcoming meeting dates should be shared with Board colleagues via 
the Board calendar so interested Board Members may attend to observe the 
meeting, always being mindful of adherence to the Open Meetings Law. 
Board Members will also have the opportunity to share information about 
their committee work and community liaisons at the monthly business 
meetings. 

30. All items for Board action will be presented at least a week in advance 

whenever practicable. 

With Community 

31. Formal external communications is the responsibility of the Public 

Information Specialist. When the communication is to come from the Board 
of Education, Members of the Board will be asked for input. Board input may 
be solicited on other communications as well. 

32. All e-mails received by individual Board Members may be forwarded in form 
or substance to boe@pelhamschools.org and may be published and/or read 
at public meetings. The preservation of confidentiality of all students and 
staff will be strictly adhered to.  All written correspondence will be promptly 
acknowledged. The Board President will work with the Public Relations 
Specialist and/or the Superintendent to coordinate responses to emails and 
may ask other Board Members to respond on behalf of the Board. In some 
cases, a form response may be developed to facilitate prompt handling of a 
volume of email on a particular issue. 

33. Anonymous communication shall not be responded to by either the Board of 

Education or Superintendent. 

34. Board Members will direct parents who call with complaints to communicate 
up the hierarchy of authority - talking to the teacher, the guidance counselor, 
the principal, and the Superintendent before involving Board Members. They 
will not offer to research the problem and call the parent back. Depending on 
the seriousness of the issue, Board Members may also want to make the 
Board President and Superintendent aware of the issue.  Board Members 
should relay substantive criticisms, complaints or suggestions to the full 
Board and the Superintendent. The Superintendent and staff are expected to 
address the issue. Board Members do not attempt to solve the problem or act 

Inspiring a Standard of Excellence for All Students 

as the intermediary between the school and the individual raising the 
question. 

35. The Board President serves as the Board's liaison to the Council of the PTAs. 

Members of the Board are always welcome to attend those monthly 
meetings. 

36. The Superintendent joins the Board President for periodic meetings with the 

local municipal leaders - the Town and Villages.  Upcoming meetings and 
agendas will be shared with the full Board in advance. 

37. Nothing in the above is meant to prohibit or discourage Board Members from 
speaking to community members about matters of public interest where the 
Board Member merely provides publicly available information. 

Board Roles and Responsibilities 

38. Board members have authority to act as members of the corporate board as a 
whole, but have no authority to take action or speak on behalf of the Board as 
a whole. 

39. New Board members shall participate in an orientation process,  which 
includes introductory meetings with the Superintendent and Assistant 
Superintendents, fellow Board members, and District counsel. Board 
members shall acquaint themselves with District policy, procedures, and 
financial information relative to their fiduciary responsibility. 

40. New York State law requires both financial and Board governance training 

for voting members of a school board to be completed within the first year of 
their first term.  Registration for these trainings may be facilitated through 
the Board Clerk. 

Adopted: 

Inspiring a Standard of Excellence for All Students 

