NRDC Issue Paper

June 2008 

Boosting the Benefits

Improving Air Quality and Health 
by Reducing Global Warming  
Pollution in California

Lead Authors
Diane Bailey 
Kim Knowlton 
Miriam Rotkin-Ellman 
Natural Resources Defense Council

Contributing Authors
Harris Epstein 
Natural Resources Defense Council

Andrew Hoerner 
Redefining Progress

Gina Solomon 
Natural Resources Defense Council

Boosting the Benefits: Improving Air Quality and Health by Reducing Global Warming Pollution in California

About NRDC
NRDC (Natural Resources Defense Council) is a national nonprofit environmental organization with more than 
1.2 million members and online activists. Since 1970, our lawyers, scientists, and other environmental specialists 
have worked to protect the worlds natural resources, public health, and the environment. NRDC has offices in 
New York City, Washington, D.C., Los Angeles, San Francisco, Chicago, and Beijing. Visit us at www.nrdc.org.

About Redefining Progress
The nation's leading policy institute dedicated to smart economics, Redefining Progress develops solutions that 
help people, protect the environment, and grow the economy. At Redefining Progress, we believe we do not have 
to choose between a strong economy, a healthy environment and social justice. We make a difference through 
unbiased research, innovative tools, and smart solutions, and we work with a broad array of partners to shift the 
economy toward sustainable growth. Visit us at www.rprogress.org.

Acknowledgments
Thanks to Alberto Ayala, Marsha Banks, Erika Brekke, Karen Buckley, Ralph Cavanagh, Audrey Chang,  
Michel Gelobter, Tim Grabiel, Linda Greer, Al Huang, Roland Hwang, Avinash Kar, Patrick Kinney,  
Anne Notthof, Jeremy Richardson, Victoria Rome, James Tomich, Hien Tran, Xuan Vu, Suzanne Vyborney, 
Richard Wales, Devra Wang, and Hollie Kitson and Zev Ross of ZevRoss Spatial Analysis.

We would also like to thank The Energy Foundation and Cindy and Alan Horn for their generous support.

NRDC Director of Communications: Phil Gutis
NRDC Marketing and Operations Director: Alexandra Kennaugh
NRDC Publications Manager: Lisa Goffredi
NRDC Publications Editor: Anthony Clark
Production: Tanja Bos, tanja@bospoint.com

Copyright 2008 by the Natural Resources Defense Council.

For additional copies of this report, send $5.00 plus $3.95 shipping and handling to NRDC Publications Department, 40 West 20th Street, New York, NY 10011.  
California residents must add 7.5% sales tax. Please make checks payable to NRDC in U.S. dollars. The report is also available online at www.nrdc.org/policy.

This report is printed on paper that is 100 percent post-consumer recycled fiber, processed chlorine free.

Natural Resources Defense Council  I 2   

Boosting the Benefits: Improving Air Quality and Health by Reducing Global Warming Pollution in California

Boosting the Benefits: Improving Air 
Quality and Health by Reducing Global 
Warming Pollution in California

The California Global Warming Solutions Act (AB 32) provides a significant 

opportunity to improve air quality and public health in the state. Our new 
analysis shows that many strategies for combating global warming will 

reduce air pollution, which lowers health risks. In fact, measures being considered for 
implementation under AB 32 could prevent more than 700 premature deaths and 
thousands of other negative health impacts annually, saving $3.2 to $5.0 billion1 in 
health costs in the year 2020 alone. New evidence of increased health impacts from 
exposure to particulate matter (PM) suggests that these health benefits and savings 
may be even greater than estimated here.2 California should adopt these measures to 
reduce global warming pollution and provide tremendous short- and long-term health 
co-benefits by improving air quality and combating global warming at the same time.

 
Global Warming Worsens Air Pollution
Global warming will continue to have enormous impacts on air quality as temperatures rise, weather patterns  
change, background pollutant levels increase, and wildfires become more common.3 Because every degree of  
warming is expected to lead to about a 3 percent increase in energy use per capita, hotter temperatures will also 
increase unhealthy emissions from power plants.4  

Research also shows that hotter temperatures will lead to higher emissions of smog- and soot-forming gases such 

as nitrogen oxides (NOx), while also accelerating the formation of ozone smog. Together, the increased emissions 
of precursors and stepped up formation of smog and soot create a feedback loop since both of these pollutants 
contribute significantly to further global warming (see sidebar on page 10: Addressing the Warming Impacts of  
Smog and Soot). In addition to the global warming pollution emitted in California itself, the ozone problem will  
be exacerbated by pollution that travels with air currents from Asia to the west coast of the United States. One 
estimate shows that ozone levels throughout California are expected to exceed the state standard by the end of  
this century due to pollution stemming from Asia alone.5

The Global Warming  

Air Pollution Link

Increased Greenhouse 

Gas Emissions

Higher 

Temperatures

Increased Particulate

Matter and Ozone

Increased Air Pollution-

Related Mortality

Natural Resources Defense Council  I 3   

Boosting the Benefits: Improving Air Quality and Health by Reducing Global Warming Pollution in California

Addressing the Warming Impacts of Smog and Soot

Although they are not always considered greenhouse gases, black carbon soot and ozone pollution both 

contribute significantly to global warming. In addition to their myriad adverse health impacts. Although these 
pollutants have relatively short atmospheric lifetimes, reduction programs of smog and sootin combination 
with reductions of the six greenhouse gases explicitly called out by AB 32could play an instrumental role in 
arresting climate change in the short term. 

The global warming impacts of ozone from human activities have already had a measurable impact on 
climate, causing roughly a 0.5 degree Celsius increase in winter temperatures in the Arctic for the period 
between 1900 and 2000 (Shindell 2006). The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change notes a small 
effect from fossil fuelbased black carbon, but some researchers have suggested that the impact has been 
underestimated (Hansen and Nazarenko 2004; Jacobson 2001). According to Hansen and Nazarenko, indirect 
soot-driven warming may have contributed to global warming of the past century, including the trend toward 
early springs in the Northern Hemisphere, thinning Arctic sea ice, and melting land ice and permafrost.  
Other work suggests that if all black carbon emissions were eliminated, net warming could be reduced by 20 to 
45 percent within 3 to 5 years (Jacobson 2002 and 2005).

In the United States, toxic diesel emissions are responsible for more than half of the black carbon soot 

released (CARB, 2007). A recent report funded in part by the California Energy Commission concluded that 
black carbon pollution, which scientists blame for the premature deaths of more than a million people, is 
one of the major contributors to the retreat of the Himalayan glaciers. The potential role of black carbon in 
moving the earth toward a climate tipping point related to melting of glaciers or ice sheets requires serious 
attention. 

A reduction in soot and smog would therefore augment efforts to mitigate climate change by regulating the 

six major greenhouse gases called out in AB 32; such a reduction would also drastically improve air quality, 
with significant impacts on human health. Addressing soot and smog in conjunction with AB 32 is a win-win 
strategy.

Sources: CARB, Health Effects of Diesel Exhaust Particulate Matter, 2007; Hansen, J. and Nazarenko, L.,  Soot Climate Forcing via Snow and Ice 
Albedos, PNAS, 101, 423-428, 2004; Jacobson, M.Z., Strong Radiative Heating due to the Mixing State of Black Carbon in Atmospheric Aerosols, 
Nature, 409, 695-697, 2001; Jacobson, M.Z., Control of Fossil-Fuel Particulate Black Carbon and Organic Matter, Possibly the Most Effective Method 
of Slowing Global Warming,  JGR, 107, 2002; Jacobson, M.Z., Correction to Control of Fossil-Fuel Particulate Black Carbon and Organic Matter, 
Possibly the Most Effective Method of Slowing Global Warming,  JGR, 110, 2005; McConnell, J.R., et. al., 20th-Century Industrial Black Carbon 
Emissions Altered Arctic Climate Forcing, Science, 317, 1381-1384, 2007; Shindell, D., et. al., Role of Tropospheric Ozone Increases in 20th-Century 
Climate Change, JGR, 111, 2006; Abdollah, Tami, Soot May Play Big Role in Climate Change, LA Times, March 25, 2008.

Air Pollution Harms Californians Health
As home to five of the 10 smoggiest cities in the United States, California is already suffering a staggering health 
toll from air pollution, including up to 24,000 premature deaths each year and tens of thousands of illnesses.6 
Ozone precursors such as NOx, particulate matter (PM), and a variety of other pollutants are emitted primarily by 
fossil-fuel combustion from transportation, power plants, and other industries. These sources also emit greenhouse 
gases (GHGs), whose long-term effect is to increase global temperatures. Ground-level ozone and PM have been 
linked to respiratory hospital admissions and emergency room visits, decreased lung function, and increased 
mortality related to cardiovascular and respiratory illness.7 

One recent study concluded that global warming pollution emissions from human activities may already be 

causing an additional 1,000 air pollutionrelated deaths and 20 to 30 additional cancers annually for each 1 degree 
Celsius rise in temperature in the United States; 300 of these deaths occur in California.8 Policies limiting emissions 
from fossil-fuel burning, therefore, offer the double benefit of reduced global warming pollution and improved  
air quality. 

Natural Resources Defense Council  I 4   

Boosting the Benefits: Improving Air Quality and Health by Reducing Global Warming Pollution in California

Immediate and Comprehensive Action Under AB 32 is Needed
The California Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006 (AB 32) calls for reduction of global warming emissions to 
1990 levels by 2020, and the governor has set a target of 80 percent below 1990 levels by 2050. AB 32 also calls for 
regulation of the major sources of global warming pollution (see Figures 1 and 2). While the exact list of regulatory 
measures that will move forward under AB 32 is yet to be determined, the Climate Action Team (CAT)an 
interagency working group tasked with crafting policies for helping California meet its global warming reduction 
targetshas vetted a package of promising measures that would achieve reductions in all of the major sectors 
contributing to global warming pollution in California. 

With quick action, these regulatory measures can bring significant environmental and health benefits, 

including the prevention of emissions totaling 109 million metric tons of CO2 equivalents (MMT CO2e) by 
2020approximately two-thirds of the reductions needed to meet the 2020 limit. Projected reductions in fuel and 
energy consumption for these measures, as well as avoided NOx and PM emissions, are derived directly from the 
most recent update of the CAT report. The potential health impacts of these reductions were evaluated according 
to the health risk assessment methodology established by the California Air Resources Board (CARB) Goods 
Movement Emission Reduction Plan (GMERP); health costs were similarly estimated according to the CARB 
GMERP.9 For more information on the methodology used in this report, see Appendix A: Technical Notes and 
Methods.

Figure 1: Sources of Global Warming 

Pollution Emissions by Sector in  

California, 2004

Figure 2: Summary of Global Warming  

Pollution Emission Reductions Identified*  

to Contribute to AB 32s 2020 Limit

Agriculture 

and 

Forestry

5%

Industrial

15%

Natural Gas

14%

Transportation

38%

Other 

4%

Electricity 

25%

Other, 24 MMT  

15%

Forestry, 11 MMT 

7%

Efficiency, 5 MMT 

Water 

3%

Cleaner Power 
Plants, 9  MMT 

5%

Renewable

Energy, 16 MMT 

9%

Efficiency, 33 MMT 

Energy 

20%

Cleaner Cars and 
Trucks, 43 MMT 

25%

Low-Carbon 
Fuel, 15 MMT 

9%

Smart 

Growth 11 MMT 

7%

California Air Resources Board Inventory, 2007, Updated 
Macroeconomic Analysis of Climate Strategies Presented in the 
March 2006 Climate Action Team Report, Final Report, October 2007;  
CARB, Expanded list of early action measures to reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions in California recommended for board consideration, 
October 2007; NRDC and other Recommendations for Policies 
to Reduce Global Warming Pollution for the AB 32 Scoping Plan, 
October 1, 2007.

*Emissions reductions as identified by the Climate Action Team, CARB, and NRDC.
Note: The first number listed in Figure 2 after each category of measures represents 
million metric tons (MMT) of CO2-equivalent emission reductions, totalling 167 MMT 
CO2e.

Natural Resources Defense Council  I 5   

Boosting the Benefits: Improving Air Quality and Health by Reducing Global Warming Pollution in California

Reductions in Pollution Bring Health and Economic Co-Benefits
Our analysis shows that the measures that reduce the greatest amounts of global warming pollutioncleaner cars 
and trucks, energy efficiency, renewable energy, and smart growthalso contribute to significant reductions in 
the NOx and PM emissions that lead to health problems.10 In addition, these measures are likely to produce many 
other improvements to air quality and public health, including reductions in carcinogens that can be byproducts of 
burning fossil fuel. 

This package of CAT measures is projected to reduce NOx emissions in 2020 by 86,000 tons. More than 

three-quarters of the NOx reduction is from the cleaner car and truck measures, which also reduce emissions in 
communities along transportation and goods-movement corridors where air quality is particularly poor. Energy 
efficiency is the single largest contributor to the 3,000 tons of PM reductions from this package, with smart 
growth, renewable energy, and cleaner cars and trucks providing additional major reductions. It is worth noting 
that smart growth measures also provide significant public health benefits in the form of enabling a more active 
lifestyle, which can curb obesity rates, leading to lowered risk of diabetes and heart disease.11

In this analysis, energy efficiency and renewable energy measures contribute little to estimated reductions in 
NOx because of the conservative assumption that all displaced power generation would have been met with new 
natural gas combined-cycle plants. To the extent that energy efficiency and renewable energy displace existing 
power generation, we can expect further decreases in NOx and improvements in air quality than estimated in our 
analysis. It is expected that some dirty, natural gas power plants may come off-line or be utilized significantly less 
by 2020, and retiring or replacing these plants with new natural-gas plants could significantly decrease NOx. Since 
NOx is a precursor to smog and fine particulate matter, NOx reductions will improve regional and local air quality. 

Reducing Other Health Threats from Global Warming

Existing levels of greenhouse gases are predicted to result in significant changes to Californias climate, which 

can negatively impact public health. Substantial reductions in global greenhouse gas emissions can slow or 
reduce the degree of warming experienced, thereby preventing or modulating the following health threats linked 
to global warming: 

4	Heat Waves and Extreme Heat: The frequency of heat wave days in some parts of California is projected to 

double by 2050, and heat-related deaths are expected to quadruple by 2100. 

4	Extreme Precipitation Events: Storms are expected to become more frequent, intense, longer, and larger, 

resulting in flooding, infrastructure damage, and population displacement.

4	Mosquito, Flea, and Tick-Borne Diseases: Diseases spread by mosquitoes, ticks, and fleas (including 

malaria, West Nile virus, dengue fever, Lyme disease, and the plague) are expected to increase as the climate 
becomes more favorable for many of these insects. 

4	Pollen and Allergy: In a warmer environment with more carbon dioxide, ragweed produces significantly 
more pollen. Many weeds and allergenic plants will produce pollen earlier, for a longer time, and in more 
copious quantities, resulting in increased seasonal allergies and triggers for asthma sufferers.

4	Food and Water Supply: Droughts are expected to afflict many regions of the world and threaten drinking 

water supplies. In addition, as the climate changes, agricultural pests already spreading into new areas will 
be harder to control.

Sources: California Climate Change Center, Our Changing Climate: Assessing the Risks to California, July 2006, CEC-500-2006-077; K. Hayhoe, et al., 
Emissions Pathways, Climate Change, and Impacts on California, PNAS 2004;101:12422-7; NRDC Fact Sheet, Global Warming Can Affect Our 
Health: Protecting Against the Most Serious Health Impacts of Climate Change, May 2008, www.nrdc.org/policy.

Natural Resources Defense Council  I 6   

Boosting the Benefits: Improving Air Quality and Health by Reducing Global Warming Pollution in California

The reductions in PM and NOx from the CAT measures are estimated to prevent more than 300 premature 
deaths associated with air pollution and thousands of additional hospitalizations and illnesses. And the benefits 
quantified here would save a total of $1.4 to $2.3 billion in avoided health costs in 2020. These projections are 
likely to underestimate the total health benefits of this climate package, since many viable global warming pollution 
measures were not included and many benefits to public health, such as reduced cancer risk, were not quantified.12  

Additional Global Warming Measures and Proposals
CARBs implementation plan for AB 32 will also include the Early Action Measures (EAMs) and 35 other measures 
adopted in October 2007, estimated to produce reductions of an additional 35 million metric tons of carbon 
dioxide equivalents (MMT CO2e).13 Further measures proposed to CARB for consideration during the scoping 
plan process for AB 32 could contribute reductions of up to 39 MMT CO2e more.14 The EAMs that are not part 
of the Climate Action Team report, together with the additional proposed measures, if adopted, would avoid more 
than 52,000 tons of NOx and PM pollution, would avert roughly 250 additional premature deaths and thousands 
of cases of asthma and respiratory symptoms, and would save $1.1 to $1.8 billion in health costs in 2020. The NOx 
and PM reductions from all of the potential types of AB 32 measures (CAT, EAM, and additional measures) are 
shown in Figures 3 and 4. The specific air quality benefits and health benefits rankings of each individual measure 
within the CAT package, EAMs, and additional proposed measures are summarized in Table 1. 

Figure 3: NOx Reductions from  

AB 32 Climate Action Team  
Measures, 135,000 Tons in 2020

Figure 4: PM Reductions from  

Potential AB 32 Measures,  

6,000 Tons in 2020

Cement 
Plants

2%

Energy 
Efficiency

5%

Smart Growth

6%

Low-Carbon 

Fuel
10%

Other (Renewable Energy, 

Water Efficiency, 

Cleaner Power, and Forestry) 

1%

Cleaner Cars 

and 
Trucks
76%

Other 

(Water Efficiency, 
Cleaner Power, 
Cement Plants, 
and Forestry) 

11%

Renewable 

Energy
10%

Energy 
Efficiency

27%

Cleaner Cars 
and Trucks

37%

Low-Carbon 

Fuel
7%

Smart Growth

8%

Source: Updated Macroeconomic Analysis of Climate Strategies Presented in the March 2006 CAT Report, Final Report, October 2007; CARB, 
Expanded list of EAMs, October 2007; and NRDC and other Recommendations for Policies to Reduce Global Warming Pollution for the AB 32 Scoping 
Plan, October 1, 2007.

Natural Resources Defense Council  I 7   

Boosting the Benefits: Improving Air Quality and Health by Reducing Global Warming Pollution in California

Table 1: Co-Benefits of Climate Action Team, Early Action Measures  

and Additional Proposals

emission 

reductions in 

2020 (tons)

Health  
Benefits 
ranking

1
2
5
17
24
26  
28

268  

256  

Energy Efficiency

Cleaner Cars  
and Trucks

Cleaner Power 

   
  
  
  
  
  
  

  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  

 type 

IndIvIdual Measures 

nox 

pM 

1,898 
73 
33 
136 
18 
27 
1 

35,405 
46,915 
18,615 
74      
667  
14 
1 

Category  
 
EAM 
CAT 
CAT 
CAT  
EAM 
CAT 
CAT/EAM 
CAT  
 
Proposed 
 
CAT 
CAT 
CAT  
CAT  
Proposed 
CAT  
CAT  
CAT  
CAT  
Proposed 
CAT 
EAM 
EAM 
CAT  
CAT  
CAT  
CAT  
 
 
Proposed 
CAT  
Cat  Climate Action Team Measures  eaM  Early Action Measures   proposed  Measures submitted for consideration in the Scoping Plan

Diesel Truck Fleet Clean-up 
Hybrid and Efficient Diesel Trucks 
Limited Diesel Idling 
Cleaner Cars and Trucks (Pavley) 
Marine Vessel Speed Reduction 
Cleaner Cars and Trucks  New Improvements 
Fuel Efficient and Inflated Tires 
Municipal Utility Program, Emissions  
Performance Standard 
Updates to Building and Appliance Standards  
(Titles 24 and 20) 
Municipal Utility Program  
Investor-Owned Utility, Additional Programs 
Appliance Standards (In Place) 
Investor-Owned Utility Programs 
Standards for Buildings at Time-of-sale 
Building Standards (In Place) 
Green Buildings Initiative 
Stationary Refrigeration and A/C Sources 
Urban Forestry 
Freight Transportation Measures 
Shore Electrical Power for Marine Vessels 
Electrify Large Irrigation Pumps 
Truck Stop Electrification 
Cement Manufacturing 
Accelerate Renewable Portfolio Standard to 33%  
California Solar Initiative 
Measures to Improve Transport Energy  
Efficiency, Smart Land Use, and Intelligent  
Transportation 
Water Efficiency, Additional 
Water Use Efficiency 

256 
307 
279  
239  
187  
106  
99  
85  
 34  
 3  
196  
85 
89  
 39  
97  
508  
 56  

    
  
  
  
      
Other
      
  
     
  
  
     
  

3,358  
321 
292  
251  
196  
1,389  
104  
89  
36  
3  

11

7
8
9
12
14
16
19
20
23
26
6
13
18
21
15
4
22

3
10
25

 5,790  
4,700 
 1,251  
896  
 2,895  
532  
58  

7,960 
273 
32 

476 
261  
31 

         Forestry 

Low Carbon Fuel

Renewable Energy

Smart Growth

Water Efficiency

Note: Measures lacking quantified fuel or energy savings were excluded from this analysis.
Source: Updated Macroeconomic Analysis of Climate Strategies Presented in the March 2006 CAT Report, Final Report; CARB, Expanded list of 
EAMs, October 2007; NRDC and other Recommendations for Policies to Reduce Global Warming Pollution for the AB 32 Scoping Plan, October 1, 
2007. Health Benefits rankings were determined using the health impacts assessment methodology from the CARB Goods Movement Emissions 
Reduction Plan, April 2006, as described above.

Natural Resources Defense Council  I 8   

Boosting the Benefits: Improving Air Quality and Health by Reducing Global Warming Pollution in California

Setting Air Quality and Health Goals for Other High-Polluting Industries
Some important measures for reducing greenhouse gases to achieve AB 32 goals have yet to be fully defined. For 
example, potential for greenhouse gas reduction and co-benefits for the petroleum refining, oil and gas extraction, 
and agriculture sectors have yet to be determined. Also, upgrading highly polluting power plants holds potential 
for tremendous co-benefits. For example, in 2005, just five old (pre-1980) power plants in California contributed 
to more than one quarter of the total NOx emissions from all power plants in the state.15  These same five plants 
(which have an average age of 50 years) are also quite carbon-intensive, releasing 1.5 to 3.5 times more CO2 per 
megawatt-hour of production than a new natural-gas combined-cycle plant, amounting to roughly 5 percent of 
the total CO2 emitted from California power plants in 2007.16  Repowering or replacing dirtier plants with cleaner 
technologies, as is currently planned for some of these older plants, can improve air quality and reduce greenhouse 
gas emissions at the same time. 

We estimate that additional global warming pollution control measures in these sectors could yield significant 

co-benefits, potentially reducing NOx and PM pollution by 10 percent by 2020, including 3,000 fewer tons of 
NOx pollution and 2,000 fewer tons of PM. These reductions would in turn yield significant additional public 
health benefits, by preventing almost 140 premature deaths and thousands of cases of asthma and respiratory 
illness. These reductions would also save up to $1 billion in health costs in 2020. Taken together, these 
comprehensive reductionsalong with the CAT package, early action measures, and scoping plan proposals
would provide enormous public health benefits in 2020 (see Table 2). Note that measures are categorized in order 
of the highest certainty of implementation and data availability (CAT measures) to the least certain (potential 
additional measures).

Table 2: Public Health Benefits of Global Warming Pollution Reduction Measures in California in 2020

Avoided Health  

Climate Action 

Additional Early  

 Potential  

    Impacts in the         Team Measures      Action and Proposed        Additional           Total 
     Year 2020 

    Measures 

Measures 

 

 

 

Value 

     (in millions 
   of dollars)

 

   

    

Premature Death 
Hospitalization 
(respiratory) 
Hospitalization 
(cardiovascular) 
Asthma and other  
Lower Respiratory 
Symptoms 
Acute Bronchitis 
Work Loss Days 
Minor Restricted 
Activity Days 

330  
70   

               

120  
             
8,300 
    
         
690  
50,000  
290,000  

     

250 
50  

 94 

6,400 

 

540  
39,000  
220,000 

   

140  
 30  

50  

710  
140  

 $3,200  5,000 
  $2.7  4.2 

 270  

  $6.0  9.5 

3,500 

18,000 

  $0.2  0.3

290  
21,000 
120,000   

 1,500  
110,000  
630,000  

 $0.3  0.5 
   $12  18
  $18 - 29

Source: Updated Macroeconomic Analysis of Climate Strategies Presented in the March 2006 CAT Report, Final Report; CARB, Expanded 
list of EAMs, October 2007; and from NRDC and other Recommendations for Policies to Reduce Global Warming Pollution for the AB 32 
Scoping Plan. October 1, 2007. Health impacts and values were estimated using the health impacts assessment methodology from the 
CARB Goods Movement Emissions Reduction Plan, April 2006, as described above.

Natural Resources Defense Council  I 9   

Boosting the Benefits: Improving Air Quality and Health by Reducing Global Warming Pollution in California

The Local Impacts of Large Sources of Carbon, Soot, and Smog-forming Pollutants
Our analysis shows the potential for significant health benefits from measures to reduce global warming pollutants. 
However, the location of these benefits is just as important as the magnitude of the benefits, especially given 
that many of Californias communities of color and low-income communities have been and continue to be 
disproportionately impacted by pollution. Health benefits from cleaner car and truck measures will be most 
pronounced near freeways, freight facilities and high traffic corridors. Communities near stationary sources, such as 
power plants, would be expected to benefit from reduced emissions from these sources. 

The maps in Figures 5 through 7 show the locations of certain facilities in industrial sectors that are known 
to emit significant quantities of global warming pollution, as well as emitting significant air pollution with the 
potential to greatly impact local communities: Power plants, cement plants, and petroleum refineries. Although 
these maps exclude all other sources, including other industries and all mobile sources, they provide a powerful 
illustration of the areas of the state which would benefit from reduced pollution from these specific facilities. The 
sectors represented on the maps account for roughly 20 percent of the total global warming pollution emitted in 
California.

The symbol for each facility on these maps shows the magnitude of CO2 emissions (by symbol size) and the 
health risk by color. The health risk index represents the relative potential health impacts among the facilities 
mapped, based on a methodology similar to that used to estimate health co-benefits and based on NOx and PM 
emissions. See Appendix A for a description of the methodology and Appendix B for a listing of all facilities 
included in the maps. 

The maps indicate that although there are polluting facilities scattered throughout the state, the Los Angeles 
area in the southern part of the state and the Carquinez and Richmond areas of the San Francisco Bay Area bear 
the brunt of pollution-related health impacts from these sources relative to other areas. In addition, the health risks 
associated with the power plants in Southern California are higher on average than elsewhere in the state due to 
high levels of air pollutant emissions, large populations living nearby, and poor regional air quality. 

Impacts of Power Plant Siting on Local Air Quality

While new power plants are expected to be vastly cleaner than many existing facilities, those utilizing fossil fuel

combustion will emit some level of harmful particulates that could have serious impacts at the local level. As 
a result, from a local perspective, the benefit from reducing particulates depends on where those reductions 
occur. There is the risk that new natural gas combined-cycle plants will be sited in urbanized areas, especially in 
communities already burdened with higher-than-average levels of pollution. In those instances, the increases in 
particulate emissions can have serious public health consequences. For example, the South Coast Air Quality 
Management District found very significant health impacts from a proposed new natural gas power plant in 
Vernon, CA, including a potential increase in annual premature mortality of up to four to 12 people. 

Therefore, while strategically sited new natural gas combined-cycle plants have the potential to provide 

valuable co-benefits on a regional level, preventing inadvertent injustices at the local level requires prudent siting 
and planning.

Source: See Final Program Environmental Assessment, pp. 5-12 to 5-16, http://www.aqmd.gov/ceqa/documents/2007/aqmd/finalea/1309.1/fpea.html.

Natural Resources Defense Council  I 10   

Boosting the Benefits: Improving Air Quality and Health by Reducing Global Warming Pollution in California

Figure 5: Carbon Dioxide (CO2) Emissions and Co-pollutant Health Impacts from  

Selected Industrial Facilities in California

Natural Resources Defense Council  I 11   

Boosting the Benefits: Improving Air Quality and Health by Reducing Global Warming Pollution in California

Figure 6: Carbon Dioxide (CO2) Emissions and Co-pollutant Health Impacts from  

Selected Industrial Facilities in the Los Angeles Area

Where Theres Smoke...

...there's elevated asthma. Smoke from wildfires is laden with particulates, causing respiratory illnesses, eye irritation, 
and exacerbated asthma. A study of health impacts on children during the 2003 wildfires in California that burned 
750,000 acres found that the risk of respiratory and other symptoms, including worsened asthma, increased up to 
500 percent from more than six smoky days in a row. Wildfires in California are expected to increase in frequency 
by 11 percent to 55 percent because of global warming over the course of this century. A 5 percent increase in 
wildfires in 2020 could increase PM emissions by almost 4,000 tons, leading to more than 6,000 cases of asthma and 
respiratory symptoms.

Sources: Our Changing Climate: Assessing the Risks to California (2006), www.climatechange.ca.gov; Kunzli N, et al., Health Effects of the 2003 
Southern California Wildfires on Children, Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 174: 1221-1228, 2006; CARB emissions inventory, 2020, http://www.arb.
ca.gov/app/emsinv/emseic1_query.php.

Natural Resources Defense Council  I 12   

Boosting the Benefits: Improving Air Quality and Health by Reducing Global Warming Pollution in California

Figure 7: Carbon Dioxide (CO2) Emissions and Co-pollutant Health Impacts from  

Selected Industrial Facilities in the San Francisco Bay Area

Stop the Mercury from Rising

Mercury is a heavy metal and neurotoxin that is emitted into the air mostly from cement plants and refineries 

in California. Mercury settles out of the air into water, where it builds up in fish that are consumed by people. 
It is estimated that only a teaspoonful of mercury can make the fish in a lake unsafe to eat. Even in low doses, 
mercury may affect a childs development, delaying walking and talking, shortening attention span and causing 
learning disabilities. 

The California Air Resources Board has the opportunity to simultaneously reduce global warming and 

mercury pollution from cement plants. Our analysis suggests that the requirement of process changes at cement 
plants will also reduce mercury emissions by an estimated 35 to 55 percent,17 avoiding the release of almost 200 
pounds of mercury each year from these plants, which currently account for approximately 90 percent of the 
airborne mercury pollution in California. 

Sources: California Environmental Protection Agency, Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment, Methylmercury in Sport Fish: Information 
for Fish Consumers, http://www.oehha.org/fish/hg/index.html; Michigan Department of Environmental Quality, Mercury in the Environment,  
http://www.michigan.gov/deq/0,1607,7-135-3585_4129_4183-11832--,00.html;Toxics Release Inventory Data, http://www.epa.gov/tri/.

Natural Resources Defense Council  I 13   

Boosting the Benefits: Improving Air Quality and Health by Reducing Global Warming Pollution in California

Recommendations

Instead of allowing the impacts of global warming to contribute to declining air 

quality, California must continue to pursue an ambitious set of policies designed 
to improve air quality and public health while also combating global warming. 

In order to best realize the full potential environmental and health co-benefits of 
reducing emissions of global warming pollutants, we recommend the following for 
California:

4	Study, quantify, and maximize the co-benefits provided by the package of policies used to meet the AB 32 

global warming emissions limit.

4	Identify measures to reduce global warming pollution and provide air quality and health co-benefits in highly 

polluting sectors for which there are currently few specific measures, such as petroleum refining, oil and gas 
extraction, and agriculture.

4	Make information about co-benefits available to the public to clarify how the states efforts to reduce global 

warming pollution will also reduce air pollution and benefit public health.

4	Take into account the global warming benefits of reducing ozone smog and soot when adopting global warm-

ing pollutant, air quality, and toxic reduction regulations.

Natural Resources Defense Council  I 14   

Blank Page 15

Boosting the Benefits: Improving Air Quality and Health by Reducing Global Warming Pollution in California

Endnotes

1 

In 2007 dollars, based on a discount rate ranging from 3 percent to 7 percent; note that the primary component of health cost savings in 
the Value of a Statistical Life assigned to each premature death avoided. Uncertainty surrounding health impacts ranges from roughly 15 
percent to 75 percent for most health endpoints, according to CARB, Technical Support Documents for the In-Use On-Road Diesel-
Fueled Heavy-duty Drayage Trucks at Ports and Intermodal Rail Yard Facilities Regulation, Appendix F, December 2007. Available at: 
http://www.arb.ca.gov/regact/2007/drayage07/drayage07.htm.

2  On May 22, 2008, CARB released an extensive updated peer review of the relation between PM2.5 and premature mortality: CARB, 

Methodology for Estimating Premature Deaths Associated with Long-term Exposures to Fine Airborne Particulate Matter in California DRAFT 
Staff Report, May 22, 2008, http://www.arb.ca.gov/research/health/pm-mort/pm-mortdraft.pdf. 

3   The Rocky Mountain Climate Organization and NRDC, Hotter and Drier: The Wests Changed Climate, March 2008. California Climate 

Change Center, Our Changing Climate: Assessing the Risks to California, July 2006, CEC-500-2006-077.

4  California Climate Change Center, 2006. Degrees refer to degrees Fahrenheit.

5 

6 

Vingarzan, R., A review of surface ozone background levels and trends. Atmospheric Environment, 2004. 38(21): p. 3431-3442.

According to the American Lung Association in their 2008 State of the Air report, five of the 10 smoggiest cities include Los Angeles, 
Bakersfield, Visalia, Fresno, and Sacramento. See http://www.stateoftheair.org/2008/most-polluted/, CARB 2008.

7  M.L. Bell et al., Ozone and Short-term Mortality in 95 U.S. Urban Communities, JAMA (2004), 292:2372-2378. C.A. Pope III and 

D.W. Dockery, Health Effects of Fine Particulate Air Pollution: Lines that Connect. J Air Waste Manag Assoc (2006) 56:709-742.

8  M.Z. Jacobson, On the Causal Link Between Carbon Dioxide and Air Pollution Mortality, Geophys Res Let (2008) 35:L03809, 

doi:10.1029/2007/GL031101. California statistic obtained from CARB Climate and Health briefing on January 30, 2008.

9  CARB, Goods Movement Emission Reduction Plan, April 2006. See: http://www.arb.ca.gov/planning/gmerp/gmerp.htm

10  We focused on NOx and PM emission reductions because these two pollutants contribute heavily to adverse health impacts from air 
pollution. While we were unable to quantify all known health impacts from NOx and PM, major impacts include onset of asthma, 
low birth weight, pre-term birth, and reduced lung function growth in children. For more information, see: CARB, Goods Movement 
Emission Reduction Program, , March 21, 2006, Appendix A.

11  Richard J. Jackson, MD, MPH, Chris Kochtitzky, MSP, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Creating A Healthy Environment: 

The Impact of the Built Environment on Public Health, available at http://www.cdc.gov/healthyplaces/articles/Creating%20A%20
Healthy%20Environment.pdf.

12  These measures are likely to reduce many other pollutants, including carcinogens such as benzene and formaldehyde; developmental 
toxicants such as lead and toluene; and neurotoxicants such as mercury and acrolein. However, we were unable to quantify reduced 
cancer risks or public health benefits from other co-pollutant reductions.

13  CARB, Expanded list of early action measures to reduce greenhouse gas emissions in California recommended for board consideration, 

October 2007, http://www.arb.ca.gov/cc/ccea/meetings/ea_final_report.pdf.

14  The analysis is based on proposals from NRDC. All scoping plan proposals submitted to ARB are posted at http://www.arb.ca.gov/cc/

scopingplan/submittals/submittals.htm.

15  This is based on 2005 emissions inventory data from CARB, http://www.arb.ca.gov/app/emsinv/facinfo/facinfo.php. Note that the 

facility with the highest NOx emissions is likely to be repowered soon (http://www.energy.ca.gov/sitingcases/humboldt/documents/index.
html). The next top five plants with the highest NOx emissions in 2005 contributed more than one-fifth of NOx emissions that year 
from the remaining power plants. Other plants may also be in the process of being repowered.

16  This is based on 2005 power plant data from CEC and 2007 CARMA data on CO2 emissions from power plants. (http://www.arb.

ca.gov/app/emsinv/facinfo/facinfo.php http://www.energy.ca.gov/database/POWER_PLANTS.XLS www.CARMA.org.)  The emission 
rate for a new natural gas power plant was taken from the CAT report, referenced above. The five dirtiest power plants include one of the 
few coal-fired power plants in California, which produce significantly more global warming (accounting for the high end of the range) 
and NOx pollution per unit of production than natural gasfired power plants.

17  Percent mercury reduction is calculated based on USEPA estimate that 30 to 45 percent of mercury emissions are due to coal 

combustion. Note that coal is the primary fuel used at California cement kilns.

Natural Resources Defense Council  I 16   

