Climate Change in National Parks

National Park Service
U.S. Department of the Interior

Earths climate is changing, with global temperature now rising at
a rate unprecedented in the experience of modern human society.
Arctic Climate Impact Assessment, 2004

Change has always been a powerful force of nature.
National parks and the stories they represent help us
understand and appreciate how much our lives are
influenced by change. They illustrate for us how
interconnected we are with our environment whenever
change occurs.

influence the experiences for which the national parks
were established. Regardless of their causes, we must do
what we can to manage these impacts and adapt to the
new circumstances they bring. Perhaps the same wisdom
that has preserved our heritage in the past can guide us
in making choices for the future.

Today, we hear more and more about the effects of
climate change. Scientists tell us there is little doubt
that human activities are having a major impact on the
atmosphere and ecosystems of our planet.

Glaciers and snow packs are melting, stream
temperatures are going up, coastal erosion is increasing,
and changes in weather patterns are leading to
drought and heat waves both locally and regionally.
According to researchers, the magnitude and pace of
these changes, as well as additional ones that
climatologists believe to be probable, are
unprecedented in human history. Many of them have
consequences that will affect the resources and

Climate Change is Happening

Warmer winters and longer,
more intense melt seasons
have increased the rate of
glacial retreat in Alaskas
Glacier Bay and Kenai Fjords
National Parks.
by scientists with the U.S.
Geological Survey that by
2030, many of the glaciers in
Montanas Glacier National
Park will be completely gone.

It is estimated

Local weather is often confused with global climate.
Specific park records may reflect periods of warming or
cooling depending on regional circumstances. Global
mean temperature, on the other hand, is based on surface
and atmospheric temperatures from thousands of
locations, and from satellites worldwide. Global mean
temperature has risen 0.8 degrees C, since 1880.

Muir Glacier, 1941 (left) and 2004 (right)
Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve

At parks like Bandelier National Monument, higher temperatures and drought have brought high
mortality to the pinon pines as infestations of bark beetles have expanded to higher elevations
and new ranges. At Everglades National Park, increasing sea level may overwhelm the mangrove
communities that filter out saltwater and maintain the freshwater wetlands. At Canyon de Chelly
National Monument, Mesa Verde and Rocky Mountain National Parks, floods and fires have damaged
historic structures and are threatening the loss of archeological sites.

Changes have Consequences
Many climate change consequences make it difficult for park managers to
preserve the resources unimpaired. Higher temperatures in spring and
summer and earlier melting of the snow pack in recent years have
contributed to an increase in the frequency and duration of wildland fires.
Recent studies have concluded that a changing climate, not previous fire-
suppression policies or land-use changes, is the major cause. The 2006
wildfire season has set a 45-year-high in the number of acres burned.
Particularly at risk are plant and animal species that are more restricted in
their needs for habitat, have limited ability to relocate, or have surrounding
development that leaves them few options.

In Yosemite, the pika population is in danger of extinction as warming
temperatures occur higher and higher on the mountainsides. With each
season, the cool habitat in which they make their homes shifts further
upslope. Eventually, if this continues, they may have nowhere higher to go.

Nutrient-rich whitebark pine seeds are a critical food source for the grizzly
bears of Yellowstone. Warmer winters have enabled bark beetles to
significantly increase mortality of whitebark pines over their entire
American range with little sign of relief. Not only does this lower the
grizzlies survival rates, they are now more likely to experience human
conflicts in their search for alternate foods.

Another dilemma for managers is occurring at Joshua Tree National Park.
Joshua trees require cool winters and freezing temperatures in order to
flower and set their seeds. Researchers have documented substantial
mortality of Joshua trees and predict that because of climate warming,
the trees will be unable to persist much longer within the park. Soon,
Joshua trees may no longer be found in the park bearing their name.

Arrange for Change

We Must Do What We Can
While many changes to park resources are inevitable,
they can still influence the ways in which visitors use
and enjoy the parks. Closures are resulting from
increased wildfires. Reduced winter snow pack and, in
some cases, more rain, have changed the timing of
surface runoff each year which often makes spring and
summer water activities difficult or impossible. Salmon
and trout populations, popular for fishing, are showing
high mortality rates due to warming water and
flooding. Indigenous users of these fisheries, especially
in Alaska, are at risk to lose not only a food source, but
a way of life. And winter seasons are opening later and
closing earlier. Although this extends the season for
activities like hiking and camping, it reduces
opportunities for recreational skiing and other winter
sports due to inadequate snow cover. Many of these
impacts have economic implications.

Scientists who study climate change agree that human
activities are a big part of the current warming trend.
As stated in the 2001 report of the Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change, there is new and stronger
evidence that most of the warming observed over the
past 50 years is attributable to human activities. At
Mauna Loa in Hawaii and around the world, specific
evidence has been gathered of an increase in
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, predominantly
carbon dioxide, which are contributing to the warming
of the planet. Carbon dioxide levels in the atmosphere
today are higher than theyve been in over 650,000
years.

For our national parks to thrive and for us to continue
enjoying them, it seems appropriate now to do what we
can to reduce climate change impacts and adapt to their
consequences. Fortunately, we have the tools,
knowledge, and ingenuity to better understand these
changes and make informed choices for coping with
them. Prominent scientists are saying that our own
survival may be at stake.

What is the use of a house, if you

haven't got a tolerable planet to put it on?

-Henry David Thoreau

Parks and Scientists Provide Hope for the Future
National parks are helping us figure out how to
respond to these changes. Parks across the nation are
conducting Climate Friendly Parks workshops, co-
sponsored by the Environmental Protection Agency, to
evaluate energy usage and identify efficiencies that
improve park operations. Many are developing
alternate energy strategies to reduce their emissions of
greenhouse gases. Use of solar and wind energy, fuel
cells, electric and hybrid forms of transportation, and
mass transportation where high visitation exists, are
being developed. Vulnerable resources are being
monitored in most parks, and several have researchers
who are specifically addressing climate change impacts.
And rangers in many parks are being trained and
provided the latest reports about climate science in
order to answer questions and assist visitors in
understanding climate change and its implications.

reduce our energy use to a basic level, and offset the
emissions we do generate by investing in clean
alternatives, we may achieve balance and not further
compromise global resources. Changing to energy
efficient light bulbs and appliances, unplugging
computers and electronic devices when theyre not in use,
and using public transportation whenever and as often
as we can are good examples of conservation practices.
There are many more. To find out more about becoming
carbon neutral and to become better informed about
climate science, here are some helpful references:

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
http://www.ipcc.ch/

The Arctic Climate Impact Assessment
http://amap.no/acia/ACIAContent.html

Understanding and Responding to Climate Change
http://dels.nas.edu/basc/Climate-HIGH.pdf

EPAs Global Warming  Actions
http://yosemite.epa.gov/oar/globalwarming.nsf/content
/ActionsIndividualMakeaDifference.html

NPS/NASA Earth-to-Sky Interpretive Training tool
http://www.earthtosky.org

Regardless of the causes, taking action to manage the
impacts of changing climate will have positive benefits
for our resources. In the future, national parks may tell
the story of our collective success in dealing with climate
change, moving to a way of life in greater harmony with
the natural processes that operate on our planet. After
all, Earth is the only planet we can call home.

Many times during our nations history, citizens have
confronted difficult circumstances and found creative
solutions. Our parks tell compelling stories about the
American Revolution, the abolition of slavery, the fight
for civil rights, and about countless inspirational
personalities who have made a difference for our
nation. Many parks convey stories about peoples
responses over thousands of years to shifting climate
patterns. These stories are now part of a call to action
for all visitors in the stewardship of our resources for
future generations. It is important that all of us
participate in answering that call.

Scientists tell us we already possess the technologies
needed to reduce the abundance of CO2. Theyve also
created strategies to do so within 50 years. Many of
these actions involve choices that individuals can make
to conserve and reduce energy use. One of the best
strategies for coping with climate change on a personal
level is to become carbon neutral. Because we exhale
carbon dioxide and need energy for our daily activities,
were unlikely to eliminate all impacts. However, if we

