BRIDGING THE GAP BETWEEN COMPUTER SECURITY AND LEGAL 
REQUIREMENTS 

CHRISTOPHER E. EVERETT

* 

 

Table of Contents 

III. 

Abstract ........................................................................................................................................... 1 
I. 
Introduction............................................................................................................................. 2 
A.  Scope................................................................................................................................... 3 
B.  Overview............................................................................................................................. 4 
II.  Why Should the Computer System be Secured? .................................................................... 5 
A.  The Ever Changing Legal Requirements............................................................................ 5 
B.  Types of Risks..................................................................................................................... 6 
1.  Personal Information....................................................................................................... 6 
2.  Financial Information...................................................................................................... 8 
3.  Credit and Debit Card Information ............................................................................... 10 
4.  Healthcare Information ................................................................................................. 11 
Intellectual Property...................................................................................................... 12 
5. 
Lowering Legal Exposure by Analyzing Security Needs................................................. 13 
A.  Security Drivers ................................................................................................................ 13 
B.  Security Level ................................................................................................................... 15 
1.  Specification ................................................................................................................. 17 
2. 
Implementation ............................................................................................................. 18 
3.  Assurance...................................................................................................................... 19 
C.  How will the analysis help computer security? ................................................................ 19 
Conclusion ........................................................................................................................ 20 

IV. 
 
 ABSTRACT 
 
The security of computer systems is a critical issue to organizations.  Business managers 
 
want to understand how the different security pieces of a computer system will help the bottom 
line of an organization.  Information technology (IT) professionals, on the other hand, try to 
secure the systems using the limited time and money that is available in most technology 
budgets.  Business managers and IT professionals need to understand each others positions so 
that they can reach a compromise on the security aspects of an organizations computer system.  
The two sides can reach this compromise by analyzing the risks associated with the information 
maintained on a computer system versus the potential liability of a security breach.  The 
corresponding security level can then be directly tied to the individualized needs of an 
organization.  By working to bridge the gap between the two sides, business managers will know 
why security helps the bottom line of an organization and IT professionals will have the time and 
money to better secure the system. 
 

                                                 

*  J.D. Candidate 2006, Nova Southestern University, Shepard Broad Law Center; B.S. in Computer 

Science and M.S. in Computer Science, Mississippi State University.  The author wishes to thank:  his wife, Dr. 
Christine R. Rutter, for all of her love and support throughout this process and the faculty of the Law Center, 
especially Professor Linda F. Harrison, for their support and guidance. 

 

- 1 - 

 

I. 

INTRODUCTION 

 
It happens late at night across America more often then most business managers want to 

think about.  The pager goes off alerting an information technology (IT) professional of a 
problem with the computer system.  The IT professional has no choice but to check on the 
delicate balance of the system.  Has the backup failed again, or is it another false alarm?  The IT 
professional hopes that it is just another false alarm triggered by the rules of the system.  As the 
IT professional logs into the system, the realization of what has happened breaks the silence of 
the night.  The system has been hacked!1 

Although the described situation is fictional, the realization that a system has been hacked 

occurs on a daily basis.2  After a computer system is hacked, the IT professional will at some 
point ask: 

 

1)  Have I failed in my duties? 3   
2)  What could I have done to prevent this catastrophe?4   
3)  How can I convince the business managers that computer security helps the bottom line of 

the organization?   
4)  Will I lose my job?  

 
This article is designed to answer the IT professionals third question:  

  How can I convince the business managers that computer security helps the bottom line of 

the organization?   

During the day-to-day routine, most IT professionals are worried about the technology of the 
system (i.e., Will that new router fit into the network properly? and Will the new desktops 
allow for remote administration?) while business managers are more worried about the return 
on the investment of the technology (i.e., Will that new router decrease the processing time of 
orders? and How will the new desktops increase productivity?).  One problem is that the 
business managers may perceive that ... security is something that the ... [IT professionals] 
handle as part of their day-to-day activities 5 or the business managers may think that security 
is handled by the organizations firewall.6  These perceptions are misguided and can be 
corrected through training and education to ensure that the business managers understand the 
measures necessary for a computer system to be secure.7   

                                                 

1.  This scenario is fictional, but based on the authors experiences as an IT professional at numerous K-12 

schools and small companies. 

2.  See Software Engineering Institute, CERT/CC Statistics 1988-2004, at 

http://www.cert.org/stats/cert_stats.html (last visited Feb. 17, 2005) [hereinafter CERT/CC Statistics]. 

3.  An IT professionals worst nightmare is being hacked and not realizing it for several weeks or months.  
4.  The IT professional and business manager should keep in mind that [a] fundamental fact in computer 

and network security is the impossibility of 100 percent assurance that a computer is trusted.  William A. Arbaugh, 
A Patch in Nine Saves Time?, COMPUTER, June 2004, at 82. 

5.  Moira West-Brown, Avoiding Trial-By-Fire Approach to Security Incidents, CROSSTALK, Oct. 2000, 
available at http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/crosstalk/2000/10/allen.html (last visited Feb. 17, 2005).  The day-to-day 
activities of many IT professionals involve basic support and operation of the vast amount of computing equipment 
in place.  Id. 

6.  Id.   Firewalls may prevent some attacks, but cannot prevent all attack types; and, if not properly 

configured and monitored, they may still leave the organization open to a range of others.  Id. 

7.  See supra note 4. 

 

- 2 - 

 

This difference in needs creates a split between the IT professionals and the business 

managers.  While it is not always important that new desktops are delivered every three years, it 
is imperative that the computer systems are secure from threats.8  Bridging the gap between the 
computer technology that the IT professionals want for the system and the computer technology 
that the business managers want to purchase for the system is challenging for even the most 
seasoned IT professional.   

One way to bridge this gap between the parties is to confront both the technology aspects 

and business aspects of computer security.  An IT professional can utilize the legal liability 
argument that stems from the information that is maintained on the computer system to give the 
business manager an argument for securing the computer system.9  The business reasoning for 
securing the network turns on a utility argument that it will be cheaper to be proactive in the 
securing of the system, than having to pay for any loses and for attempting to secure the system 
after a breach.10  The IT professional can determine the security drivers that fit the computer 
system that needs to be protected and decide what the minimal security level for the computer 
system needs to be. 11  The security level would be based on the utility analysis that will allow 
the organization to claim that it made reasonable efforts to protect the computer system from 
being hacked. 
 

A.  Scope 
 
This article is designed for business managers, IT professionals, and attorneys.  The 
article is designed to provide both a starting place to discuss the security measures that are 
needed to fulfill an organizations legal obligations and as a tool for justifications for security 
measures.12  This article does not discuss under what legal theories an organization would be 
liable for a computer security breach, nor does this article discuss the pros and cons of those 

                                                 

8.  There are many elements to computer security, but an important point is that [c]omputer items must be 
protected only until they lose their value.  They must be protected to a degree consistent with their value.  CHARLES 
P. PFLEEGER, SECURITY IN COMPUTING 9 (2nd ed. 1999).   

9.  Decreasing the liability of information loses from an organizations computer system is imperative for 

business managers, because [a] security incident can have a wide-ranging negative impact on a companys revenue 
streams, customer confidence, and public relations.  MARK EGAN & TIM MATHER, THE EXECUTIVE GUIDE TO 
INFORMATION SECURITY:  THREATS, CHALLENGES, AND SOLUTIONS 2 (2005).    

10.  [A] cost/benefit analysis of network systems security is clearly important.  The costs will be those of 

deploying and maintaining various defense mechanisms to protect a system or site against attacks, including the 
costs of any constraints on the system imposed by the defense mechanism.  Soumyo D. Moitra & Suresh L. Konda, 
The Survivability of Network Systems:  An Empirical Analysis 1, Technical Report CMU/SEI-2000-TR-021 (2000), 
available at http://www.cert.org/archive/pdf/00tr021.pdf (last visited Feb. 24, 2005).  The benefits will be those of 
increased survivability of the system or site and as a direct result of the survivability a decrease in potential 
liability.  Id. 

11.  [S]ystems security professionals should assume that the legal system will come into play to 

compensate individuals and companies who can successfully allege and prove that there was some human error.  For 
a successful defense, persuasive proof of extreme vigilance will be required ... even when the latest and best in 
durable precautions have been incorporated into network security.  Fred Chris Smith, Ethical Responsibilities and 
Legal Liabilities of Network Security Professionals, 1997 PROC. OF THE 13TH ANN. COMPUTER SECURITY 
APPLICATIONS CONF. 239, 246. 

12.  This article is for organizations that maintain information on its computer systems whether for internal 
or external use, but this article does not cover any liability for military information since that type of information has 
a different set of requirements then non-military information.   

 

- 3 - 

 

different legal theories.13  This article assumes that organizations will at some point in the future 
be held liable for failure to properly secure its computer systems, because [t]he potential 
onslaught of claims arising from insecure computer systems is not a veiled threat, but more aptly 
a ripening promise.14  This article covers not only the protection of an organizations own 
information, but information from other sources that an organization maintains on its computer 
systems.15  By following the guidelines described in this article, an organization will be able to 
claim that they were attempting to fulfill their security obligations.16 

 
B.  Overview 
 
Part I of this article began with an introduction of a day in the life of an IT professional 

that occurs across the world.  Part I also discusses the limited scope of this article.  Part II of this 
article discusses why computer systems should be secure.  Part II also includes a discussion of 
the ever changing legal requirements for securing computer systems.  Additionally, Part II 
includes an overview of the different types of risks involved with computer systems along with 
the relevant state and federal laws associated with the information.   

Part III is an overview of the security drivers and the security levels that an organization 

should utilize in deciding how to protect the information maintained on its computer system.  
Part III then covers how the use of the utility analysis will resolve certain legal issues.  Part IV 
demonstrates why the utilization of the utility analysis will work in practice to help business 
managers understand the potential liability issues regarding computer security and to help IT 
professionals give business reasons why an organization should invest in computer security. 

 
 

                                                 

13.  There are numerous articles describing the different legal theories under which an organization may or 

may not be liable along with commentary about current and future laws regarding the different legal theories.  See, 
e.g., Nancy R. Mead, Who is Liable for Insecure Systems?, COMPUTER, July 2004, at 27;  Ethan Preston & Paul 
Turner, The Global Rise of a Duty to Disclose Information Security Breaches, 22 J. MARSHALL J. COMPUTER & 
INFO. L. 457 (2004);  Monica Vir, Note and Comment, The Blame Game:  Can Internet Service Providers Escape 
Liability for Semantic Attacks?, 29 RUTGERS COMPUTER & TECH. L.J. 193 (2003);  Erin Kenneally, Duty and 
Liability for Negligent Internet Security, ;LOGIN:, Dec. 2001, at 62;  Sarah Faulkner, Comment, Invasion of the 
Information Snatchers: Creating Liability for Corporations with Vulnerable Computer Networks, 18 J. MARSHALL 
J. COMPUTER & INFO. L. 1019 (2000);  David L. Gripman, Comment, The Doors are Locked but the Thieves and 
Vandals are Still Getting In: A Proposal in Tort to Alleviate Corporate Americas Cyber-Crime Problem, 16 J. 
MARSHALL J. COMPUTER & INFO. L. 167 (1997);  John Jay Fossett, The Development of Negligence in Computer 
Law, 14 N. KY. L. REV. 289 (1987).  

14.  Erin Kenneally, The Byte Stops Here:  Duty and Liability for Negligent Internet Security, COMPUTER 
SECURITY J., vol. XVI 2000, at 1 [hereinafter Kenneally 2000].  There is a good indication that cases arising from 
insecure systems will hold an organization liable based on the liability of architects when buildings fail because of 
design defects, landlords for failing to provide adequate security for criminal invasions against their tenants, and 
medical causation claims by chemical exposure victims.  Id.  Although the issue of whether an organization could 
be held liable for a security breach has not been resolved.  See, e.g., Erin Kenneally, Whos Liable for Insecure 
Networks?, COMPUTER, June 2002, at 93;  Kenneally 2000, supra note 14;  Carl S. Kaplan, Can Hacking Victims be 
Held Legally Liable?, N.Y. TIMES, Aug. 24, 2001, available at 
http://www.nytimes.com/2001/08/24/technology/24CYBERLAW.html (last visited Feb. 24, 2005);  Cheryl S. 
Massingale & A. Faye Borthick, Risk Allocation for Computer System Security Breaches:  Potential Liability for 
Providers of Computer Services, 12 W. NEW ENG. L. REV. 167 (1990). 

15.  See LANCE ROSE, NETLAW:  YOUR RIGHTS IN THE ONLINE WORLD 142 (1995). 
16.  The security drivers and security levels are designed to fulfill an organizations obligations under 

negligence theory.  See infra Part III. 

 

- 4 - 

 

II.  WHY SHOULD THE COMPUTER SYSTEM BE SECURED? 
 

The goal of computer security is to maintain the confidentiality, integrity, availability, 

and accountability of the computer system and the information residing on the computer 
system.17  The harder question is how much security is required to not only ensure these four 
items for an organization, but to ensure that liability is reduced for any lapses in the 
confidentiality, integrity, availability, or accountability of the computer system or information.18   
The first issue is the legal standard that must be met to reduce the potential liability when 

there is a lapse in security.  The legal standard is constantly in flux, but an understanding of the 
analysis behind the standard will allow both IT professionals and business managers to find a 
common ground for the needed security level of the organization.  To calculate the legal 
standard, an organization must evaluate the types of risks that are associated with the information 
that is maintained on its computer system.  Both IT professionals and business managers need to 
be aware of the different types of risk and work to reduce any legal exposure by working to 
ensure that the confidentiality, integrity, availability, and accountability of the computer system 
containing the information are not comprised.   

 
A.  The Ever Changing Legal Requirements 

 

The question of how much security is required is related to the calculation of the 

probability of injury and the severity of the injury versus the burden of securing against the 
injury.19  This calculation of injury versus burden is a utility type analysis.20  For liability to be 
reduced, the burden of securing against the injury must not be less than the probability of injury 
multiplied by the severity of the injury.21  The probability of injury is the likelihood that the 

                                                 

17.  PFLEEGER, supra note 8, at 5;  Butler W. Lampson, Computer Security in the Real World, COMPUTER, 

June 2004, at 37.  Confidentiality means that the assets of a computing system are accessible only by authorized 
parties. ...  Integrity means that assets are accessible only by authorized parties or only in authorized ways. ...  
Availability means that assets are accessible to authorized parties.  PFLEEGER, supra note 8, at 5.  Accountability is 
knowing who has had access to information or resources.  Lampson, supra note 17, at 39. 

18.  The security of the computer system is also known as information security which is defined in the 

United States Code as: 

The  term  "information  security"  means  protecting  information  and  information  systems  from  unauthorized 
access, use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or destruction in order to provide-- 
(A) integrity, which means guarding against improper information modification or destruction, and includes 
ensuring information nonrepudiation and authenticity; 
(B) confidentiality, which means preserving authorized restrictions on access and disclosure, including means 
for protecting personal privacy and proprietary information; and 
(C) availability, which means ensuring timely and reliable access to and use of information. 

44 U.S.C.  3542(b)(1) (2004).  Section 3542(b)(1) gives definitions for integrity, confidentiality, and availability, 
but the loss of each is much simpler to define.  A loss of confidentiality is the unauthorized disclosure of 
information.  STANDARDS FOR SECURITY CATEGORIZATION OF FEDERAL INFORMATION AND INFORMATION 
SYSTEMS, FIPS PUB 199, 2 (Natl Inst. of Standards and Tech. 2003).  A loss of integrity is the unauthorized 
modification or destruction of information.  Id.  A loss of availability is the disruption of access to or use of 
information or an information system.  Id. 

19.  United States v. Carroll Towing Co., 159 F.2d 169, 173 (2d Cir. 1947).   
20.  See supra Part I.  
21.  Carroll Towing Co., 159 F.2d at 173.  Stated in algebraic terms:  if the probability be called P; the 

injury, L; and the burden, B; liability depends upon whether B is less than L multiplied by P:  i.e., whether B < PL.  
Id. 

 

- 5 - 

 

resulting injury will occur.22  Since there is such a large number of reported attempted break-ins 
and the numbers are increasing, the likelihood that an organization will be hacked or at least 
attempted to be hacked into is high, although the exact probability depends on many 
organization-dependent factors.23   

The next part of the calculation is the severity of the injury.24  The severity of the injury 

is directly related to the type of information that an organization maintains on its computer 
system and the risk associated with maintaining that data.  There are many types of risks 
associated with the different kinds of data on a computer system and the services provided by a 
computer system.  Each of the risks has its own degree of danger associated with a loss or 
exposure.25 

The last part of the calculation is the burden of securing against the injury.26  Securing 
against the injury is the burden of adequate precautions.27  The necessary precautions is the 
part of the calculation that causes the disparity between what the IT professionals want to use to 
protect the computer system and what the business managers deem necessary to protect the 
computer system.  Another dilemma with adequate precautions is that in the computer security 
field, the needed security precautions are always in flux.  Thus, when utilizing the burden or 
utility analysis on the computer security level, an organizations legal requirements for 
protecting information is constantly changing. 

 
B.  Types of Risks 

 

There are several types of information at risk including personal information, financial 

information, credit card information, healthcare information, and intellectual property.  It is 
imperative that both IT professionals and business managers understand these types of risks and 
understand that [p]ractical security balances the cost of protection and the risk of loss.28  Thus, 
an organization should base its decisions on the level of protection based on the type of 
information that is stored on the computer system. 
 

1.  Personal Information 

 

Personal information includes name, address, e-mail address, telephone number, social 

security number, and other types of information that can be used to identify a person.29  
Organizations should be aware that some states have legal requirements that organizations with 

                                                 

22.  Id. 
23.  See CERT/CC Statistics, supra note 2. 
24.  Carroll Towing Co., 159 F.2d at 173. 
25.  Some of the dangers include: 1) Damage to information;  2)Disruption of information;  3)Theft of 

money;  4)Theft of information; and 5)Loss of privacy.  Lampson, supra note 17, at 39. 

26.  Carroll Towing Co., 159 F.2d at 173. 
27.  Id.  
28.  Lampson, supra note 17, at 38. 
29.  See CAL. CIV. CODE  1798.80 (West 2005).  Section 1798.80(e) defines personally information as: 
"Personal  information"  means  any  information  that  identifies,  relates  to,  describes,  or  is  capable  of  being 
associated  with,  a  particular  individual,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  his  or  her  name,  signature,  social 
security number, physical characteristics or description, address, telephone number, passport number, driver's 
license  or  state  identification  card  number,  insurance  policy  number,  education,  employment,  employment 
history, bank account number, credit card number, debit card number, or any other financial information. Id. 

 

- 6 - 

 

personal information should protect the information by reasonable methods.30  The disclosure of 
personal information maintained by an organization can also have other affects such as the 
mandatory disclosure of the security breach to the person(s) whose information was or could 
have been exposed during a security breach.31  The importance of protecting personal 
information is paramount not only because of the negative publicity, but because of the 
increasing costs for consumers to recover from identity theft and the cost to businesses and 
financial institutions for the fraudulent charges attributed to identity theft.   

One such security breach occurred when IKEA had to close its online catalog order site 

... after a privacy breach made the personal information of tens of thousands of its customers 
available online.32  The personal information included names, addresses, phone numbers, and 
email addresses of customers who ordered IKEA catalogs.33  Another security breach occurred 
when Eli Lilly & Co. was fined and forced to enter into a 20-year consent decree with the FTC 
after it inadvertently exposed the e-mail addresses of hundreds of users of Prozac.  The 
agreement with the FTC required broad changes to the firms computer security practice.34   

Although both the Eli Lilly & Co. and IKEA breaches seemingly stem from an 

inadvertent incorrect configuration of their computer systems that only disclosed basic contact 
information, other breaches do occur on systems that contain sensitive information such as social 
security numbers and birthdates.  One break-in allowed a hacker to view the names and social 
security numbers of 400 T-Mobile customers.35  Another reported break-in occurred on a UC 
Berkeley computer in which the hacker gained access to names, addresses, telephone numbers, 
social security numbers and birth dates of about 600,000 people.36 

It is estimated that it costs an average of $500 in out-of-pocket expenses plus 

approximately 30 hours of time to handle the process of recovering from identity theft.37  Thus, 
T-Mobiles break-in that compromised the personal information of 400 customers cost 
approximately $200,000 plus 12,000 hours of time if all of the 400 customers had to recover 
from identity theft.38  The next level of break-in involves hundreds of thousands of peoples 

                                                 

30.  Section 1798.82(b) provides that [a] business that owns or licenses personal information about a 

California resident shall implement and maintain reasonable security procedures and practices appropriate to the 
nature of the information, to protect the personal information from unauthorized access, destruction, use, 
modification, or disclosure.  Id. 

31.  It should also be noted that since July 1, 2003, organizations doing business in California have to 

disclose any security breaches that affect private information of consumers in California to the consumers.   
1798.82.  Although section 1798.82(f) gives the exception that personal information does not include publicly 
available information that is lawfully made available to the general public from federal, state, or local government 
records.  Id.  Thus, organizations do have some leeway when a security breach occurs regarding notification of the 
consumers. 

32.  Troy Wolverton, IKEA Exposes Customer Information on Catalog Site, CNET NEWS.COM, Sep. 6, 

2000, at http://news.com.com/IKEA+exposes+customer+information+on+catalog+site/2100-1017_3-245372.html 
(last visited Feb. 24, 2005). 

33.  Id. 
34.  Jonathan Krim, Firms Look to Limit Liability for Online Security Breaches, WASH. POST, Mar. 5, 2004, 

at E01. 

35.  Man Who Hacked into T-Mobile Pleads Guilty, TechNewsWorld, Feb. 16, 2005, at 

http://www.technewsworld.com/story/40656.html (last visited Feb. 24, 2005) [hereinafter T-Mobile Hacked]. 

36.  Susan B. Shor, UC Berkeley Hack Not Unusual, Analyst Says, TECHNEWSWORLD, Oct. 21, 2004, at 

http://www.technewsworld.com/story/37507.html (last visited Feb. 24, 2005).  

37.  Federal Trade Commission, Identity Theft Survey Report, Sept. 2003, at 7, available at 

http://www.ftc.gov/os/2003/09/synovatereport.pdf (last visited Mar. 4, 2005) [hereinafter Identity Theft]. 

38.  T-Mobile Hacked, supra note 35. 

 

- 7 - 

 

personal information, which happened when the personal information of 600,000 people were 
obtained by a hacker from a UC Berkeley computer system.39  If all of the 600,000 people had to 
recover from identity theft, then the cost of recovery would be approximately $300 million plus 
18 million hours of time.  Of course, not all of the personal information that is stolen leads to a 
persons identity being stolen, but the possibility of such a large amount of damages that could 
stem from a loss of personal information is substantial.  In addition, a person whose personal 
information has been stolen has to remain on guard for the rest of his or her life to protect 
themselves from identity theft.40  The cost to an individual for this lifelong vigilance is not easily 
calculated except for the definite loss of reputation to the organization that allowed the 
information to be stolen. 

Another important reason for protecting personal information is the cost to businesses 

and financial institutions for the fraudulent charges related to identity theft.  It is estimated that 
identity theft costs businesses and financial institutions $4,800 per identity theft victim.41  For the 
T-Mobile break-in, the cost to businesses and financial institutions could be $1.9 million for the 
400 victims,42 while the UC Berkeley break-in cost to businesses and financial institutions could 
be $2.8 billion for the 600,000 victims.43 

The large amounts for which an organization could be held liable could be devastating for 

an organization when placed in the burden analysis, especially if the organization did not take 
even the minimum precautions necessary to protect the information.  Thus, if T-Mobile was held 
liable for the breach in its computer security, then its potential liability could extend to over $2 
million while UC Berkeleys liability could extend to over $3 billion.  These potentials for 
liability are dependent on the number of people whose identities are stolen from the personal 
information that was contained on the computer systems of the organizations, but the potential 
loss from 600,000 people attempting to recover damages would be daunting for any 
organization, especially if that organization could have provided adequate protection of the 
information.   
 

2.  Financial Information 

 

Financial information includes both personal financial information for an individual and 

corporate financial information.  In addition to the general types of damage that could occur from 
the release of private financial information, some financial information is also regulated by 
federal laws and regulations.44  Protection of personal financial information by financial 
institutions is regulated by the Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act (GLBA) of 200145 while the protection 
of corporate financial information is regulated by the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002.46   

Under the GLBA, each financial institution has an affirmative and continuing obligation 

to respect the privacy of its customers and to protect the security and confidentiality of those 

                                                 

39.  Shor, supra note 36.  
40.  See ID Theft Victims Face Lifetime of Vigilance, Feb. 24, 2005, at 

http://www.cnn.com/2005/TECH/02/24/choicepoint.victims.ap/ (last visited Mar. 4, 2005). 

41.  Identity Theft, supra note 37, at 7.  
42.  T-Mobile Hacked, supra note 35. 
43.  Shor, supra note 36.   
44.  This is only covering law and regulations in the United States and does not cover any foreign laws and 

regulations such as the European Data Protection Directive.  See, e.g., Preston & Turner, supra note 13. 

45.  Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, Pub. L. No. 106-102, 113 Stat. 1338 (2001). 
46.  Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, Pub. L. No. 107-204, 116 Stat. 745 (2002). 

 

- 8 - 

 

customers' nonpublic personal information.47  In addition, federal agencies and regulators have 
to establish appropriate standards for the financial institutions.48  Under Sarbanes-Oxley, 
organizations have to establish and maintain an adequate internal control structure and 
procedures for financial reporting.49  Part of the challenge of having a proper internal control 
structure for finances is directly related to the challenge of maintaining information security.50  
Both of these acts put additional obligations on organizations to securely maintain financial 
information. 

There are different types of security breaches that can occur regarding financial 

information.  One type of break-in occurred in 1994 to Citibank when a group of Russian 
hackers stole $10 million by making illegal transfers. 51  Although Citibank eventually 
recovered $9.6 million of the stolen money, twenty of Citibanks top customers left citing poor 
computer security.52  This type of break-in does not directly affect customer information but 
instead affects the long-term stability of the bank. 

On a different side of computer security, a security breach that occurred because of 
human error happened in 2003 to Bank Rhode Island when a laptop containing the names, 
addresses and social security numbers of about 43,000 customers was stolen from [the banks] 
... principal data-processing provider.53  Another more recent security breach happened in 2005 
to Bank of America when computer data tapes containing personal information on up to 1.2 
million federal employees, including some members of the U.S. Senate were lost.54  The lost 
data includes social security numbers and account information that could make customers of a 
federal government charge card program vulnerable to identity theft.55  These breaches fall 
under the type of information that the GLBA is designed to protect.  These types of breaches 
                                                 

47.  15 U.S.C.  6801(a) (2005).  
48.   6801(b).  The standards are:   

(1) to insure the security and confidentiality of customer records and information; 
(2) to protect against any anticipated threats or hazards to the security or integrity of such records; 
and 
(3)  to  protect  against  unauthorized  access  to  or  use  of  such  records  or  information  which  could 
result in substantial harm or inconvenience to any customer.  Id. 

The federal agencies and authorities that have to establish the safeguards include Federal Trade Commission, the 
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the Board of Directors of the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation, the Director of the Office of Thrift Supervision, the Securities and Exchange Commission, and the 
insurance authority of each state.   6805(a). 

49.  15 U.S.C.  7262(a) (2005). 
50.  See EGAN & MATHER, supra note 9, at 19.  Some of the challenges of a proper internal control 

structure include confidentiality, integrity, availability, and accountability which are the same challenges of any 
other computer security project.  See id.  In addition, [s]ince the bulk of information in most companies is created, 
stored, transmitted and maintained electronically, one could logically conclude that IT shoulders a lions share of the 
responsibility for Sarbanes-Oxley compliance.  CipherTrust, How Sarbanes-Oxley Affects Corporate Email 
Systems, Oct. 21, 2004, at http://www.ciphertrust.com/resources/articles/articles/sox.php (last visited March 4, 
2005). 

51.  Richard Behar et al., Whos Reading your E-Mail?  As the World Gets Networked, Spies, Rogue 

Employees, and Bored Teens are Invading Companies Computers to Make Mischief, Steal Trade SecretsEven 
Sabotage Careers, FORTUNE, Feb. 3, 1997, at 56. 

52.  Id. 
53.  Lucas Mearian, BankRI Customer Information Stolen Along with Laptop, COMPUTERWORLD, Dec. 19, 

2003, at http://www.computerworld.com/securitytopics/security/story/0,10801,88443,00.html (last visited Mar. 4, 
2005). 

54.  Bank of America Loses Customer Data, MSNBC, Mar. 1, 2005, at 

http://www.msnbc.msn.com/id/7032779/ (last visited Mar. 4, 2005). 

55.  Id.  

 

- 9 - 

 

expose not only personal financial information to hackers, but also personal information to 
hackers.  The personal information such as the Social Security numbers could be used for 
identity theft and the risk of such identity theft carries the same potential liability.56  

The requirements on organizations to securely maintain information under the GLBA and 

Sarbanes-Oxley, the threat of negative publicity and lack of customer confidence in the 
organization, and the potential for the financial information about customers and the organization 
all contribute to the high level of risk involved with the maintenance of financial information.  
There are no estimates as to the potential liability risks involved with information that is 
protected under GLBA or Sarbanes-Oxley although there are potential criminal penalties 
involved with the failure to secure information required under Sarbanes-Oxley.  It is also 
difficult to calculate the potential liability when other types of security breaches occur such as 
what happened to Citibank in 1994.  Citibank was able to recover most of the stolen funds, but 
the damage to Citibanks reputation was not measurable.  The potential liability for personal 
financial information can be calculated based on the potential identity theft that may occur.57  
Corporate financial information has many other potential pitfalls, because of the sensitive nature 
between competitors and the market. 

Even though there is a lack of empirical data about the potential liability of most of the 

different types of financial information that may be stored on computer systems, all of the 
different types of financial information carry a significant risk to the maintainer of the 
information upon exposure.  The risks vary from criminal penalties to money damages to the loss 
of customers.  All of these risks are significant to the organization and should be utilized when 
calculating the potential liability for financial information stored on the organizations computer 
systems. 
 

3.  Credit and Debit Card Information 

 

Credit and debit card information is unique from the other types of information that is at 
risk because the credit card companies have zero-liability and other policies that limit the loss 
of consumers.  Credit and debit cards can also be replaced, since the card numbers are not 
permanently attached to an individual.58  Over the years, there have been numerous reported 
incidents of credit card information thefts from organizations computer systems.  Some of these 
organizations include BJs Wholesale Club59 and Data Processors International.60  The issue of 
securing credit card information is a major issue that should not be ignored by any organization - 
big or small. 

One issue with the easy replacement of cards is that [i]t generally costs banks $5 to $6 to 

replace ... cards.61  If the card issuers have to replace eight million cards,62 someone is paying 
the $40 to $48 million for the new cards.  So, the risk associated with credit and card information 

                                                 
56.  See supra Part II.B.1.  
57.  See supra Part II.B.1. 
58.  Hacker Breach Dents Confidence in Card Security, ATM & DEBIT NEWS, Feb. 27, 2003, at 1. 
59.  Timothy C. Barmann, Banks Cancel Debit Cards after BJs Wholesale Club Warns of Theft, 

PROVIDENCE JOURNAL, Mar. 16, 2004, available at 2004 WL 59429202. 

60.  Hacker Breach Dents Confidence in Card Security, supra note 58. 
61.  Barmann, supra note 59. 
62.  Eight million debit and credit car accounts where comprised by the Data Processors International 

security breach.  Hacker Breach Dents Confidence in Card Security, supra note 58. 

 

- 10 - 

 

is not only the fraudulent use of the credit cards, but the cost of replacing all of the cards that 
were compromised. 

The other major issue with credit card fraud is who ends up paying for all of the fraud.  In 
some circumstances, the merchant ends up paying for the fraud while, in other circumstances, the 
bank issuing the card ends up paying.63  An example of a merchant paying for the cost of fraud 
involves Expedia, which had to record $4 to $6 million ... in third quarter losses to cover 
fraudulent credit card purchases made on its Web site in 2000.64  This cost is significant for the 
organizations that maintain credit card information on computer systems, because the use of 
stolen credit card information could cause widespread loss to merchants which could force the 
organization that did not maintain adequate security precautions on its computer systems to 
absorb the loss. 

Overall, the cost of replacing credit and debit cards and the cost of the fraud to banks and 

merchants is significant.  The cost for both the replacement of cards and the fraudulent charges 
can easily reach into the millions of dollars.  While the banks and merchants currently cover 
most of these expenses, the burden could be shifted to any organization that allowed the loss of 
the card information.  Thus, organizations that maintain credit card information should be aware 
of the risks involved with the exposure of the information and should work to minimize this risk, 
since the injury could cost millions of dollars. 
 

4.  Healthcare Information 

 

Healthcare information has particular personal and financial value.65  People have a 

significant interest in protecting their healthcare information to ensure that the information does 
not adversely affect their job, insurance rates, and other vital aspects of a persons life.  A 
persons life could be negatively impacted if sensitive medical information was disclosed, such 
as the use of anti-depressants, anti-psychotic medication, or sleeping pills.  There are many other 
medical treatments and conditions that could negatively impacted a persons life such as fertility 
treatments, attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, AIDS, cancer, STDs, sickle cell trait, 
pregnancy, drug rehabilitation, alcohol rehabilitation, and genetic markers that indicate 
potentially increased risk for diseases.  These lists of medications, treatments, and conditions are 
just a few examples of some of the sensitive medical information that could be stored on an 
organizations computer system. 

The disclosure of any of these medical issues could have widespread and long lasting 

affects on a person.  If an organization does not take adequate precautions to protect healthcare 
information, then the organization runs the risk that the disclosure of the sensitive information 
could cause people to lose their jobs, have higher insurance rates, and personal distress.  The 
injury upon disclosure of healthcare information is significant and should be calculated when 
determining the precautions that need to be taken to protect the information.  

There are other issues surrounding the maintenance of healthcare information on an 

organizations computer systems.  One issue is the regulation of the information by the Health 

                                                 

63.  Randy Gainer, A Cyberspace Perspective:  Allocating the Risk of Loss for Bank Card Fraud on the 

Internet, 15 J. MARSHALL J. COMPUTER & INFO. L. 39, 46 (1996). 

64.  Paul A. Greenberg, Expedia Stung by Major Credit Card Fraud, E-COMMERCE TIMES, March 2, 2000, 

at http://www.ecommercetimes.com/story/2638.html (last visited Mar. 4, 2005). 

65.  See Whalen v. Roe, 429 U.S. 589, 599 (1977). 

 

- 11 - 

 

Information Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) of 1996.66  To ensure the privacy and 
confidentiality of patients medical records, HIPAA institutes standards for the privacy of 
individually identifiable health information.67  To protect the medical information, HIPAA 
provides for both civil and criminal punishments.68  Thus, an organization not only has to be 
concerned with the negative affects to the person upon theft of any information, but also any 
consequences under HIPAA if the information is not protected. 
 

5.  Intellectual Property 

 

There are several different forms of intellectual property that are at risk.  These different 
forms include pending patent applications, trade secrets, copyrighted material, and other types of 
confidential materials maintained by organizations.  [I]n the corporate world where intellectual 
property is often the only thing separating competitors, it is cheaper and easier to steal 
information than to develop it.69  It is important for all types of organizations to protect their 
intellectual property because the disclosure of an organizations intellectual property will give 
the competitors a significant advantage. 

A major dilemma for many software companies occurs when their source code is stolen.  

In 2004, the source code that controls many of Ciscos routers and switches was stolen.70  This 
theft is troubling for other organizations because Cisco has been buying smaller firms that 
specialize in network security software.71  So, if Cisco is unable to protect its intellectual 
property from computer security breaches, then other organizations will have to put in extra 
effort to protect their intellectual property.  Another major problem for software companies is the 
illegal copying of the software.  In some cases, groups would obtain advance copies of 
computer programs not yet commercially available and circumvent the copyright protections 
embedded in the software.72  The theft of source code and the theft of software programs that 
have not even been released are major risks for software companies. 

Other industries also have to worry about the theft of intellectual property.  Although 

some of the theft comes from published patents or from reverse engineering, some of the theft 
occurs from hackers breaking into organizations computer systems to steal intellectual property.  
The pharmaceutical industry worries about the theft of drug research while other industries such 
as the soft drink industry are concerned with the disclosure of its trade secrets.  Considering that 
the estimated cost of research for a new drug is $450-$700 million, the risk of exposure to 
pharmaceutical companies is extreme.73  Considering that the Coca-Cola Company had over $21 
billion in revenue in 2004, the protection of its formulas as trade secrets is imperative for the 

                                                 

66.  Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104-191, 110 Stat. 1936 

(1996). 

67.  EGAN & MATHER, supra note 9, at 18. 
68.  See 42 U.S.C.  1320d-5 (2005); 42 U.S.C.  1320d-6. 
69.  Kennealy 2001, supra note 13, at 64. 
70.  Jay Lyman, UK Suspect Arrested in Cisco Source Code Theft, TECHNEWSWORLD, Sept. 20, 2004, at 

http://www.technewsworld.com/story/36787.html (last visited Mar. 4, 2005). 

71.  Keith Regan, Cisco Probes Potential Source Code Leak, E-COMMERCE TIMES, May 17, 2004, at 

http://www.technewsworld.com/story/33827.html (last visited Mar. 4, 2005). 

72.  U.S. Department of Justice, Warwick Man is Sentenced for Software Privacy, Apr. 23, 2004, available 

at http://www.usdoj.gov/criminal/cybercrime/russoSent.htm (last visited Mar. 5, 2005). 

73.  Network Science Corporation, Drug Development:  The Short Story, at http://www.netsci.org/scgi-

bin/Courseware/projector.pl?Course_num=course1&Filename=slide07.html (last visited Mar. 5, 2005).  

 

- 12 - 

 

company.74  The pharmaceutical industry and soft drink industry are just a few of the many types 
of industries that should be careful about exposing their secrets. 

The exposure of an organizations intellectual property can have significant risks to the 

organization.  Technology, pharmaceutical, and soft drink organizations are just a few of the 
types of organizations that can be injured by the theft of intellectual property.  The theft can 
range from salary information to designs for new products to cutting edge research.  Basically, 
any type of sensitive information that an organization could store on a computer system could be 
stolen.  The theft of intellectual property is a risk that organizations should minimize, because 
although there is not empirical evidence for intellectual property losses, the loss could range 
from negative publicity to the loss of a competitive edge to the loss of millions of dollars of 
research. 
 
III.  LOWERING LEGAL EXPOSURE BY ANALYZING SECURITY NEEDS 
 

The ability to lower the legal exposure of an organization can be accomplished by 

analyzing the security needs of the organization and protecting the information according to the 
individualized needs of the organization.  The first part of the analysis is the determination of the 
security drivers of the organization.  These security drivers are directly tied to the risks of the 
information that is maintained on the organizations computer systems.  The next step is to 
determine the security level that the organization needs to maintain to provide adequate 
protection for the information.  It is imperative that IT professionals and business managers 
understand the limitations of both the security drivers and the selection of a security level for an 
organization. 
 

A.  Security Drivers 

 

One challenging aspect to the proper utilization of computer security is the selection of 
the correct security drivers.  The security drivers are the risks associated with the information 
maintained on the organizations computer system.  Both the IT professionals and the business 
managers should understand these security drivers; so that a proper determination of the needed 
security level for an organization can be determined that fits the individualized needs of the 
organization.  The list of security drivers is not exclusive, but should be a starting place for the 
two sides when determining the computer security needed to reduce an organizations exposure 
to legal liability. 

These security drivers are designed for the type of information that is maintained on an 

organizations computer systems and the methods of accessing the information.  The security 
drivers do not cover the technical aspects of an organizations computer system, because the 
adequate precautions that are necessary to protect information that is at risk is not dependent on 
the technology that an organization has chosen to use, but is dependent on the risks involved 
with the injury that the information could cause if stolen. 

The IT professionals and business managers should utilize the security drivers in Table 1 
to choose the proper security level for an organization.  There are many other drivers that either 
party may add based on the individualized needs of the organization.  There are other types of 

                                                 

74.  The Coca-Cola Company, U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission Form 10-K, Commission File 
No. 1-2217, at 4, available at http://www2.coca-cola.com/investors/pdfs/form_10K_2004.pdf (last visited Mar. 5, 
2005). 

 

- 13 - 

 

information that has a large potential for injury and can be added to an organizations security 
driver list for consideration when determining the proper security level for the organization. 
 
Table 1 - Security drivers75 

Security Drivers 

Sensitivity of Information 

Personal Information 

Financial Information 

Credit and Debit Card 
Information 

Healthcare Information 

Intellectual Property 

 
Amount of Information 

 
Information Access 

Internet 

Modem 

Wireless 

Risks 

 
The maintenance of personal information carries varying amounts of 
risk to the organization depending on the amount of information stored.  
A small amount of information has a minimal risk of injury while large 
amounts of information carry a high risk of injury. 
The maintenance of financial information carries a high risk of injury 
regardless of the amount, because of the regulations that control the 
disclosure and control of financial information.  In addition, the theft 
and exposure of financial information can cause organizations to lose 
customers. 
The maintenance of credit card information has a lower risk of injury 
than other types of personal or financial information, since the credit 
and debit cards can be re-issued unlike other personal information.  The 
risk can become significant when a large number of card information is 
maintained on the computer system, because of the cost of card 
replacement and fraud. 
The maintenance of healthcare information has a high risk, because of 
potential injury that can occur to patients and the requirements under 
HIPAA for protecting the information.   
The maintenance of intellectual property has a low to high risk 
depending on the nature of the information stored on the computer 
system.  Some types of intellectual property have a low risk, because 
the injury upon theft is low while other types of intellectual property 
could devastate an organization. 
 
The more information that is maintained in general, the more injury that 
can occur.  If the computer system only has the personal information for 
100 people, then the injury is small compared to the injury that could 
occur from the theft of personal information for 600,000 people. 
 
 
The risk of injury to any type of information is high when the 
information is accessed via the Internet, because of the 24/7 nature of 
the Internet. 
The risk of injury to any type of information is nominal when the 
information is accessed via dial-up, because the IT professionals will 
be able to provide more security protections than via Internet access. 
The risk of injury to any type of information is high when the 
information is accessed via a wireless network, because of the inherent 
weak security in most wireless products.  Note: the security drivers are 
designed to be independent of specific technology, but since wireless is 
becoming a method of access to large amounts of data, it is important to 
categorize the risk of this type of access. 

                                                 

75.  See, e.g., supra Part II.B;  EGAN & MATHER, supra note 9. 

 

- 14 - 

 

The risk of injury to any type of information is moderate when the 
information is accessed via an organizations Intranet, because the risk 
of theft from internal users is significant.76 
 
 
The risk of injury to any type of information is moderate when the 
information is only accessed by an organizations internal users, 
because of risk of theft from internal users is significant.77 
The risk of injury to any type of information is high when the 
information is accessed by the public, because public access means that 
the information could be disclosed inadvertently to the public or since 
the information is accessible to the public, the information could be 
hacked by any member of the public. 
 
 
The risk of injury for a business system varies according to the specific 
uses of the system. 
The risk of injury for an infrastructure system is high, because the 
system is part of the infrastructure. 
The risk of injury for a computer system that affects a life function is 
extremely high. 
The risk of injury for a computer system that affects the environment is 
high. 

Intranet 

 
Users 

Internal 

Public 

 
Type of System 

Business 

Infrastructure 

Endanger Life 

Endanger Environment 

 
 
B.  Security Level 

 

The classification of the computer security needed for an organization into a security 

level is a difficult task since every organization has slightly different requirements.  Every 
organization has different requirements because [s]ecurity doesnt exist in products and 
verbiage alone; it requires a process, people, policies, education, and technologies working 
together.78  While bridging the gap between IT professionals and business managers, both sides 
should understand that [s]tronger defenses will imply higher costs, and ... [both sides] have to 
consider tradeoffs between security and costs, where costs could include possible functional 
limitations to the system.79  But regardless of the potential cost, an analysis between the 
potential injury involved with the information maintained on the computer system and the 
burden for securing the computer system needs to be performed to determine the precautions that 
should be taken to protect the information. 

                                                 

76.  See CSO Magazine, 2004 E-Crime Watch Survey: Summary of Findings, at 14, at 

http://www.cert.org/archive/pdf/2004eCrimeWatchSummary.pdf (last visited Feb. 24, 2005) [hereinafter 2004 E-
Crime]. 

77.  See id. 
78.  Robert K. Weiler, Decision Support: You Cant Outsource Liability for Security, INFORMATION WEEK, 

Aug. 26, 2002, available at http://www.informationweek.com/story/showArticle.jhtml?articleID=6502997 (last 
visited Feb. 22, 2005). 

79.  Moitra & Konda, supra note 10, at 2. 

 

- 15 - 

 

While analyzing the security drivers to determine the security level for an organization, 

 
the organization needs to address the issue that [y]ou cannot protect everything equally.80  It is 
important to understand that the computer system in an organization needs to be protected at a 
security level that is customized according to the security drivers that apply to the organization.  
When different types of information are maintained on a computer system, the different types 
can be protected according to the individualized risks of the information. 

The security level for an organization has three major parts.  These three parts are 

specification, implementation, and assurance.81  The security level needs these three major parts 
along with the sub-parts because security cannot be accomplished by products and verbiage 
alone.82  Some business managers are under the false impression that the organization can buy a 
few security products and the computer system will be secure.83  One problem with relying on a 
product to solve an organizations security issues is that [e]ven a very moderately resourced 
attacker can break anything thats at all large and complex.  There is nothing that can be done to 
stop this, so long as there are enough different security vulnerabilities to do statistics: different 
testers find different bugs.84  Thus, relying on software alone will not solve the security issues 
of a computer system.85 

Based on the security drivers, the IT professionals and business managers can reach a 

compromise on the security level required for an organization.  The first step in determining the 
security level is to review the available security options.  The next step is to determine how many 
and which options are worth the burden for the protection of the information.  The determination 
should take sub-parts from each of the three major parts-specification, implementation, and 
assurance.  Through the use of these three major parts, an organization will be more prepared to 
protect the information stored on its computer system.86 

The different parts of a security level should combine to form both a holistic approach 

and defense-in-depth approach to computer security.  The combination of specification, 
implementation, and assurance gives the security a holistic approach while the sub-parts of the 
specification, implementation, and assurance parts give the security the defense-in-depth aspect.  

                                                 

80.  Julia Allen et al., Improving the Security of Networked Systems, CROSSTALK, Oct. 2000, available at 

http://www.stsc.hill.af.mil/crosstalk/2000/10/allen.html (last visited Feb. 17, 2005). 

81.  Lampson, supra note 17, at 38. 
82.  Weiler, supra note 78. 
83.  See David Geer, Just How Secure are Security Products?, COMPUTER, June 2004, at 14. 
84.  Ross Anderson, Why Information Security is Hard: An Economic Perspective, 2001 PROC. OF THE 

17TH ANN. COMPUTER SECURITY APPLICATIONS CONF. 358, 362.    

85.  Although some business personal advocate putting the responsibility of computer system security 

breaches on the software companies that produced the software since the software had bugs.  There are numerous 
theories of liability that are put forth for why software companies should be liable when their software products fail, 
but most software companies have been avoiding liability by the use of some form of liability waiver.  See, e.g.,  
Daniel J. Ryan, Two Views on Security Software Liability: Let the Legal System Decide, IEEE SECURITY & 
PRIVACY, Jan./Feb. 2003, at 70; Carey Heckman, Two Views on Security Software Liability:  Using the Right Legal 
Tools, IEEE SECURITY & PRIVACY, Jan./Feb. 2003, at 73; Nancy R. Mead, International Liability Issues for 
Software Quality, CMU/SEI-2003-SR-001, July 2003, available at http://www.cert.org/archive/pdf/03sr001.pdf (last 
visited Feb. 23, 2005);  Kevin R. Pinkney, Putting Blame Where Blame is due:  Software Manufacturer and 
Customer Liability for Secuirty-Related Software Failure, 13 ALB. L.J. SCI. & TECH. 43 (2002);  Nancy J. Wahl, 
Responsibility for Unreliable Software, 1994 PROC. OF THE CONF. ON ETHICS IN THE COMPUTER AGE 175.  

86.  This article gives an overview of the sub-parts of the three major parts, but the details of the sub-parts 
are beyond the scope of this article.  There are numerous other books and articles that go into detail about these sub-
parts.  See infra notes 87, 97, and 101. 

 

- 16 - 

 

Overall, the use of the different parts of the security level dependent on the needs of the 
organization will provide the appropriate security level for the organization. 

 

1.  Specification 

 
The specification includes policies, standards, procedures, and guidelines.87  A policy ... 

is a high-level statement of enterprise beliefs, goals, and objectives and the general means for 
their attainment for a specified subject area.88  Standards are mandatory requirements that 
support individual policies.89  Procedures are mandatory, step-by-step, detailed actions 
required to successfully complete a task.90  Guidelines are more general statements designed to 
achieve the policys objectives but by providing a framework within which to implement 
procedures.91  Depending on the risks to the organization, the use of the different types of 
specifications allow for the organization to better manage the security risks. 

Proper policies are important in the implementation of computer security because without 

any policies, the organization may be in greater danger of a breach of security, loss of 
competitive advantage, loss in customer confidence, or an increase in government interference.  
By implementing policies, the organization takes control of its destiny.92  An information 
security policy is a short, non-technical document designed for the entire organization, while the 
IT security policy refers to broad technical decisions for the organization, but does not give 
technical details.93  The goal of an information security policy is to maintain the integrity, 
confidentiality, and availability of information resources.94  Another type of policy that can be 
utilized is an inappropriate use policy which outlines the acceptable and unacceptable uses of an 
organizations computer system.  There are numerous other types of polices that can be utilized 
to provide the proper level of protection for the information maintained on the organizations 
computer system and based on the security drivers, more research into the different types of 
policies may be necessary.95 

Standards define what is to be accomplished in specific terms.96  Standards are 
important because they give guidance as to what is required and expected for the security 
environment.  There are many types of standards that can be customized according to the 
individual needs of an organization.  The standards include those developed by the National 

                                                 

87.  See, e.g.,  STEVE PURSER, A PRACTICAL GUIDE TO MANAGING INFORMATION SECURITY (2004);  ERIC 
GREENBERG, MISSION-CRITICAL SECURITY PLANNER:  WHEN HACKERS WONT TAKE NO FOR AN ANSWER (2003);  
MAXIMUM SECURITY (3rd ed. 2001);  THOMAS R. PELTIER, INFORMATION SECURITY POLICIES AND PROCEDURES:  A 
PRACTITIONERS REFERENCE (2nd ed. 2004);  JOSEPH G. BOYCE & DAN W. JENNINGS, INFORMATION ASSURANCE:  
MANAGING ORGANIZATIONAL IT SECURITY RISKS (2002);  2004 E-Crime, supra note 76, at 19-32.;  JOHN CHIRILLO, 
HACK ATTACKS DENIED:  A COMPLETE GUIDE TO NETWORK LOCKDOWN  (2001);  JAE K. SHIM ET AL., THE 
INTERNATIONAL HANDBOOK OF COMPUTER SECURITY (2000);  National Institute of Standards and Technology, An 
Introduction of Computer Security:  The NIST Handbook (1995), at http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-
12/handbook.pdf (last visited Mar. 4, 2005). 
88.  PELTIER, supra note 87, at 49. 
89.  Id. 
90.  Id. 
91.  Id. 
92.  Id. at 47. 
93.  PURSER, supra note 87, at 136-37. 
94.  PELTIER, supra note 87, at 47. 
95.  See id. 
96.  Id. at 114. 

 

- 17 - 

 

Institute of Standards and Technology, HIPAA requirements, and GLBA requirements.  The 
standard used depends on the needs of the organization.  Overall, the use of standards enables an 
organization to have a minimal base from which the entire organization can build the level of 
security that is required.  Procedures and guidelines are important to an organization because 
they allow an organization to customize the needs and details of day-to-day operations to ensure 
that the level of security needed is met. 

Overall, the use of policies, standards, procedures, and guidelines enables an organization 

to put into writing what needs to be protected and how the organization is going to protect that 
information.  An organization should be aware that these specification documents are not static, 
but living documents that should be updated on a schedule to ensure that the documents support 
the current needs of the organization. 

 

 

2.  Implementation 

Implementation includes desktop and server protection, network protection, training, data 

Desktop and server security has many integral parts including anti-virus, anti-spyware, 

protection, and physical protection.97  There are many parts to these categories for the proper 
implementation of an effective security level for an organization.  When most business managers 
think about computer security, they think about the visible aspects of the implementation of 
computer security, but there are many hidden aspects of the implementation of computer 
security. 
 
patch management, authentication (including two-factor using biometrics, smart cards), security 
scanner, integrity-checking programs, role-based access control, and an intrusion detection 
system.  Network security has many integral parts that have to work in unison to protect the 
network.  These parts include firewalls (packet-filter, stateful inspection, and application 
gateway), virtual private networks, anti-virus scanning, content filtering, intrusion detection 
system, security scanners, and a system watcher.  There are other parts to both desktop and 
server security and network security depending on the needs of the organization, but the listed 
parts are some of the more common.  Although depending on the potential injury if the 
information is released, an organization should be aware of other types of security. 
 
Training is important because real-world systems are more than just technology, and if 
we want to secure them, we also must consider their nontechnological aspects.98  User training 
is imperative not only for the use of the security mechanisms that protect the computer system, 
but also to prevent social engineering.  One type of social engineering that has become 
widespread is phishing.99  User training includes education and awareness programs and new 
employee security training.  Another important aspect of training is training for IT professionals.  
The field of computer security is constantly changing and to ensure that an organizations 
computer system is properly protected, the IT professionals securing the computer system have 
to be properly trained (via conferences, training, and other educational materials). 

                                                 

97.  See, e.g.,  PURSER, supra note 87;  JULIA H. ALLEN, THE CERT GUIDE TO SYSTEM AND NETWORK 

SECURITY PRACTICES (2001);  MAXIMUM SECURITY, supra note 87;  BOYCE & JENNINGS, supra note 87;  SHIM ET 
AL., supra note 87;  Anderson, supra note 84;  2004 E-Crime, supra note 76. 

98.  S.W. Smith, A Funny Thing Happened on the Way to the Marketplace, IEEE SECURITY & PRIVACY, 

Nov./Dec. 2003, at 74. 

99.  Phishing is the use of spam to direct their victims to Web sites designed by thieves to resemble 

legitimate e-commerce sites.  Michele Delio, IT Tackles Phishing, INFOWORLD, Jan. 24, 2005, at 31. 

 

- 18 - 

 

Data protection includes encryption and electronic signatures.  Encryption addresses the 

 
issue of confidentiality and electronic signatures address the use of authenticity and data 
integrity.100  Other types of data protection include access controls on confidential data, 
encryption of critical data in transit, and encryption of critical data in storage.  Physical 
protection includes electronic access control systems, badging systems, closed caption television, 
biometrics, and emission security. 
 
protection, and physical protection helps an organization control the risk of injury from the theft 
of information maintained on its computer system.  Not every type of security implementation is 
listed, because of the ever changing field of computer security. 
 

Overall, the use of desktop and server protection, network protection, training, data 

3.  Assurance 

 

 
Assurance includes monitoring and auditing.101  Monitoring includes employee 

monitoring, monitoring Internet connections, wireless monitoring, keystroke monitoring, 
intrusion detection system (monitored by humans and/or automated systems with built in 
alarms), and log management tools.  Auditing includes storage and review of voice mail, 
employee/contractor background examinations, periodic risk assessments, transaction trial 
auditing, mandatory internal reporting of insider misuse/abuse, internal auditor, external auditor, 
regular security audits, periodic systems penetration testing, storage and review of computer 
files, storage and review of e-mail, use of white hat hackers, and polygraph examinations.  The 
use of monitoring and auditing to protect the information stored on an organizations computer 
system provides part of the overall protection for the information. 

 
C.  How will the analysis help computer security? 

 

The IT professional who is trying to figure out how to get the business manager to 

understand to what precautions are required to secure the computer system will benefit from this 
utility or burden analysis of the computer security issue.102  The utility analysis is important 
because every organization is different, and the information that needs to be protected is 
different.   

It is imperative that an organization perform this analysis and not rely solely on industry 

standards because there are precautions so imperative that even their universal disregard will 
not excuse their omission.103  [I]ndustry standards are merely a minimal standard that may be 
considered when determining liability and compliance with standards will not be the only factor 
in determining whether an organization is liable.104  In addition, an organization should not rely 

                                                 

100.  Emily M. Weitzenboeck, Enterprise Security: Legal Challenges and Possible Solutions, 2001 PROC. 

OF THE 10TH INTL WORKSHOPS ON ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES: INFRASTRUCTURE FOR COLLABORATIVE 
ENTERPRISES 183, 185. 

101.  See, e.g., PURSER, supra note 87;  BOYCE & JENNINGS, supra note 87;  SHIM ET AL., supra note 87;  

2004 E-Crime, supra note 76. 

102.  See supra Part II.A. 
103.  T.J. Hooper v. Northern Barge Corp., 60 F.2d 737, 740 (2d Cir. 1932).  
104.  Zacher v. Budd Co., 396 N.W.2d 122, 133 (S.D. 1986).  Additionally, [i]n determining whether 

conduct is negligent, the customs of the community, or of others under like circumstances, are factors to be taken 
into account, but are not controlling where a reasonable man would not follow them.  RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF 
TORTS  295A. 

 

- 19 - 

 

on legislative enactments or administrative regulations as its only indication of the level of 
security required for its computer system.105  Analyzing an organizations individual security 
needs and implementing those needs reduces the organizations potential liability by not relying 
on industry standards or regulations as the minimal level of computer security.   

This individualized analysis also helps to reduce an organizations potential liability by 

embedding the research and education of new security tools into the security levels.  
Organizations cannot ignore new security tools simply because other organizations are not using 
the security tools, but must weigh the benefit of the security tool against the need for 
protection.106  An analysis is designed to look at the individual characteristics of an organization 
and perform the burden analysis based on these characteristics to determine how active an 
organization needs to be in evaluating new security tools to determine if the tool is worth the 
burden of use to reduce the probability that the computer system will be hacked into. 

Thus, this analysis of the risks to an organization will help provide a solution to reduce an 

organizations potential liability by individualizing the security level that the organization needs 
to maintain not based on an industry standard or regulation, but based on the individualized 
needs of the organization.  These individualized needs are directly related to the type of 
information that the organization maintains and the probability that the information could be 
accessed by third parties versus the burden on the organization to secure the data.  An IT 
professional can thus utilize this analysis to show the business managers of an organization the 
potential liability that may result by not providing adequate precautions for the security of the 
computer system. 
 
IV.  CONCLUSION 

 
By analyzing the individual needs of an organization, the organization will be able to 

fulfill its duties and obligations to its customers and others that use or could be affected by the 
organizations computer system.  Computer systems have become such an integral part of 
America government and business that computer-related risks cannot be separated from national 
defense, general safety, health, business, and privacy risks.107  Thus, organizations have a duty 
to ensure that the information maintained on its computer system is adequately protected. 

An individualized analysis will help solve the legal problems by [b]eing proactive about 

security [which] is critical to mitigating your security risk.108  An organization that follows as 
many of the standards and guidelines about computer security109 and takes the extra steps to 
calculate its computer security approach and customize the approach according to the specific 
needs of the organization will have taken the steps to adequately protect the information it 

                                                 

105.  Compliance with a legislative enactment or administrative regulation does not prevent a finding of 

negligence where a reasonable man would take additional precaution.  RESTATEMENT (SECOND) OF TORTS  288C.  
See Zacher, 396 N.W.2d at 133 (quoting Turner v. American General Corp., 392 A.2d 1005, 1007 (D.C. 1978)). 

106.  See ROSE, supra note 15, at 148.  This does not mean that the system operator should become a 

leader in testing out every possible new security tool.  New tools of any kind are often unreliable or ineffective, and 
the system operator could actually decrease security if he or she implements new, unproven tools too quickly.  Id. 
107.  Richard D. Pethia, Testimony before the House Committee on Government Reform, Subcommittee 

on Government Efficiency, Nov. 19, 2000, available at http://www.cert.org/congressional_testimony/pethia-11-
02/Pethia_testimony_11-19-02.html (last visited Feb. 24, 2005).  

108.  West-Brown, supra note 5. 
109.  Organizations should be aware that blindly following standards developed by the industry will not 

protect a company from liability.  See Zacher, 396 N.W.2d at 122. 

 

- 20 - 

 

maintains.  The individualized computer security approach is of course only the first step in the 
process.  The organization also has to implement the security plan and monitor the 
implementation.  This holistic approach to computer security may help the organization escape 
liability and better yet, may decrease the number of computer security break-ins.   

Even if the utilization of these measures protects the organization from legal liability, 

business managers should understand that having good security measures in place will not 
prevent the organization from suffering computer security incidents.110  Thus, the risks of 
maintaining information never completely disappears, but the legal liability may be reduced by 
using the methods described in this article. 

                                                 

110.  West-Brown, supra note 5.  It is probably futile to hope for an absolute security for any network 

system.  Moitra & Konda, supra note 10, at 1. 

 

- 21 - 

 

