UNIT 5:

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

5.1 DEFINITION

112

5.2 CAUSES, EFFECTS AND CONTROL MEASURES OF:

113

5.2.1 Air Pollution

113

5.2.2 Water Pollution

123

5.2.3 Soil Pollution

131

5.2.4 Marine Pollution

135

5.2.5 Noise Pollution

140

5.2.6 Thermal Pollution

142

5.2.7 Nuclear hazards

143

5.3 SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT: CAUSES, EFFECTS AND CONTROL MEASURES
OF URBAN AND INDUSTRIAL WASTE

145

5.4 ROLE OF INDIVIDUALS IN POLLUTION PREVENTION

150

5.5 POLLUTION CASE STUDIES

153

5.6 DISASTER MANAGEMENT: FLOODS, EARTHQUAKES, CYCLONES, LANDSLIDES

156

Pollution

111

111

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

‘We spray our elms, and the following spring,
trees are silent of robin song, not because
we sprayed the robins directly but because
the poison traveled step by step through the
now familiar elm-earthworm-robin cycle’
– Rachael Carson

book has inspired controversy and has initiated
a major change in thinking about the safety of
using pesticides and other toxic chemicals.

This quotation appeared in Rachael Carson’s
book entitled Silent Spring. In the years following the publication of Silent Spring in 1962, the

Pollution is the effect of undesirable changes in
our surroundings that have harmful effects on
plants, animals and human beings. This occurs
Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

112

Chapter5.p65

5.1 DEFINITION

112

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

when only short-term economic gains are made
at the cost of the long-term ecological benefits
for humanity. No natural phenomenon has led
to greater ecological changes than have been
made by mankind. During the last few decades
we have contaminated our air, water and land
on which life itself depends with a variety of
waste products.
Pollutants include solid, liquid or gaseous substances present in greater than natural abundance produced due to human activity, which
have a detrimental effect on our environment.
The nature and concentration of a pollutant
determines the severity of detrimental effects
on human health. An average human requires
about 12 kg of air each day, which is nearly 12
to15 times greater than the amount of food we
eat. Thus even a small concentration of pollutants in the air becomes more significant in comparison to the similar levels present in food.
Pollutants that enter water have the ability to
spread to distant places especially in the marine
ecosystem.
From an ecological perspective pollutants can
be classified as follows:
Degradable or non-persistent pollutants: These
can be rapidly broken down by natural processes. Eg: domestic sewage, discarded vegetables, etc.
Slowly degradable or persistent pollutants: Pollutants that remain in the environment for many
years in an unchanged condition and take decades or longer to degrade. Eg: DDT and most
plastics.
Non-degradable pollutants: These cannot be
degraded by natural processes. Once they are
released into the environment they are difficult
to eradicate and continue to accumulate. Eg:
toxic elements like lead or mercury.

5.2 CAUSES, EFFECTS AND CONTROL MEASURES OF POLLUTION
5.2.1 Air Pollution
History of air pollution: The origin of air pollution on the earth can be traced from the times
when man started using firewood as a means
of cooking and heating. Hippocrates has mentioned air pollution in 400 BC. With the discovery and increasing use of coal, air pollution
became more pronounced especially in urban
areas. It was recognized as a problem 700 years
ago in London in the form of smoke pollution,
which prompted King Edward I to make the first
antipollution law to restrict people from using
coal for domestic heating in the year 1273. In
the year 1300 another Act banning the use of
coal was passed. Defying the law led to imposition of capital punishment. In spite of this air
pollution became a serious problem in London
during the industrial revolution due to the use
of coal in industries. The earliest recorded major disaster was the ‘London Smog’ that occurred
in 1952 that resulted in more than 4000 deaths
due to the accumulation of air pollutants over
the city for five days.
In Europe, around the middle of the 19th century, a black form of the Peppered moth was
noticed in industrial areas. Usually the normal
Peppered moth is well camouflaged on a clean
lichen covered tree. However the peppered pattern was easily spotted and picked up by birds
on the smoke blackened bark of trees in the
industrial area, while the black form remained
well camouflaged. Thus while the peppered
patterned moths were successful in surviving in
clean non-industrial areas, the black coloured
moths were successful in industrial areas. With
the spread of industrialization, it has been observed that the black forms are not only see in
Peppered moth, but also in many other moths.
This is a classic case of pollution leading to adaptation.

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

113

113

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

Air pollution began to increase in the beginning
of the twentieth century with the development
of the transportation systems and large-scale use
of petrol and diesel. The severe air quality problems due to the formation of photochemical
smog from the combustion residues of diesel
and petrol engines were felt for the first time in
Los Angeles. Pollution due to auto-exhaust remains a serious environmental issue in many
developed and developing countries including
India.
The Air Pollution Control Act in India was passed
in 1981 and the Motor Vehicle Act for controlling the air pollution, very recently. These laws
are intended to prevent air from being polluted.
The greatest industrial disaster leading to serious air pollution took place in Bhopal where
extremely poisonous methyl isocyanide gas was
accidentally released from the Union Carbide’s
pesticide manufacturing plant on the night of
December 3rd 1984. The effects of this disaster
on human health and the soil are felt even today.

Temperature declines with altitude in the troposphere. At the top of the troposphere temperatures abruptly begin to rise. This boundary
where this temperature reversal occurs is called
the tropopause.
The tropopause marks the end of the troposphere and the beginning of the stratosphere,
the second layer of the atmosphere. The stratosphere extends from 17 to 48 kilometers above
the earth’s surface. While the composition of
the stratosphere is similar to that of the troposphere it has two major differences. The volume of water vapour here is about 1000 times
less while the volume of ozone is about 1000
times greater. The presence of ozone in the
stratosphere prevents about 99 percent of the
sun’s harmful ultraviolet radiation from reaching the earth’s surface thus protecting humans
from cancer and damage to the immune system. This layer does not have clouds and hence
airplanes fly in this layer as it creates less turbulence. Temperature rises with altitude in the
stratosphere until there is another reversal. This
point is called the stratopause and it marks the
end of the stratosphere and the beginning of
the atmosphere’s next layer, the mesosphere.

Structure of the atmosphere
The atmosphere is normally composed of 79
percent nitrogen, 20 percent oxygen and one
percent as a mixture of carbon dioxide, water
vapour and trace amounts of several other gases
such as neon, helium, methane, krypton, hydrogen and xenon. The general structure of the
atmosphere has several important features that
have relevance to environmental problems. The
atmosphere is divided into several layers.
The innermost layer the troposphere extends 17
kilometers above sea level at the equator and
about 8 kilometers over the poles. It contains
about 75 percent of the mass of the earth’s air.
The fragility of this layer is obvious from the fact
that if the earth were an apple this particular
layer would be no thicker than an apple’s skin.

Types and sources of Air Pollution
What is air pollution?
Air pollution occurs due to the presence of undesirable solid or gaseous particles in the air in
quantities that are harmful to human health and
the environment. Air may get polluted by natuEnvironmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

114

Chapter5.p65

In the mesosphere the temperature decreases
with altitude falling up to –110 oC at the top.
Above this is a layer where ionization of the
gases is a major phenomenon, thus increasing
the temperature. This layer is called the thermosphere. Only the lower troposphere is routinely involved in our weather and hence air
pollution. The other layers are not significant in
determining the level of air pollution.

114

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

ral causes such as volcanoes, which release ash,
dust, sulphur and other gases, or by forest fires
that are occasionally naturally caused by lightning. However, unlike pollutants from human
activity, naturally occurring pollutants tend to
remain in the atmosphere for a short time and
do not lead to permanent atmospheric change.
Pollutants that are emitted directly from identifiable sources are produced both by natural
events (for example, dust storms and volcanic
eruptions) and human activities (emission from
vehicles, industries, etc.). These are called primary pollutants. There are five primary pollutants that together contribute about 90 percent
of the global air pollution. These are carbon
oxides (CO and CO2), nitrogen oxides, sulfur
oxides, volatile organic compounds (mostly hydrocarbons) and suspended particulate matter.
Pollutants that are produced in the atmosphere
when certain chemical reactions take place
among the primary pollutants are called secondary pollutants. Eg: sulfuric acid, nitric acid, carbonic acid, etc.

Carbon monoxide is a colourless, odorless and
toxic gas produced when organic materials such
as natural gas, coal or wood are incompletely
burnt. Vehicular exhausts are the single largest
source of carbon monoxide. The number of vehicles has been increasing over the years all over
the world. Vehicles are also poorly maintained
and several have inadequate pollution control
equipment resulting in release of greater
amounts of carbon monoxide. Carbon monoxide is however not a persistent pollutant. Natural processes can convert carbon monoxide to
other compounds that are not harmful. Therefore the air can be cleared of its carbon monoxide if no new carbon monoxide is introduced
into the atmosphere.
Sulfur oxides are produced when sulfur containing fossil fuels are burnt.

Nitrogen oxides are found in vehicular exhausts.
Nitrogen oxides are significant, as they are involved in the production of secondary air pollutants such as ozone.
Hydrocarbons are a group of compounds consisting of carbon and hydrogen atoms. They either evaporate from fuel supplies or are
remnants of fuel that did not burn completely.
Hydrocarbons are washed out of the air when
it rains and run into surface water. They cause
an oily film on the surface and do not as such
cause a serious issue until they react to form
secondary pollutants. Using higher oxygen concentrations in the fuel-air mixture and using
valves to prevent the escape of gases, fitting of
catalytic converters in automobiles, are some of
the modifications that can reduce the release
of hydrocarbons into the atmosphere.
Particulates are small pieces of solid material (for
example, smoke particles from fires, bits of asbestos, dust particles and ash from industries)
dispersed into the atmosphere. The effects of
particulates range from soot to the carcinogenic
(cancer causing) effects of asbestos, dust particles and ash from industrial plants that are dispersed into the atmosphere. Repeated exposure
to particulates can cause them to accumulate
in the lungs and interfere with the ability of the
lungs to exchange gases.
Lead is a major air pollutant that remains largely
unmonitored and is emitted by vehicles. High
lead levels have been reported in the ambient
air in metropolitan cities. Leaded petrol is the
primary source of airborne lead emissions in Indian cities.
Pollutants are also found indoors from infiltration of polluted outside air and from various
chemicals used or produced inside buildings.
Both indoor and outdoor air pollution are equally
harmful.

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

115

115

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

Types of particulates
Term

Meaning

Examples

Aerosol

General term for particles suspended in air

Sprays from pressurized cans

Mist

Aerosol consisting of liquid droplets

Sulfuric acid mist

Dust

Aerosol consisting of solid particles that are blown into
the air or are produced from larger particles by grinding
them down

Dust storm

Smoke

Aerosol consisting of solid particles or a mixture of solid
and liquid particles produced by chemical reaction such
as fires

Cigarette smoke, smoke
from burning garbage

Fume

Generally means the same as smoke but often applies
specifically to aerosols produced by condensation of hot
vapors of metals.

Zinc/lead fumes

Plume

Geometrical shape or form of the smoke coming out of
a chimney

Fog

Aerosol consisting of water droplets

Smog

Term used to describe a mixture of smoke and fog.

What happens to pollutants in the atmosphere?
Once pollutants enter the troposphere they are
transported downwind, diluted by the large volume of air, transformed through either physical
or chemical changes or are removed from the
atmosphere by rain during which they are attached to water vapour that subsequently forms
rain or snow that falls to the earth’s surface.
The atmosphere normally disperses pollutants
by mixing them in the very large volume of air
that covers the earth. This dilutes the pollutants
to acceptable levels. The rate of dispersion however varies in relation to the following aspects:

However on a still evening, the process is reversed. An hour or two before sunset after a
sunny day, the ground starts to lose heat and
the air near the ground begins to cool rapidly.
Due to the absence of wind, a static layer of
cold air is produced as the ground cools. This in
turn induces condensation of fog. The morning
sun cannot initially penetrate this fog layer. The
Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

116

Chapter5.p65

Topography
Normally as the earth’s surface becomes
warmed by sunlight the layer of air in contact
with the ground is also heated by convection.
This warmer air is less dense than the cold air
above it, so it rises. Thus pollutants produced in
the surface layer are effectively dispersed.

116

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

cold air being dense cannot rise and is trapped
by the warm air above. It cannot move out of
the area due to the surrounding hills. The topographic features resemble a closed chemical reactor in which the pollutants are trapped. This
condition often continues through the cool night
and reaches its maximum intensity before sunrise. When the morning sun warms the ground
the air near the ground also warms up and rises
within an hour or two. This may be broken up
by strong winds. In cold regions this situation
can persist for several days. Such a situation is
known as smog (smoke + fog).

other industrial establishments. This used to lead
to the generation of high levels of smoke containing sulphur oxides. Due to a sudden adverse
meteorological condition air pollutants like
smoke and sulphur oxides started to build-up in
the atmosphere. The white fog accumulated
over the city turned black forming a ‘pea-soup’
smog with almost zero visibility. Within two days
of the formation of this smog, people started
suffering from acute pulmonary disorders which
caused irritation of bronchi, cough, nasal discharges, sore throat, vomiting and burning sensations in the eyes. This event lead to several
deaths.

Meteorological conditions
The velocity of the wind affects the dispersal of
pollutants. Strong winds mix polluted air more
rapidly with the surrounding air diluting the
pollutants rapidly. When wind velocity is low
mixing takes place and the concentration of
pollutants remains high.

The most well known example is that of the
‘London Smog’ that occurred in 1952. The city
used large quantities of sulphur containing coal
for domestic heating that released smoke, along
with smoke from thermal power plants and
Pollution

Chapter5.p65

117

117

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

When sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxides are
transported by prevailing winds they form secondary pollutants such as nitric acid vapour,
droplets of sulfuric acid and particles of sulphate
and nitrate salts. These chemicals descend on
the earth’s surface in two forms: wet (as acidic
rain, snow, fog and cloud vapour) and dry (as
acidic particles). The resulting mixture is called
acid deposition, commonly called acid rain.
Acid deposition has many harmful effects especially when the pH falls below 5.1 for terrestrial
systems and below 5.5 for aquatic systems. It
contributes to human respiratory diseases such
as bronchitis and asthma, which can cause premature death. It also damages statues, buildings, metals and car finishes. Acid deposition
can damage tree foliage directly but the most
serious effect is weakening of trees so they become more susceptible to other types of damage. The nitric acid and the nitrate salts in acid
deposition can lead to excessive soil nitrogen
levels. This can over stimulate growth of other
plants and intensify depletion of other important soil nutrients such as calcium and magnesium, which in turn can reduce tree growth and
vigour.

Effects of air pollution on living organisms
Our respiratory system has a number of mechanisms that help in protecting us from air pollution. The hair in our nose filters out large
particles. The sticky mucus in the lining of the
upper respiratory tract captures smaller particles
and dissolves some gaseous pollutants. When
the upper respiratory system is irritated by pollutants sneezing and coughing expel contaminated air and mucus. Prolonged smoking or
exposure to air pollutants can overload or breakdown these natural defenses causing or contributing to diseases such as lung cancer,
asthma, chronic bronchitis and emphysema. Elderly people, infants, pregnant women and
people with heart disease, asthma or other res-

Cigarette smoking is responsible for the greatest exposure to carbon monoxide. Exposure to
air containing even 0.001 percent of carbon
monoxide for several hours can cause collapse,
coma and even death. As carbon monoxide remains attached to hemoglobin in blood for a
long time, it accumulates and reduces the oxygen carrying capacity of blood. This impairs perception and thinking, slows reflexes and causes
headaches, drowsiness, dizziness and nausea.
Carbon monoxide in heavy traffic causes headaches, drowsiness and blurred vision.
Sulfur dioxide irritates respiratory tissues.
Chronic exposure causes a condition similar to
bronchitis. It also reacts with water, oxygen and
other material in the air to form sulfur-containing acids. The acids can become attached to
particles which when inhaled are very corrosive
to the lung.
Nitrogen oxides especially NO2 can irritate the
lungs, aggravate asthma or chronic bronchitis
and also increase susceptibility to respiratory
infections such as influenza or common colds.
Suspended particles aggravate bronchitis and
asthma. Exposure to these particles over a long
period of time damages lung tissue and contributes to the development of chronic respiratory disease and cancer.
Many volatile organic compounds such as (benzene and formaldehyde) and toxic particulates
(such as lead, cadmium) can cause mutations,
reproductive problems or cancer. Inhaling ozone,
a component of photochemical smog causes
coughing, chest pain, breathlessness and irritation of the eye, nose and the throat.

Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

118

Chapter5.p65

piratory diseases are especially vulnerable to air
pollution.

118

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

centration can produce dramatic effects on life
on earth.

Effects on plants
When some gaseous pollutants enter leaf pores
they damage the leaves of crop plants. Chronic
exposure of the leaves to air pollutants can break
down the waxy coating that helps prevent excessive water loss and leads to damage from
diseases, pests, drought and frost. Such exposure interferes with photosynthesis and plant
growth, reduces nutrient uptake and causes
leaves to turn yellow, brown or drop off altogether. At a higher concentration of sulphur
dioxide majority of the flower buds become stiff
and hard. They eventually fall from the plants,
as they are unable to flower.
Prolonged exposure to high levels of several air
pollutants from smelters, coal burning power
plants and industrial units as well as from cars
and trucks can damage trees and other plants.

Effects of air pollution on materials
Every year air pollutants cause damage worth
billions of rupees. Air pollutants break down
exterior paint on cars and houses. All around
the world air pollutants have discoloured irreplaceable monuments, historic buildings, marble
statues, etc.

Effects of air pollution on the stratosphere
The upper stratosphere consists of considerable
amounts of ozone, which works as an effective
screen for ultraviolet light. This region called the
ozone layer extends up to 60 kms above the
surface of the earth. Though the ozone is
present upto 60 kms its greatest density remains
in the region between 20 to 25 kms. The ozone
layer does not consist of solely ozone but a mixture of other common atmospheric gases. In the
most dense ozone layer there will be only one
ozone molecule in 100,000 gas molecules.
Therefore even small changes in the ozone con-

The total amount of ozone in a ‘column’ of air
from the earth’s surface upto an altitude of 50
km is the total column ozone. This is recorded
in Dobson Units (DU), a measure of the thickness of the ozone layer by an equivalent layer
of pure ozone gas at normal temperature and
pressure at sea level. This means that 100
DU=1mm of pure ozone gas at normal temperature and pressure at sea level.
Ozone is a form of oxygen with three atoms
instead of two. It is produced naturally from the
photodissociation of oxygen gas molecules in
the atmosphere. The ozone thus formed is constantly broken down by naturally occurring processes that maintain its balance in the ozone
layer. In the absence of pollutants the creation
and breakdown of ozone are purely governed
by natural forces, but the presence of certain
pollutants can accelerate the breakdown of
ozone. Though it was known earlier that ozone
shows fluctuations in its concentrations which
may be accompanied sometimes with a little
ozone depletion, it was only in 1985 that the
large scale destruction of the ozone also called
the Ozone Hole came into limelight when some
British researchers published measurements
about the ozone layer.
Soon after these findings a greater impetus was
given to research on the ozone layer, which
convincingly established that CFC’s were leading to its depletion. These CFCs (chloro-flurocarbons) are extremely stable, non-flammable,
non-toxic and harmless to handle. This makes
them ideal for many industrial applications like
aerosols, air conditioners, refrigerators and fire
extinguishers. Many cans, which give out foams
and sprays, use CFCs. (eg: perfumes, room fresheners, etc.) CFCs are also used in making foams
for mattresses and cushions, disposable
Styrofoam cups, glasses, packaging material for
insulation, cold storage etc. However their sta-

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

119

119

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

bility also gives them a long life span in the atmosphere.
Halons are similar in structure to the CFCs but
contain bromine atoms instead of chlorine. They
are more dangerous to the ozone layer than
CFCs. Halons are used as fire extinguishing
agents as they do not pose a harm to people
and equipment exposed to them during fire
fighting.
The CFCs and the halons migrate into the upper atmosphere after they are released. As they
are heavier than air they have to be carried by
air currents up to just above the lower atmosphere and then they slowly diffuse into the
upper atmosphere. This is a slow process and
can take as long as five to fifteen years. In the
stratosphere unfiltered UV-radiation severs the
chemical bonds releasing chlorine from the rest
of the CFC. This attacks the ozone molecule
resulting in its splitting into an oxygen molecule
and an oxygen atom.
Despite the fact that CFCs are evenly distribute
over the globe, the ozone depletion is especially
pronounced over the South Pole due to the extreme weather conditions in the Antarctic atmosphere. The presence of the ice crystals
makes the Cl-O bonding easier. The ozone layer
over countries like Australia, New Zealand, South
Africa and parts of South America is also depleted.
India has signed the Montreal Protocol in 1992,
which aims to control the production and consumption of Ozone Depleting Substances.

Ozone depletion-What does it do?
Changes in the ozone layer have serious implications for mankind.
Effects on human health: Sunburn, cataract,
aging of the skin and skin cancer are caused by

Food production: Ultra violet radiation affects
the ability of plants to capture light energy during the process of photosynthesis. This reduces
the nutrient content and the growth of plants.
This is seen especially in legumes and cabbage.
Plant and animal planktons are damaged by ultra-violet radiation. In zooplanktons (microscopic
animals) the breeding period is shortened by
changes in radiation. As planktons form the basis
of the marine food chain a change in their number and species composition influences fish and
shell fish production.
Effect on materials: Increased UV radiation
damages paints and fabrics, causing them to
fade faster.
Effect on climate: Atmospheric changes induced by pollution contribute to global warming, a phenomenon which is caused due to the
increase in concentration of certain gases like
carbon dioxide, nitrogen oxides, methane and
CFCs. Observations of the earth have shown
beyond doubt that atmospheric constituents
such as water vapour, carbon dioxide, methane,
nitrogen oxides and Chloro Fluro Carbons trap
heat in the form of infra-red radiation near the
earth’s surface. This is known as the ‘Greenhouse Effect’. The phenomenon is similar to
what happens in a greenhouse. The glass in a
greenhouse allows solar radiation to enter which
is absorbed by the objects inside. These objects
radiate heat in the form of terrestrial radiation,
which does not pass out through the glass. The
heat is therefore trapped in the greenhouse increasing the temperature inside and ensuring
the luxuriant growth of plants.
Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

120

Chapter5.p65

increased ultra-violet radiation. It weakens the
immune system by suppressing the resistance
of the whole body to certain infections like
measles, chicken pox and other viral diseases
that elicit rash and parasitic diseases such as
malaria introduced through the skin.

120

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

Green House Effect

There could be several adverse effects of global
warming.
•

With a warmer earth the polar ice caps will
melt causing a rise in ocean levels and flooding of coastal areas.

•

In countries like Bangladesh or the Maldives
this would be catastrophic. If the sea level
rises by 3m., Maldives will disappear completely beneath the waves.

ane are trapped beneath the frozen soil of
Alaska. When the permafrost melts the
methane that will be released can accelerate the process of global warming.

Control measures for air pollution

•

The rise in temperature will bring about a
fall in agricultural produce.

•

Changes in the distribution of solar energy
can bring about changes in habitats. A previously productive agricultural area will suffer severe droughts while rains will fall in
locations that were once deserts. This could
bring about changes in the species of natural plants, agricultural crops, insects, livestock and micro-organisms.

•

In the polar regions temperature rises
caused by global warming would have disastrous effects. Vast quantities of meth-

Air pollution can be controlled by two fundamental approaches: preventive techniques and
effluent control.
One of the effective means of controlling air
pollution is to have proper equipment in
place. This includes devices for removal of pollutants from the flue gases though scrubbers,
closed collection recovery systems through
which it is possible to collect the pollutants
before they escape, use of dry and wet collectors, filters, electrostatic precipitators, etc.
Providing a greater height to the stacks can
help in facilitating the discharge of pollutants
as far away from the ground as possible. Industries should be located in places so as to minimize the effects of pollution after considering
the topography and the wind directions.
Substitution of raw material that causes more

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

121

121

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

pollution with those that cause less pollution can
be done.

Air pollution in India
The World health Organization (WHO) which
rates only mega cities of the world has rated
Delhi the fourth most polluted city ion the world.
However compared to other cities in India, Delhi
is not at the top of the list of polluted cities. Our
country has several pollution hotspots. The recent release from the Central Pollution Control
Board (CPCB), Parivesh, January 2003 states that
Ahmedabad’s air is most noxious flowed by
Kanpur, Solapur and Lucknow with small particulate levels (PM10) 3-4 times the standard of
60 microgram per cubic meter (mg/m3). The report has ranked 29 cities according to Respirable Particulate Matter (RSPM) levels recorded
during the year 2000. This report thus confirms
the fact that Indian cities show high particulate
pollution with 14 cities hitting critical levels.
Nitrogen dioxide levels in most major cities are
generally close to the acceptable annual standard of 60 mg/m3. However sharp increases have
been noticed in a few cities with heavy vehicular traffic and density as in a few locations in
Kolkata and Delhi indicating stronger impact of
traffic. The CPCB indicates vehicles as one of
the predominant sources of air pollution. However the impact of hard measures implemented
in Delhi over the last few years such as introduction of Euro II standards, lowering the sulphur content in fuel to 500 ppm and
implementing Compressed Natural Gas program
has succeeded in improving the quality of air.
Rapid urbanization of smaller cities especially
those situated near the big commercial centers
have an enormous increase in traffic load especially in the most polluted segment such as two
and three wheelers and diesel vehicles combined
with poor quality fuel contribute to the deteriorating air quality in a big way.

The Supreme Court also played a vital role protecting the Taj Mahal. Being exposed to sulphur
dioxide and suspended particulate matter, the
Taj had contracted ‘marble cancer’, a fungal
growth that corroded its surface giving it a yellowish tinge. The SPM deposits blackened it. Shri
MC Mehta an environmental lawyer filed a public interest litigation in 1984 expressing concern
over the havoc the polluting units in Agra were
wreaking on the Taj Mahal. Twelve years later
the Supreme Court ordered 292 industries in
the vicinity to either adopt pollution control
measures or shut down. It also made it mandatory for these units to either switch over to ecofriendly fuels like natural gas or shift out of the
area.

Air quality monitoring
India does not presently have a well established
system of monitoring air pollution. When air
quality monitoring began in India in the late
1960s planners focused only on a few pollutants namely sulphur dioxide, nitrogen oxides and
suspended particulate matter. Other pollutants
such as carbon monoxide and lead were monitored only on a limited scale. The threat from
other air toxins such as benzene, ozone, other
small particulates is not known as these are not
monitored at all. A database on ambient air
quality in Indian cities has been prepared by the
monitoring networks of the National Environmental Engineering Research Institute (NEERI),
Nagpur. The Central Pollution Control Board
(CPCB) initiated its own national Ambient Air
Quality Monitoring (NAAQM) program in 1985.
Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

122

Chapter5.p65

It is alarming to note that residential locations
in India are fast outpacing industrial locations in
air pollution implying that vehicular fumes are
responsible for this trend. The Supreme Court’s
order of April 5, 2002 has directed the Central
Government for an action plan for other polluted cities. Absence of any local initiatives for
action and delay in air pollution control measures will only make the situation worse.

122

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

Ambient air quality standards in India developed by the Central Pollution Control Board
Area Category

SPM µg/m3

SO2 µg/m3

Co µg/m3

NOx µg/m3

Industrial and mixed use

500

120

5000

120

Residential and rural

200

80

2000

80

Sensitive

100

3

1000

30

Data to the NAAQM is supplied by the respective state pollution control boards, which is then
transmitted to the CPCB. Experts feel that the
present air quality-monitoring network cannot
capture the true profile of urban air pollution
due to the lack of adequate monitoring stations.
Moreover critical toxins have still not been included in the list of pollutants to be monitored.

Legal aspects of air pollution control in India
The Air (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act
was legislated in 1981. The Act provided for
prevention, control and abatement of air pollution. In areas notified under this Act no industrial pollution causing activity could come up
without the permission of the concerned State
Pollution Control Board. But this Act was not
strong enough to play a precautionary or a corrective role. After the Bhopal disaster, a more
comprehensive Environment Protection Act
(EPA) was passed in 1986. This Act for the first
time conferred enforcement agencies with necessary punitive powers to restrict any activity that
can harm the environment. To regulate vehicular pollution the Central Motor Vehicles Act of
1939 was amended in 1989. Following this
amendment the exhaust emission rules for vehicle owners were notified in 1990 and the mass
emission standards for vehicle manufacturers
were enforced in 1991 for the first time. The
mass emission norms have been further revised
for 2000.

Air quality management as a well-defined program has yet to emerge in India. We need a
much more strengthened air quality management with continuous monitoring of air if we
are to have a better quality of air. This would
also need an integrated approach with strict air
pollution control laws. Some of the suggestions
for doing this include:
•

Putting a greater emphasis on pollution prevention rather than control

•

Reducing the use of fossil fuels

•

Improving the quality of vehicular fuel

•

Increasing the use of renewable energy

5.2.2 Water Pollution
Our liquid planet glows like a soft blue sapphire in the hard-edged darkness of space.
There is nothing else like it in the solar system. It is because of water.
– John Todd
Introduction: Water is the essential element
that makes life on earth possible. Without water there would be no life. We usually take water for granted. It flows from our taps when they
are turned on. Most of us are able to bathe when
we want to, swim when we choose and water

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

123

123

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

our gardens. Like good health we ignore water
when we have it.
Although 71% of the earth’s surface is covered
by water only a tiny fraction of this water is available to us as fresh water. About 97% of the
total water available on earth is found in oceans
and is too salty for drinking or irrigation. The
remaining 3% is fresh water. Of this 2.997% is
locked in ice caps or glaciers. Thus only 0.003%
of the earth’ total volume of water is easily available to us as soil moisture, groundwater, water
vapour and water in lakes, streams, rivers and
wetlands.
In short if the world’s water supply were only
100 litres our usable supply of fresh water would
be only about 0.003 litres (one-half teaspoon).
This makes water a very precious resource. The
future wars in our world may well be fought
over water. By the middle of this century, almost twice as many people will be trying to share
the same amount of fresh water the earth has
today. As freshwater becomes more scarce access to water resources will be a major factor in
determining the economic growth of several
countries around the world.
Water availability on the planet: Water that
is found in streams, rivers, lakes, wetlands and
artificial reservoirs is called surface water. Water that percolates into the ground and fills the
pores in soil and rock is called groundwater.
Porous water-saturated layers of sand, gravel
or bedrock through which ground water flows
are called aquifers. Most aquifers are replenished naturally by rainfall that percolates downward through the soil and rock. This process is
called natural recharge. If the withdrawal rate
of an aquifer exceeds its natural recharge rate,
the water table is lowered. Any pollutant that is
discharged onto the land above is also pulled
into the aquifer and pollutes the groundwater
resulting in polluted water in the nearby wells.

When the quality or composition of water
changes directly or indirectly as a result of
man’s activities such that it becomes unfit
for any purpose it is said to be polluted.
Point sources of pollution: When a source of
pollution can be readily identified because it has
a definite source and place where it enters the
water it is said to come from a point source.
Eg. Municipal and Industrial Discharge Pipes.
When a source of pollution cannot be readily
identified, such as agricultural runoff, acid rain,
etc, they are said to be non-point sources of
pollution.

Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

124

Chapter5.p65

India receives most of her rainfall during the
months of June to September due to the seasonal winds and the temperature differences
between the land and the sea. These winds blow
from the opposite directions in the different seasons. They blow into India from the surrounding oceans during the summer season and blow
out from the subcontinent to the oceans during
the winter. The monsoon in India is usually reasonably stable but varies geographically. In some
years the commencement of the rains may be
delayed considerably over the entire country or
a part of it. The rains may also terminate earlier
than usual. They may be heavier than usual over
one part than over another. All these may cause
local floods or drought. However in India even
areas that receive adequate rainfall during the
monsoon suffer from water shortages in the post
monsoon period due to lack of storage facilities.

124

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

Sources of Pollution

Causes of water pollution
There are several classes of common water pollutants. These are disease-causing agents
(pathogens) which include bacteria, viruses, protozoa and parasitic worms that enter water from
domestic sewage and untreated human and
animal wastes. Human wastes contain concentrated populations of coliform bacteria such as
Escherichia coli and Streptococcus faecalis. These
bacteria normally grow in the large intestine of
humans where they are responsible for some
food digestion and for the production of vitamin K. These bacteria are not harmful in low
numbers. Large amounts of human waste in
water, increases the number of these bacteria
which cause gastrointestinal diseases. Other
potentially harmful bacteria from human wastes
may also be present in smaller numbers. Thus
the greater the amount of wastes in the water
the greater are the chances of contracting diseases from them.
Another category of water pollutants is oxygen depleting wastes. These are organic
wastes that can be decomposed by aerobic (oxygen requiring) bacteria. Large populations of
bacteria use up the oxygen present in water to

degrade these wastes. In the process this degrades water quality. The amount of oxygen
required to break down a certain amount of
organic matter is called the biological oxygen
demand (BOD). The amount of BOD in the water is an indicator of the level of pollution. If too
much organic matter is added to the water all
the available oxygen is used up. This causes fish
and other forms of oxygen dependent aquatic
life to die. Thus anaerobic bacteria (those that
do not require oxygen) begin to break down
the wastes. Their anaerobic respiration produces
chemicals that have a foul odour and an unpleasant taste that is harmful to human health.
A third class of pollutants are inorganic plant
nutrients. These are water soluble nitrates and
phosphates that cause excessive growth of algae and other aquatic plants. The excessive
growth of algae and aquatic plants due to added
nutrients is called eutrophication. They may interfere with the use of the water by clogging
water intake pipes, changing the taste and
odour of water and cause a buildup of organic
matter. As the organic matter decays, oxygen
levels decrease and fish and other aquatic species die.

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

125

125

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

The quantity of fertilizers applied in a field is
often many times more than is actually required
by the plants. The chemicals in fertilizers and
pesticides pollute soil and water. While excess
fertilizers cause eutrophication, pesticides cause
bioaccumulation and biomagnification. Pesticides which enter water bodies are introduced
into the aquatic food chain. They are then absorbed by the phytoplanktons and aquatic
plants. These plants are eaten by the herbivorous fish which are in turn eaten by the carnivorous fish which are in turn eaten by the water
birds. At each link in the food chain these chemicals which do not pass out of the body are accumulated and increasingly concentrated
resulting in biomagnification of these harmful
substances.

A fourth class of water pollutants is water
soluble inorganic chemicals which are acids,
salts and compounds of toxic metals such as
mercury and lead. High levels of these chemicals can make the water unfit to drink, harm

Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

126

Chapter5.p65

One of the effects of accumulation of high levels of pesticides such as DDT is that birds lay
eggs with shells that are much thinner than
normal. This results in the premature breaking
of these eggs, killing the chicks inside. Birds of
prey such as hawks, eagles and other fish eating birds are affected by such pollution. Although DDT has been banned in India for
agricultural use and is to be used only for malaria eradication, it is still used in the fields as it
is cheap.

126

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

fish and other aquatic life, reduce crop yields
and accelerate corrosion of equipment that use
this water.
Another cause of water pollution is a variety of
organic chemicals, which include oil, gasoline,
plastics, pesticides, cleaning solvents, detergent
and many other chemicals. These are harmful
to aquatic life and human health. They get into
the water directly from industrial activity either
from improper handling of the chemicals in industries and more often from improper and illegal disposal of chemical wastes.
Sediment of suspended matter is another
class of water pollutants. These are insoluble particles of soil and other solids that become suspended in water. This occurs when soil is eroded
from the land. High levels of soil particles suspended in water, interferes with the penetration of sunlight. This reduces the photosynthetic
activity of aquatic plants and algae disrupting
the ecological balance of the aquatic bodies.
When the velocity of water in streams and rivers decreases the suspended particles settle
down at the bottom as sediments. Excessive
sediments that settle down destroys feeding and
spawning grounds of fish, clogs and fills lakes,
artificial reservoirs etc.
Water soluble radioactive isotopes are yet
another source of water pollution. These can
be concentrated in various tissues and organs
as they pass through food chains and food webs.
Ionizing radiation emitted by such isotopes can
cause birth defects, cancer and genetic damage.
Hot water let out by power plants and industries that use large volumes of water to cool the
plant result in rise in temperature of the local
water bodies. Thermal pollution occurs when
industry returns the heated water to a water
source. Power plants heat water to convert it
into steam, to drive the turbines that generate
electricity. For efficient functioning of the steam

turbines, the steam is condensed into water after it leaves the turbines. This condensation is
done by taking water from a water body to absorb the heat. This heated water, which is at
least 15oC higher than the normal is discharged
back into the water body. The warm water not
only decreases the solubility of oxygen but
changes the breeding cycles of various aquatic
organisms.
Oil is washed into surface water in runoff from
roads and parking lots which also pollutes
groundwater. Leakage from underground tanks
CASE STUDY
One of the worst oil spill disasters that have
occurred is that of the Exxon Valdez. On 24th
march 1989 the Exxon Valdez, a tanker more
than three football fields wide went off
course in a 16 kilometer wide channel in
Prince William Sound near Valdez in Alaska.
It hit submerged rocks, creating an environmental disaster. The rapidly spreading oil slick
coated more than 1600 kilometers of shoreline killing between 300,000 and 645,000
water birds and a large number of sea otters, harbor seals, whales and fishes. Exxon
spent $ 2.2. billion directly on the clean-up
operations. However some results of the
cleanup effort showed that where high pressure jets of hot water were used to clean
beaches coastal plants and animals that had
survived the spill were killed. Thus it did more
harm than good. Exxon pleaded guilty in
1991 and agreed to pay the Federal Government and the state of Alaska $ 1 billion
in fines and civil damages. This $8.5 billion
accident might have been prevented if Exxon
had spent only $22.5 million to fit the tanker
with a double hull-one inside the other. Such
double hulled vessels would be less likely to
rupture and spill their contents. The spill highlighted the need for marine pollution prevention.

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

127

127

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

is another source of pollution. Accidental oil spills
from large transport tankers at sea have been
causing significant environmental damage.

•

Leakage from underground storage tanks
containing gasoline and other hazardous
substances

Though accidents such as the Exxon Valdez get
worldwide attention, much more oil is released
as a result of small, regular releases from other
less visible sources. Nearly two thirds of all marine oil pollution comes from three sources: runoff from streets, improper discharge of
lubricating oil from machines or automobile
crankcases and intentional oil discharges that
occur during the loading and unloading of tankers. Oil tankers often use sea water as ballast to
stabilize the ship after they have discharged their
oil. This oil contaminated water is then discharged back into the sea when the tanker is
refilled.

•

Leachate from landfills

•

Poorly designed and inadequately maintained septic tanks

•

Mining wastes

Groundwater pollution: While oil spills are
highly visible and often get a lot of media attention, a much greater threat to human life
comes from our groundwater being polluted
which is used for drinking and irrigation. While
groundwater is easy to deplete and pollute it
gets renewed very slowly and hence must be
used judiciously. Groundwater flows are slow
and not turbulent hence the contaminants are
not effectively diluted and dispersed as compared to surface water. Moreover pumping
groundwater and treating it is very slow and
costly. Hence it is extremely essential to prevent
the pollution of groundwater in the first place.
Ground water is polluted due to:
•

Urban run-off of untreated or poorly treated
waste water and garbage

•

Industrial waste storage located above or
near aquifers

•

Agricultural practices such as the application of large amounts of fertilizers and pesticides, animal feeding operations, etc. in
the rural sector

There are two theories that have been put forth
to explain this unusually high content of arsenic
in groundwater. One group of researchers suggested that the cause is natural while the other
stated that the cause is man-made.
According to the first hypothesis, arsenic probably originates in the Himalayan headwaters of
the Ganga and the Brahmaputra rivers and has
been lying undisturbed beneath the surface of
Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

128

Chapter5.p65

Severe cases of arsenic poisoning from contaminated groundwater have been reported from
West Bengal in what is known today as the worst
case of groundwater pollution. The School of
Environmental Sciences, Jadhavpur University,
West Bengal has been involved in the task of
surveying the magnitude of the arsenic problem in West Bengal for the last fourteen years.
According to a report in the Down to Earth (Vol.
11, No.22), arsenic poisoning was first noticed
by K C Saha, former professor of dermatology
at the School of Tropical Medicine, Kolkata when
he began to receive patients with skin lesions
that resembled the symptoms of leprosy which
was in reality not leprosy. Since all the patients
were from the district of 24-Parganas, Saha
along with others began to look for the cause
and found it to be arsenic toxicity. Thus groundwater arsenic contamination in West Bengal was
first reported in a local daily newspaper in December 1983 when 63 people from three villages located in different districts were identified
by health officials as suffering from arsenic poisoning.

128

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

the region’s deltas for thousands of years in the
thick layers of fine alluvial mud across the banks
of these rivers. Most of the arsenic affected areas of West Bengal lie in the alluvial plains
formed in the quarternary period (last 1.6 million years).The Purulia district of West Bengal is
part of the extensive area of the Precambrian
era (last 570 million year) having metamorphic
rocks and granites with widespread sulphide
mineralisation. Researchers from the UK based
British Geological Survey (BGS) suggested that
their position close to where the river Ganga
enters Bangladesh (geologically) may be the primary source of arsenic in the Bengal alluvium.
According to David Kinniburgh project leader
with BGS the main factor is time. The mud in
these areas is thicker, wider and flatter than almost anywhere else on earth. It can thus take
hundreds or thousands of years for underground
water to percolate through the mud before
reaching the sea and thus it absorbs arsenic for
a long period.
Other researchers feel that the excess amount
of arsenic in groundwater can be contributed
to by the high rate of groundwater extraction.
Their hypothesis called the pyrite oxidation thesis describes how arsenic can get mobilized in
the groundwater. In this hypothesis arsenic is
assumed to be present in certain minerals (pyrites) that are deposited within the aquifer sediments. Due to the lowering of the water table
below the deposits, arseno-pyrite which is oxidized in a zone of the aquifer called the Vadose
zone releases arsenic as arsenic adsorbed on iron
hydroxide. During the subsequent recharge period, iron hydroxide releases arsenic into groundwater. This theory is supported by two
arguments. The first is the intensive irrigation
development in West Bengal using deep tube
wells and shallow tube wells. This method of
extraction, which was exactly in the 20m to
100m below ground level ensured, increased
contribution of groundwater to irrigation. The
other argument that supports the pyrite oxidation theory is that prior to irrigation develop-

ment and drinking water supply schemes based
on groundwater there were no reported cases
of arsenic poisoning.
Arsenicosis or arsenic toxicity develops after two
to five years of exposure to arsenic contaminated
drinking water depending on the amount of
water consumption and the arsenic concentration in water. Initially the skin begins to darken
(called diffuse melanosis) which later leads to
spotted melanosis when darkened sports begin
to appear on the chest, back and limbs. At a
later stage leucomelanosis sets in and the body
begins to show black and white spots. In the
middle stage of arsenicosis the skin in parts becomes hard and fibrous. Rough, dry skin with
nodules on hands or the soles of feet indicate
severe toxicity. This can lead to the formation
of gangrene and cancer. Arsenic poisoning
brings with it other complications such as liver
and spleen enlargement, cirrhosis of the liver,
diabetes, goiter and skin cancers.

The state of India’s rivers
India has always had a tradition of worshipping
rivers. Most of the rivers in India are named after gods, goddesses or saints. However a large
majority of the Indian population including those
who worship the rivers do not think twice before polluting a river. Urbanization, industrialization, excess withdrawal of water, agricultural
run-off, improper agricultural practices and various religious and social practices all contribute
to river pollution in India. Every single river in
India be it the Ganga, Yamuna, Cauvery or the
Krishna have their own share of problems due
to pollution. Waters from the Ganga and the
Yamuna are drawn for irrigation through the
network of canals as soon as these rivers reach
the plains reducing the amount of water that
flows downstream. What flows in the river is
water from small nalas, and streams that carry
with them sewage and industrial effluents. The
residual freshwater, is unable to dilute the pol-

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

129

129

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

lutants and the rivers turn into stinking sewers.
In spite of data from scientifically competent
studies conducted by the Central Pollution Control Board (CPCB), the Government has not been
able to tackle this issue. Sewage and municipal
effluents account for 75% of the pollution load
in rivers while the remaining 25% is from industrial effluents and non-point pollution
sources.
In 1985, India launched the Ganga Action plan
(GAP) the largest ever river clean-up operation
in the country. The plan has been criticized for,
overspending and slow progress. The GAP Phase
II in 1991 included cleaning operations for the
tributaries of the Ganga, ie; the Yamuna, Gomti
and the Damodar. Thus the Yamuna Action Plan
(YAP), Gomti Action Plan and the Damodar Action plan were added.
In 1995 the National River Conservation plan
was launched. Under this all the rivers in India
were taken up for clean-up operations. In most
of these plans, attempts have been made to tap
drains, divert sewage to sewage treatment
plants before letting out the sewage into the
rivers. The biggest drawback of these river cleaning programs was that they failed to pin responsibilities as to who would pay for running the
treatment facilities in the long run. With the
power supply being erratic and these plants
being heavily dependent on power, most of
these facilities lie underutilized. Moreover the
problem of river pollution due to agricultural runoff has not been addressed in these programs.
NRCP is scheduled to be completed by March
2005. The approved cost for the plan is Rs.
772.08 crores covering 18 rivers in 10 states including 46 towns. The cost is borne entirely by
the Central Government and the Ministry of
Environment and Forests is the nodal agency that
co-ordinates and monitors the plan. Under this
plan the major activities include treating the
pollution load from sewer systems of towns and
cities, setting up of Sewage treatment plants,
electric crematoria, low cost sanitation facilities,

Control measures for preventing water
pollution
While the foremost necessity is prevention, setting up effluent treatment plants and treating
waste through these can reduce the pollution
load in the recipient water. The treated effluent
can be reused for either gardening or cooling
purposes wherever possible. A few years ago a
new technology called the Root Zone Process
has been developed by Thermax. This system
involves running contaminated water through
the root zones of specially designed reed beds.
The reeds, which are essentially wetland plants
have the capacity to absorb oxygen from the
surrounding air through their stomatal openings.
The oxygen is pushed through the porous stem
of the reeds into the hollow roots where it enters the root zone and creates conditions suitable for the growth of numerous bacteria and
fungi. These micro-organisms oxidize impurities
in the wastewaters, so that the water which finally comes out is clean.

Water Pollution

Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

130

Chapter5.p65

riverfront development, afforestation and solid
waste management.

130

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

5.2.3 Soil Pollution
Introduction: We can no more manufacture a
soil with a tank of chemicals than we can invent
a rain forest or produce a single bird. We may
enhance the soil by helping its processes along,
but we can never recreate what we destroy. The
soil is a resource for which there is no substitute. (Environmental historian Donald Worster
reminds us that fertilizers are not a substitute
for fertile soil).
Soil is a thin covering over the land consisting of
a mixture of minerals, organic material, living
organisms, air and water that together support
the growth of plant life. Several factors contribute to the formation of soil from the parent
material. This includes mechanical weathering
of rocks due to temperature changes and abrasion, wind, moving water, glaciers, chemical
weathering activities and lichens. Climate and
time are also important in the development of
soils. Extremely dry or cold climates develop soils
very slowly while humid and warm climates develop them more rapidly. Under ideal climatic
conditions soft parent material may develop into
a centimeter of soil within 15 years. Under poor
climatic conditions a hard parent material may
require hundreds of years to develop into soil.
Mature soils are arranged in a series of zones
called soil horizons. Each horizon has a distinct
texture and composition that varies with different types of soils. A cross sectional view of the
horizons in a soil is called a soil profile.
The top layer or the surface litter layer called
the O horizon consists mostly of freshly fallen
and partially decomposed leaves, twigs, animal
waste, fungi and other organic materials. Normally it is brown or black.
The uppermost layer of the soil called the A
horizon consists of partially decomposed organic
matter (humus) and some inorganic mineral
particles. It is usually darker and looser than the

deeper layers. The roots of most plants are found
in these two upper layers. As long as these layers are anchored by vegetation soil stores water and releases it in a trickle throughout the
year instead of in a force like a flood. These two
top layers also contain a large amount of bacteria, fungi, earthworms and other small insects
that form complex food webs in the soil that
help recycle soil nutrients and contribute to soil
fertility.
The B horizon often called the subsoil contains
less organic material and fewer organisms than
the A horizon. The area below the subsoil is
called the C horizon and consists of weathered
parent material. This parent material does not
contain any organic materials. The chemical
composition of the C-horizon helps to determine
the pH of the soil and also influences the soil’s
rate of water absorption and retention.
Soils vary in their content of clay (very fine particles), silt (fine particles), sand (medium size
particles) and gravel (coarse to very coarse particles). The relative amounts of the different sizes
and types of mineral particles determine soil
texture. Soils with approximately equal mixtures
of clay, sand, silt and humus are called loams.

Causes of soil degradation
Erosion
Soil erosion can be defined as the movement of
surface litter and topsoil from one place to another. While erosion is a natural process often
caused by wind and flowing water it is greatly
accelerated by human activities such as farming, construction, overgrazing by livestock, burning of grass cover and deforestation.
Loss of the topsoil makes a soil less fertile and
reduces its water holding capacity. The topsoil,
which is washed away, also contributes to water pollution clogging lakes, increasing turbidity
of the water and also leads to loss of aquatic

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

131

131

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

life. For one inch of topsoil to be formed it normally requires 200-1000 years depending upon
the climate and soil type. Thus if the topsoil
erodes faster than it is formed the soil becomes
a non-renewable resource.
Thus it is essential that proper soil conservation
measures are used to minimize the loss of top
soil. There are several techniques that can protect soil from erosion. Today both water and
soil are conserved through integrated treatment
methods. Some of the most commonly employed methods include the two types of treatment that are generally used.
•

Area treatment which involves treating the
land

•

Drainage line treatment which involves
treating the natural water courses (nalas)

Continuous contour trenches can be used to
enhance infiltration of water reduce the runoff and check soil erosion. These are actually
shallow trenches dug across the slope of the
land and along the contour lines basically for

the purpose of soil and water conservation. They
are most effective on gentle slopes and in areas
of low to medium rainfall. These bunds are stabilized by fast growing tree species and grasses.
In areas of steep slopes where the bunds are
not possible, continuous contour benches (CCBs)
made of stones are used for the same purpose.
Gradonies can also be used to convert wastelands into agricultural lands. In this narrow
trenches with bunds on the downstream side
are built along contours in the upper reaches of
the catchment to collect run-off and to conserve
moisture from the trees or tree crops. The area
between the two bunds is use for cultivation of
crops after development of fertile soil cover.
Some of the ways in which this can be achieved
are:
Live check dams which barriers created by
planting grass, shrubs and trees across the gullies can be used for this purpose.
A bund constructed out of stones across the
stream can also be used for conserving soil and
water.

Area Treatment
Purpose

Treatment Measure

Effect

Reduces the impact of
rain drops on the soil

Develop vegetative cover on the
non arable land

Minimum disturbance and
displacement of soil particles

Infiltration of water
where it falls

Apply water infiltration measures on
the area

In situ soil and moisture conservation

Minimum surface run off

Store surplus rain water by constructing
bunds, ponds in the area

Increased soil moisture in the area,
facilitate ground water recharge

Ridge to valley sequencing Treat the upper catchment first and then Economically viable, less risk
proceed towards the outlet
of damage and longer life of
structures of the lower catchments

Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

132

Chapter5.p65

132

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

Drainage line treatment
Purpose

Treatment measure

Effect

Stop further deepening
of gullies and retain
sediment run-off

Plug the gullies at formation

Stops erosion, recharges
groundwater at the
upper level.

Reduce run-off velocity,
pass cleaner water to the
downstream side

Crate temporary barriers in nalas

Delayed flow and
increased groundwater
recharge

Minimum sedimentation
in the storage basins

Use various methods to treat the catchments

Low construction cost

Use local material and skills for constructing
the structures

An Earthen checkbund is constructed out of
local soil across the stream to check soil erosion
and flow of water.
A Gabion structure is a bund constructed of
stone and wrapped in galvanized chainlink.
A Gabion structure with ferrocement impervious barrier has a one inch thick impervious
wall of ferrocement at the center of the structure which goes below the ground level upto
the hard strata. This ferrocement partition supported by the gabion portion is able to retain
the water and withstand the force of the runoff
water.
An Underground bandhara is an underground structure across a nalla bed to function as a barrier to check the ground water
movement.
Excess use of fertilizers: Approximately 25
percent of the world’s crop yield is estimated to
be directly attributed to the use of chemical fertilizers. The use of chemical fertilizes has increased significantly over the last few decades

Structures are locally
maintained

and is expected to rise even higher. Fertilizers
are very valuable as they replace the soil nutrients used up by plants. The three primary soil
nutrients often in short supply are potassium,
phosphorus and nitrogen compounds. These are
commonly referred to as macronutrients. Certain other elements like boron, zinc and manganese are necessary in extremely small amounts
and are known as micronutrients. When crops
are harvested a large amount of macronutrients
and a small amount of micronutrients are removed with the crops. If the same crop is grown
again depleted levels of thee nutrients can result in decreased yields. These necessary nutrients can be returned to the soil through the
application of fertilizers. In addition to fertilizers
a large amount of pesticides (chemicals used to
kill or control populations of unwanted fungi,
animals or plants often called pests) are also used
to ensure a good yield. Pesticides can be subdivided into several categories based on the kinds
of organisms they are used to control. Insecticides are used to control insect populations while
fungicides are used to control unwanted fungal
growth. Mice and rats are killed by rodenticides
while plant pests are controlled by herbicides.

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

133

133

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

Problems with pesticide use
Pesticides not only kill the pests but also a large
variety of living things including humans. They
may be persistent or non-persistent. Persistent
pesticides once applied are effective for a long
time. However as they do not break down easily they tend to accumulate in the soil and in the
bodies of animals in the food chain.
For example, DDT which was one of the first
synthetic organic insecticide to be used was
thought to be the perfect insecticide. During the
first ten years of its use (1942-1952) DDT is estimated to have saved about five million lives
primarily because of its use to control disease
carrying mosquitoes. However after a period of
use many mosquitoes and insects became tolerant of DDT, thus making it lose its effectiveness. DDT in temperate regions of the world
has a half life (the amount of time required for
half of the chemical to decompose) of 10 to 15
years. This means that if 100 kilograms of DDT
were to be sprayed over an area, 50 kilograms
would still be present in the area 10 to 15 years
later. The half-life of DDT varies according to
the soil type, temperature, kind of soil organisms present and other factors. In tropical parts
of the world the half life may be as short as six
months. The use of DDT has been banned in
some countries. India still however permits the
use of DDT though for purposes of mosquito
control only. Persistent pesticides become attached to small soil particles which are easily
moved by wind and water to different parts thus
affecting soils elsewhere. Persistent pesticides
may also accumulate in the bodies of animals,
and over a period of time increase in concentration if the animal is unable to flush them out
of its system thus leading to the phenomenon
called bioaccumulation. When an affected animal is eaten by another carnivore these pesticides are further concentrated in the body of
the carnivore. This phenomenon of acquiring
increasing levels of a substance in the bodies of
higher trophic level organisms is known as
biomagnification. This process especially in the

Other problems associated with insecticides is
the ability of insect populations to become resistant to them thus rendering them useless in a
couple of generations. Most pesticides kill beneficial as well as pest species. They kill the predator as well as the parasitic insects that control
the pests. Thus the pest species increase rapidly
following the use of a pesticide as there are no
natural checks to their population growth. The
short term and the long-term health effects to
the persons using the pesticide and the public
that consumes the food grown by using the
pesticides are also major concerns. Exposure to
small quantities of pesticides over several years
can cause mutations, produce cancers, etc.
Thus the question that comes to mind is that if
pesticides have so many drawbacks then why
are they used so extensively and what are the
substitutes for them? There are three main reasons for the use of pesticides. Firstly the use of
pesticides in the short term has increased the
amount of food that can be grown in many parts
of the world as the damage by pests is decreased. The second reason for its extensive use
is base on an economic consideration. The increased yields more than compensates the
farmer for cost of pesticides. Thirdly current
health problems especially in developing countries due to mosquitoes are impossible to control without insecticides.
However more and more farmers are increasingly opting to replace chemical fertilizers and
use different methods of controlling pests without affecting their yield. Thus several different
approaches that have slightly varying and overlapping goals have been developed. Alternative
agriculture is the broadest term that is used that
includes all non-traditional agricultural methods
Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

134

Chapter5.p65

case of insecticides like DDT have been proved
to be disastrous. DDT is a well known case of
biomagnification in ecosystems. DDT interferes
with the production of normal eggshells in birds
making them fragile.

134

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

and encompasses sustainable agriculture, organic agriculture, alternative uses of traditional
crops, alternative methods for raising crops, etc.
Sustainable agriculture advocates the use of
methods to produce adequate safe food in an
economically viable manner while maintaining
the state of the ecosystem. Organic agriculture
advocates avoiding the use of chemical fertilizers and pesticides. A wide variety of techniques
can be used to reduce this negative impact of
agriculture. Leaving crop residue on the soil and
incorporating it into the soil reduces erosion and
increase soil organic matter. Introduction of organic matter into the soil also makes compaction less likely. Crop rotation is an effective way
to enhance soil fertility, reduce erosion and control pests. There have been arguments both for
and against organic farming. Critics argue that
organic farming cannot produce the amount of
food required for today’s population and it is
economically viable only in certain conditions.
However supporters for organic farming feel
that of the hidden costs of soil erosion and pollution are taken into account it is a viable approach. Besides organic farmers do not have to
spend on fertilizers and pesticides and also get
a premium price for their products thus making
it financially viable for them.
Another way to reduce these impacts is through
the use of integrated pest management. This is
a technique that uses a complete understanding of all ecological aspects of a crop and the
particular pests to which it is susceptible to establish pest control strategies that uses no or
few pesticides. IPM promotes the use of
biopesticides. Biopesticides are derived from
three sources: microbial, botanical and biochemical. Microbial pesticides are micro-organisms such as bacteria, fungus, virus or protozoa
that fight pests through a variety of ways. They
produce toxins specific to the pests and produce
diseases in them. Biochemical pesticides contain
several chemicals that affect the reproductive
and digestive mechanisms of the pests. The most

commonly used biopesticides are Bacillus
thuringiensis (Bt), neem (Azadirachta indica) and
trichogramma. Although they are available in
the market they are yet to become market
favourites.

Excess salts and water
Irrigated lands can produce crop yields much
higher than those that only use rainwater. However this has its own set of ill effects. Irrigation
water contains dissolved salts and in dry climates
much of the water in the saline solution evaporates leaving its salts such as sodium chloride in
the topsoil. The accumulation of these salts is
called salinization, which can stunt plant growth,
lower yields and eventually kill the crop and render the land useless for agriculture. These salts
can be flushed out of the soil by using more
water. This practice however increases the cost
of crop production and also wastes enormous
amounts of water. Flushing salts can also make
the downstream irrigation water saltier.
Another problem with irrigation is water logging. This occurs when large amounts of water
is used to leach the salts deeper into the soil.
However if the drainage is poor this water accumulates underground gradually raising the
water table. The roots of the plants then get
enveloped in this saline water and eventually
die.
Thus in the long run it is better for us to adopt
sustainable farming practices so as to prevent
the degradation of soil.

5.2.4 Marine Pollution
Marine pollution can be defined as the introduction of substances to the marine environment directly or indirectly by man resulting in
adverse effects such as hazards to human health,
obstruction of marine activities and lowering the
quality of sea water. While the causes of ma-

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

135

135

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

rine pollution may be similar to that of general
water pollution there are some very specific
causes that pollute marine waters.
•

The most obvious inputs of waste is through
pipes directly discharging wastes into the
sea. Very often municipal waste and sewage from residences and hotels in coastal
towns are directly discharged into the sea.

•

Pesticides and fertilizers from agriculture
which are washed off the land by rain, enter water courses and eventually reach the
sea.

•

Ships carry many toxic substances such as
oil, liquefied natural gas, pesticides, industrial chemicals, etc. in huge quantities sometimes to the capacity of 350,000 tonnes.
Ship accidents and accidental spillages at
sea therefore can be very damaging to the
marine environment. Shipping channels in
estuaries and at the entrances to ports often require frequent dredging to keep them
open. This dredged material that may contain heavy metals and other contaminants
are often dumped out to sea.

•

Offshore oil exploration and extraction also
pollute the seawater to a large extent.

Petroleum and oils washed off from the
roads normally enter the sewage system but
stormwater overflows carry these materials
into rivers and eventually into the seas.
Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

136

Chapter5.p65

•

136

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

Pollution due to organic wastes
The amount of oxygen dissolved in the water is
vital for the plants and animals living in it.
Wastes, which directly or indirectly affect the
oxygen concentration, play an important role in
determining the quality of the water. Normally
the greatest volume of waste discharged to
watercourses, estuaries and the sea is sewage,
which is primarily organic in nature and is degraded by bacterial activity. Using the oxygen
present in the water these wastes are broken
down into stable inorganic compounds. However as a result of this bacterial activity the oxygen concentration in the water is reduced. When
the oxygen concentration falls below 1.5 mg/
lit, the rate of aerobic oxidation is reduced and
their place is taken over by the anaerobic bacteria that can oxidize the organic molecules without the use of oxygen. This results in end
products such as hydrogen sulphide, ammonia
and methane, which are toxic to many organisms. This process results in the formation of an
anoxic zone which is low in its oxygen content
from which most life disappears except for
anaerobic bacteria, fungi, yeasts and some protozoa. This makes the water foul smelling.
Control measures: One way of reducing the
pollution load on marine waters is through the
introduction of sewage treatment plants. This
will reduce the biological oxygen demand (BOD)
of the final product before it is discharged to
the receiving waters.
Various stages of treatment such as primary,
secondary or advanced can be used depending
on the quality of the effluent that is required to
be treated.
Primary treatment: These treatment plants use
physical processes such as screening and sedimentation to remove pollutants that will settle,
float or, that are too large to pass through simple
screening devices. This includes, stones, sticks,
rags, and all such material that can clog pipes.
A screen consists of parallel bars spaced 2 to
7cms apart followed by a wire mesh with smaller

openings. One way of avoiding the problem of
disposal of materials collected on the screens is
to use a device called a comminuter which grinds
the coarse material into small pieces that can
then be left in the waste water. After screening
the wastewater passes into a grit chamber. The
detention time is chosen to be long enough to
allow lighter, organic material to settle. From
the grit chamber the sewage passes into a primary settling tank (also called as sedimentation
tank) where the flow speed is reduced sufficiently to allow most of the suspended solids to
settle out by gravity. If the waste is to undergo
only primary treatment it is then chlorinated to
destroy bacteria and control odours after which
the effluent is released. Primary treatment normally removes about 35 percent of the BOD and
60 percent of the suspended solids.
Secondary treatment: The main objective of
secondary treatment is to remove most of the
BOD. There are three commonly used approaches: trickling filters, activated sludge process and oxidation ponds. Secondary treatment
can remove at least 85 percent of the BOD.
A trickling filter consists of a rotating distribution arm that sprays liquid wastewater over a
circular bed of ‘fist size’ rocks or other coarse
materials. The spaces between the rocks allow
air to circulate easily so that aerobic conditions
can be maintained. The individual rocks in the
bed are covered with a layer of slime, which
consists of bacteria, fungi, algae, etc. which
degrade the waste trickling through the bed.
This slime periodically slides off individual rocks
and is collected at the bottom of the filter along
with the treated wastewater and is then passed
on to the secondary settling tank where it is removed.
In the activated sludge process the sewage is
pumped into a large tank and mixed for several
hours with bacteria rich sludge and air bubbles
to facilitate degradation by micro-organisms.
The water then goes into a sedimentation tank

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

137

137

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

where most of the microorganisms settle out as
sludge. This sludge is then broken down in an
anaerobic digester where methane-forming
bacteria slowly convert the organic matter into
carbon dioxide, methane and other stable end
products. The gas produced in the digester is
60 percent methane, which is a valuable fuel
and can be put to many uses within the treatment plant itself. The digested sludge, which is
still liquid, is normally pumped out onto sludge
drying beds where evaporation and seepage
remove the water. This dried sludge is potentially a good source of manure. Activated sludge
tanks use less land area than trickling filters with
equivalent performance. They are also less expensive to construct than trickling filters and
have fewer problems with flies and odour and
can also achieve higher rates of BOD removal.
Thus although the operating costs are a little
higher due to the expenses incurred on energy
for running pumps and blowers they are preferred over trickling filters.

Oxidation ponds are large shallow ponds approximately 1 to 2 metres deep where raw or
partially treated sewage is decomposed by microorganisms. They are easy to build and manage and accommodate large fluctuations in flow
and can provide treatment at a much lower cost.
They however require a large amount of land
and hence can be used where land is not a limitation.
Advanced sewage treatment: This involves a
series of chemical and physical process that removes specific pollutants left in the water after
primary and secondary treatment. Sewage treatment plant effluents contain nitrates and phosphates in large amounts. These contribute to
eutrophication. Thus advanced treatment plants
are designed to specifically remove these contaminants. Advanced treatment plants are very
expensive to build and operate and hence are
rarely used.

Tanker operations
Half the world production of crude oil which is
close to three billion tones a year is transported
by sea. After a tanker has unloaded its cargo of
oil it has to take on seawater as ballast for the
return journey. This ballast water is stored in the
cargo compartments that previously contained
the oil. During the unloading of the cargo a certain amount of oil remains clinging to the walls
of the container and this may amount to 800
tonnes in a 200,000 tonne tanker. The ballast
water thus becomes contaminated with this oil.
When a fresh cargo of oil is to be loaded, these
compartments are cleaned with water, which
discharges the dirty ballast along with the oil
into the sea. Two techniques have substantially
reduced this oil pollution. In the load-on-top
system, the compartments are cleaned by high
pressure jets of water. The oily water is retained
in the compartment until the oil floats to the
top. The water underneath that contains only a
little oil is then discharged into the sea and the
oil is transferred to a slop tank. At the loading
terminal, fresh oil is loaded on top of the oil in
the tank and hence the name of the technique.
In the second method called ‘crude oil washing’, the clingage is removed by jets of crude oil
while the cargo is being unloaded. Some modern tankers have segregated ballast where the
ballast water does not come in contact with the
oil. Thus with the introduction of these new
methods of deballasting, the amount of oil entering the sea has been considerably reduced.

Dry docking
All ships need periodic dry docking for servicing, repairs, cleaning the hull, etc. During this
period when the cargo compartments are to
Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

138

Chapter5.p65

Pollution due to oil: Oil pollution of the sea
normally attracts the greatest attention because
of its visibility. There are several sources though
which the oil can reach the sea.

138

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

completely emptied, residual oil finds its way into
the sea.

Bilge and fuel oils
As ballast tanks take up valuable space, additional ballast is sometimes carried in empty fuel
tanks. While being pumped overboard it carries
oil into the sea. Individually the quantity of oil
released may be small but it becomes a considerable amount when all the shipping operations
are taken into consideration.

Tanker accidents
A large number of oil tanker accidents happen
every year. Sometimes this can result in major
disasters such as that of the Exxon Valdez described in the section on water pollution.

Offshore oil production
Oil that is extracted from the seabed contains
some water. Even after it is passed through oil
separators the water that is discharged contains
some oil, which adds to marine pollution. Drilling muds which are pumped down oil wells
when it is being drilled normally contain 70 to
80 percent of oil. They are dumped on the seabed beneath the platform thus heavily contaminating the water. Uncontrolled release of oil
from the wells can be catastrophic events resulting in oil pollution.
Control measures for oil pollution: Cleaning
oil from surface waters and contaminated
beaches is a time consuming labour intensive
process. The natural process of emulsification
of oil in the water can be accelerated through
the use of chemical dispersants which can be
sprayed on the oil. A variety of slick-lickers in
which a continuous belt of absorbent material
dips through the oil slick and is passed through
rollers to extract the oil have been designed.
Rocks, harbour walls can be cleaned with high-

pressure steam or dispersants after which the
surface must be hosed down.
Effects of marine pollution: Apart from causing eutrophication a large amount of organic
wastes can also result in the development of
red tides. These are phytoplankton blooms of
such intensity that the area is discolored. Many
important commercially important marine species are also killed due to clogging of gills or
other structures.
When liquid oil is spilled on the sea it spreads
over the surface of the water to form a thin film
called an oil slick. The rate of spreading and the
thickness of the film depends on the sea temperature and the nature of the oil.
Oil slicks damage marine life to a large extent.
Salt marshes, mangrove swamps are likely to
trap oil and the plants, which form the basis for
these ecosystems thus suffer. For salt marsh
plants, oil slicks can affect the flowering, fruiting and germination.
If liquid oil contaminates a bird’s plumage its
water repellent properties are lost. Water thus
penetrates the plumage and displaces the air
trapped between the feathers and the skin. This
air layer is necessary as it provides buoyancy and
thermal insulation. With this loss the plumage
becomes water logged and the birds may sink
and drown. Even if this does not happen loss of
thermal insulation results in exhaustion of food
reserves in an attempt to maintain body temperature often followed by death. Birds often
clean their plumage by preening and in the process consume oil which depending on its toxicity can lead to intestinal, renal or liver failure.
Drill cuttings dumped on the seabed create anoxic conditions and result in the production of
toxic sulphides in the bottom sediment thus
eliminating the benthic fauna.

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

139

139

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

Fish and shellfish production facilities can also
be affected by oil slicks. The most important
commercial damage can however also come
from tainting which imparts an unpleasant
flavour to fish and seafood and is detectable at
extremely low levels of contamination. This reduces the market value of seafood.

5.2.5 Noise Pollution
Noise may not seem as harmful as the contamination of air or water but it is a pollution problem that affects human health and can
contribute to a general deterioration of environmental quality.
Noise is undesirable and unwanted sound. Not
all sound is noise. What may be considered as
music to one person may be noise to another. It
is not a substance that can accumulate in the
environment like most other pollutants. Sound
is measured in a unit called the ‘Decibel’.

The differences between sound and noise is often subjective and a matter of personal opinion. There are however some very harmful
effects caused by exposure to high sound levels. These effects can range in severity from
being extremely annoying to being extremely
painful and hazardous.

Decibel levels of common sounds

Effects of noise pollution on physical health

dB

Environmental Condition

0

Threshold of hearing

10

Rustle of leaves

20

Broadcasting studio

30

Bedroom at night

40

Library

50

Quiet office

60

Conversational speech (at 1m)

70

Average radio

74

Light traffic noise

90

Subway train

100

Symphony orchestra

110

Rock band

120

Aircraft takeoff

146

Threshold of pain

The most direct harmful effect of excessive noise
is physical damage to the ear and the temporary or permanent hearing loss often called a
temporary threshold shift (TTS). People suffering from this condition are unable to detect
weak sounds. However hearing ability is usually
recovered within a month of exposure. In
Maharashtra people living in close vicinity of
Ganesh mandals that play blaring music for ten
days of the Ganesh festival are usually known
to suffer from this phenomenon. Permanent
loss, usually called noise induced permanent
threshold shift (NIPTS) represents a loss of hearing ability from which there is no recovery.
Below a sound level of 80 dBA haring loss does
not occur at all. However temporary effects are
noticed at sound levels between 80 and 130
dBA. About 50 percent of the people exposed
Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

140

Chapter5.p65

There are several sources of noise pollution that
contribute to both indoor and outdoor noise
pollution. Noise emanating from factories, vehicles, playing of loudspeakers during various
festivals can contribute to outdoor noise pollution while loudly played radio or music systems,
and other electronic gadgets can contribute to
indoor noise pollution. A study conducted by
researchers from the New Delhi based National
Physical Laboratory show that noise generated
by firecrackers (presently available in the market) is much higher than the prescribed levels.
The permitted noise level is 125 decibels, as per
the Environment (Protection) (second amendment) Rules, 1999.

140

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

to 95 dBA sound levels at work will develop
NIPTS and most people exposed to more than
105 dBA will experience permanent hearing loss
to some degree. A sound level of 150 dBA or
more can physically rupture the human eardrum.
The degree of hearing loss depends on the duration as well as the intensity of the noise. For
example, 1hour of exposure to a 100 dBA sound
level can produce a TTS that may last for about
one day. However in factories with noisy machinery workers are subjected to high sound
levels for several hours a day. Exposure to 95
dBA for 8 hours everyday for over a period of
10 years may cause about 15 dBA of NIPTS. In
addition to hearing losses excessive sound levels can cause harmful effects on the circulatory
system by raising blood pressure and altering
pulse rates.

Effects of noise pollution on mental health:
Noise can also cause emotional or psychological effects such as irritability, anxiety and stress.
Lack of concentration and mental fatigue are
significant health effects of noise. It has been
observed that the performance of school children is poor in comprehension tasks when
schools are situated in busy areas of a city and
suffer from noise pollution.
As noise interferes with normal auditory communication, it may mask auditory warning signals and hence increases the rate of accidents
especially in industries. It can also lead to lowered worker efficiency and productivity and
higher accident rates on the job.
Thus noise is just more than a mere nuisance or
annoyance. It definitely affects the quality of life.
It is thus important to ensure mitigation or control of noise pollution.

Permitted noise levels
Ambient Noise Levels dB

Zone

Day-time

Night-time

Silent Zone

50

40

Residential Zone

55

45

Commercial Zone

65

55

Industrial Zone

70

70

A standard safe time limit has been set for exposure to various noise levels. Beyond this ‘safe’
time continuing exposure over a period of a year
will lead to hearing loss.

Duration

dBA

8 hours

90

4 hours

93

2 hours

96

1 hour

99

30 minutes

102

15 minutes

105

7 minutes

108

4 minutes

111

2 minutes

114

1 minute

117

30 seconds

120

Instantaneous rupture of membrane

150

Noise Control techniques
There are four fundamental ways in which noise
can be controlled: Reduce noise at the source,
block the path of noise, increase the path length
and protect the recipient. In general, the best
control method is to reduce noise levels at the
source.

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

141

141

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

Source reduction can be done by effectively
muffling vehicles and machinery to reduce the
noise. In industries noise reduction can be done
by using rigid sealed enclosures around machinery lined with acoustic absorbing material. Isolating machines and their enclosures from the
floor using special spring mounts or absorbent
mounts and pads and using flexible couplings
for interior pipelines also contribute to reducing
noise pollution at the source.
However one of the best methods of noise
source reduction is regular and thorough maintenance of operating machinery. Noise levels at
construction sites can be controlled using proper
construction planning and scheduling techniques. Locating noisy air compressors and other
equipment away from the site boundary along
with creation of temporary barriers to physically
block the noise can help contribute to reducing
noise pollution. Most of the vehicular noise
comes from movement of the vehicle tires on
the pavement and wind resistance. However
poorly maintained vehicles can add to the noise
levels. Traffic volume and speed also have significant effects on the overall sound. For example
doubling the speed increases the sound levels
by about 9 dBA and doubling the traffic volume
(number of vehicles per hour) increases sound
levels by about 3 dBA. A smooth flow of traffic
also causes less noise than does a stop-and-go
traffic pattern. Proper highway planning and
design are essential for controlling traffic noise.
Establishing lower speed limits for highways that
pass through residential areas, limiting traffic
volume and providing alternative routes for truck
traffic are effective noise control measures. The
path of traffic noise can also be blocked by construction of vertical barriers alongside the highway. Planting of trees around houses can also
act as effective noise barriers. In industries different types of absorptive material can be used
to control interior noise. Highly absorptive interior finish material for walls, ceilings and floors
can decrease indoor noise levels significantly.
Sound levels drop significantly with increasing

5.2.6 Thermal Pollution
Sources: The discharge of warm water into a
river is usually called a thermal pollution. It
occurs when an industry removes water from a
source, uses the water for cooling purposes and
then returns the heated water to its source.
Power plants heat water to convert it into steam,
to drive the turbines that generate electricity.
For efficient functioning of the steam turbines,
the steam is condensed into water after it leaves
the turbines. This condensation is done by taking water from a water body to absorb the heat.
This heated water, which is at least 15oC higher
than the normal is discharged back into the
water body.
Effects: The warmer temperature decreases the
solubility of oxygen and increases the metabolism of fish. This changes the ecological balance
of the river. Within certain limits thermal additions can promote the growth of certain fish
and the fish catch may be high in the vicinity of
a power plant. However sudden changes in temperature caused by periodic plant shutdowns
both planned and unintentional can change result in death of these fish that are acclimatized
to living in warmer waters.
Tropical marine animals are generally unable to
withstand a temperature increase of 2 to 30C
Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

142

Chapter5.p65

distance from the noise source. Increasing the
path length between the source and the recipient offers a passive means of control. Municipal land-use ordinances pertaining to the
location of airports make use of the attenuating effect of distance on sound levels. Use of
earplugs and earmuffs can protect individuals
effectively from excessive noise levels. Specially
designed earmuffs can reduce the sound level
reaching the eardrum by as much as 40 dBA.
However very often workers tend not to wear
them on a regular basis despite company requirements for their use.

142

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

and most sponges, mollusks and crustaceans are
eliminated at temperatures above 370C. This
results in a change in the diversity of fauna as
only those species that can live in warmer water survive.
Control measures: Thermal pollution can be
controlled by passing the heated water through
a cooling pond or a cooling tower after it leaves
the condenser. The heat is dissipated into the
air and the water can then be discharged into
the river or pumped back to the plant for reuse
as cooling water. There are several ways in which
thermal pollution can be reduced. One method
is to construct a large shallow pond. Hot water
is pumped into one end of the pond and cooler
water is removed from the other end. The heat
gets dissipated from the pond into the atmosphere. A second method is to use a cooling
tower. These structures take up less land area
than the ponds. Here most of the heat transfer
occurs through evaporation. Here warm waters
coming from the condenser is sprayed downward over vertical sheets or baffles where the
water flows in thin films. Cool air enters the
tower through the water inlet that encircles the
base of the tower and rises upwards causing
evaporative cooling. A natural draft is maintained because of the density difference between the cool air outside and the warmer air
inside the tower. The waste heat is dissipated
into the atmosphere about 100 m above the
base of the tower. The cooled water is collected
at the floor of the tower and recycled back to
the power plant condensers. The disadvantage
in both these methods is however that large
amounts of water are lost by evaporation.

5.2.7 Nuclear Hazards
Nuclear energy can be both beneficial and harmful depending on the way in which it is used.
We routinely use X-rays to examine bones for
fractures, treat cancer with radiation and diagnose diseases with the help of radioactive iso-

topes. Approximately 17 % of the electrical
energy generated in the world comes from
nuclear power plants. However on the other
hand it is impossible to forget the destruction
that nuclear bombs caused the cities of
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. The radioactive wastes
from nuclear energy have caused serious environmental damage.
Nuclear fission is the splitting of the nucleus of
the atom. The resulting energy can be used for
a variety of purposes. The first controlled fission
of an atom was carried out in Germany in 1938.
However the United States was the first country to develop an atomic bomb which was subsequently dropped on the Japanese cities of
Hiroshima and Nagasaki. The world’s first electricity generating reactor was constructed in the
United States in 1951 and the Soviet Union built
its first reactor in 1954. In December 1953, President Dwight D. Eisenhower in his ‘Atoms for
Peace’ speech made the following prediction:
‘Nuclear reactors will produce electricity so
cheaply that it will not be necessary to meter it.
The users will pay a fee and use as much electricity as they want. Atoms will provide a safe,
clean and dependable source of electricity.’
Today however though nuclear power is being
used as a reliable source of electricity the above
statement sounds highly optimistic. Several serious accidents have caused worldwide concern
about safety and disposal of radioactive wastes.
In order to appreciate the consequences of using nuclear fuels to generate energy it is important to understand how the fuel is processed.
Low-grade uranium ore, which contains 0.2
percent uranium by weight, is obtained by surface or underground mining. After it is mined
the ore goes through a milling process where it
is crushed and treated with a solvent to concentrate the uranium and produces yellow cake
a material containing 70 to 90 percent uranium
oxide. Naturally occurring uranium contains only
0.7 percent of fissionable U-235, which is not

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

143

143

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

high enough for most types of reactors. Hence
it is necessary to increase the amount of U-235
by enrichment though it is a difficult and expensive process. The enrichment process increases the U-235 content from 0.7 to 3 percent.
Fuel fabrication then converts the enriched material into a powder, which is then compacted
into pellets. These pellets are sealed in metal
fuel rods about 4 meters in length which is then
loaded into the reactor. As fission occurs the
concentration of U-235 atoms decreases. After
about three years, a fuel rod does not have
enough radioactive material to sustain a chain
reaction and hence the spent fuel rods must be
replaced by new ones. The spent rods are however still very radioactive containing about one
percent U-235 and one percent plutonium.
These rods are a major source of radioactive
waste material produced by a nuclear reactor.
Initially it was thought that spent fuel rods could
be reprocessed to not only provide new fuel but
also to reduce the amount of nuclear waste.
However the cost of producing fuel rods by reprocessing was found to be greater than the
cost of producing fuel rods from ore. Presently
India does operate reprocessing plants to reprocess spent fuel as an alternative to storing them
as nuclear waste. At each step in the cycle there
is a danger of exposure and poses several health
and environmental concerns.
Although nuclear power has significant benefits
an incident which changed people’s attitudes
towards nuclear power plants was the
Chernobyl disaster that occurred in 1986.
Chernobyl is a small city in Ukraine near the
border with Belarus north of Kiev. At 1.00 am
April 25, 1986 a test to measure the amount of
electricity that the still spinning turbine would
produce if steam were shut off was being conducted at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Station4. This was important information since the
emergency core cooling system required energy
for its operation and the coasting turbine could
provide some of that energy until another source

At 1.00am, the operators shut off most of the
emergency warning signals and turned on all
the eight pumps to provide adequate cooling
for the reactor following the completion of the
test. Just as the final stages for the test were
beginning a signal indicated excessive reaction
in the reactor. In spite of the warning the operators blocked the automatic reactor shutdown
and began the test. As the test continued the
power output of the reactor rose beyond its
normal level and continued to rise. The operators activated the emergency system designed
to put the control rods back into the reactor
and stop the fission. But it was already too late.
The core had already been deformed and the
rods would not fit properly thus the reaction
could not be stopped. In 4.5 seconds the energy level of the reactor increased two thousand times. The fuel rods ruptured the cooling
water turned into steam and a steam explosion
occurred. The lack of cooling water allowed the
reactor to explode. The explosion blew the 1000
metric ton concrete roof from the reactor and
the reactor caught fire. This resulted in the
world’s worst nuclear accident and it took ten
days to bring the runaway reaction under control.

Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

144

Chapter5.p65

became available. The amount of steam being
produced was reduced by lowering the control
rods into the reactor. But the test was delayed
because of a demand for electricity and a new
shift of workers came on duty. The operators
failed to program the computer to maintain
power at 700 megawatts and the output
dropped to 30 megawatts. This presented an
immediate need to rapidly increase the power
and many of the control rods were withdrawn.
Meanwhile an inert gas (xenon) had accumulated on the fuel rods. The gas absorbed the
neutrons and slowed the rate of power increase.
In an attempt to obtain more power the operators withdrew all the control rods. This was a
second serious safety violation.

144

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

There were of course immediate fatalities, but
the long-term consequences were devastating.
116,000 people were evacuated of which
24,000 had received high doses of radiation.
Even today many people suffer from illnesses
they feel are related to their exposure to the
fallout from Chernobyl. In 1996 ten years after
the accident it was clear that one of the longterm effects was the increased frequency of
thyroid cancer in children.
The degree and the kind of damage from
nuclear accidents vary with the kind of radiation, the amount of radiation, the duration of
exposure and the types of cells irradiated. Radiation can also cause mutations which are
changes in the genetic makeup of the cells.
Mutations can occur in the ovaries or the testes
leading to the formation of mutated eggs or
sperms which in turn can lead to abnormal offspring. Mutations can also occur in the tissues
of the body ad may manifest themselves as abnormal tissue growths known as cancer. Two
common cancers that are linked to increased
radiation exposure are leukemia and breast cancer.

5.3 SOLID WASTE MANAGEEMNT:
CAUSES, EFFECTS AND CONTROL MEASURES OF URBAN AND INDUSTRIAL
WASTE
In ancient cities, food scraps and other wastes
were simply thrown into the unpaved streets
where they accumulated. Around 320 B.C. in
Athens, the first known law forbidding this practice was established and a system of waste removal began to evolve in several eastern
Mediterranean cities. Disposal methods were
very crude and often were just open pits outside the city walls. As populations increased,
efforts were made to transport the wastes out
further thus creating city dumps. Until recently
the disposal of municipal solid waste did not
attract much public attention. The favoured

means of disposal was to dump solid wastes
outside the city or village limits.
Around most towns and cities in India the approach roads are littered with multi-coloured
plastic bags and other garbage. Waste is also
burnt to reduce its volume. Modern methods
of disposal such as incineration and the development of sanitary landfills, etc. are now attempting to solve these problems. Lack of space
for dumping solid waste has become a serious
problem in several cities and towns all over the
world. Dumping and burning wastes is not an
acceptable practice today from either an environmental or a health perspective. Today disposal of solid waste should be part of an
integrated waste management plan. The
method of collection, processing, resource recovery and the final disposal should mesh with
one another to achieve a common objective.

Characteristics of municipal solid waste
Solid wastes are grouped or classified in several
different ways. These different classifications are
necessary to address the complex challenges of
solid waste management in an effective manner. The term municipal solid waste (MSW) is
generally used to describe most of the non-hazardous solid waste from a city, town or village
that requires routine collection and transport to
a processing or disposal site. Sources of MSW
include private homes, commercial establishments and institutions as well as industrial facilities. However MSW does not include wastes
from industrial processes, construction and
demolition debris, sewage sludge, mining wastes
or agricultural wastes.
Municipal solid waste contains a wide variety of
materials. It can contain food waste such as vegetable and meat material, left over food, egg
shells, etc which is classified as wet garbage as
well as paper, plastic, tetrapacks, plastic cans,
newspaper, glass bottles, cardboard boxes, alu-

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

145

145

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

minum foil, metal items, wood pieces, etc. which
is classified as dry garbage.
Control measures of urban and industrial
wastes: An integrated waste management
strategy includes three main components:
1. Source reduction
2. Recycling
3. Disposal
Source reduction is one of the fundamental
ways to reduce waste. This can be done by using less material when making a product, reuse
of products on site, designing products or packaging to reduce their quantity. On an individual
level we can reduce the use of unnecessary items
while shopping, buy items with minimal packaging, avoid buying disposable items and also
avoid asking for plastic carry bags.
Recycling is reusing some components of the
waste that may have some economic value.
Recycling has readily visible benefits such as conservation of resources reduction in energy used
during manufacture and reducing pollution levels. Some materials such as aluminum and steel
can be recycled many times. Metal, paper, glass
and plastics are recyclable. Mining of new aluminum is expensive and hence recycled aluminum has a strong market and plays a significant
role in the aluminum industry. Paper recycling
can also help preserve forests as it takes about
17 trees to make one ton of paper. Crushed
glass (cullet) reduces the energy required to
manufacture new glass by 50 percent. Cullet
lowers the temperature requirement of the
glassmaking process thus conserving energy and
reducing air pollution. However even if recycling
is a viable alternative, it presents several problems.
The problems associated with recycling are either technical or economical. Plastics are difficult to recycle because of the different types of
polymer resins used in their production. Since
each type has its own chemical makeup differ-

Disposal of solid waste is done most commonly
through a sanitary landfill or through incineration. A modern sanitary landfill is a depression
in an impermeable soil layer that is lined with
an impermeable membrane. The three key characteristics of a municipal sanitary landfill that
distinguish it from an open dump are:
•

Solid waste is placed in a suitably selected
and prepared landfill site in a carefully prescribed manner.

•

The waste material is spread out and compacted with appropriate heavy machinery.

•

The waste is covered each day with a layer
of compacted soil.

The problem with older landfills are associated
with groundwater pollution. Pollutants seeping
out from the bottom of a sanitary landfill
(leachates) very often percolate down to the
groundwater aquifer no matter how thick the
underlying soil layer. Today it is essential to have
suitable bottom liners and leachate collection
systems along with the installation of monitoring systems to detect groundwater pollution.
The organic material in the buried solid waste
Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

146

Chapter5.p65

ent plastics cannot be recycled together. Thus
separation of different plastics before recycling
is necessary. Similarly in recycled paper the fibers are weakened and it is difficult to control
the colour of the recycled product. Recycled
paper is banned for use in food containers to
prevent the possibility of contamination. It very
often costs less to transport raw paper pulp than
scrap paper. Collection, sorting and transport
account for about 90 percent of the cost of
paper recycling. The processes of pulping,
deinking and screening wastepaper are generally more expensive than making paper from
virgin wood or cellulose fibers. Very often thus
recycled paper is more expensive than virgin
paper. However as technology improves the cost
will come down.

146

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

will decompose due to the action of microorganisms. At first the waste decomposes aerobically until the oxygen that was present in the
freshly placed fill is used up by the aerobic microorganisms. The anerobes take over producing methane which is poisonous and highly
explosive when mixed with air in concentrations
between 5 and 15 percent. The movement of
gas can be controlled by providing impermeable
barriers in the landfill. A venting system to collect the blocked gas and vent it to the surface
where it can be safely diluted and dispersed into
the atmosphere is thus a necessary component
of the design of sanitary landfills.
Even though landfilling is an economic alternative for solid waste disposal, it has become increasingly difficult to find suitable landfilling sites
that are within economic hauling distance and
very often citizens do not want landfills in their
vicinity. Another reason is that no matter how
well engineered the design and operation may
be, there is always the danger of some environmental damage in the form of leakage of
leachates.
Incineration is the process of burning municipal solid waste in a properly designed furnace
under suitable temperature and operating conditions. Incineration is a chemical process in
which the combustible portion of the waste is
combined with oxygen forming carbon dioxide
and water, which are released into the atmosphere. This chemical reaction called oxidation
results in the release of heat. For complete oxidation the waste must be mixed with appropriate volumes of air at a temperature of about
815o C for about one hour. Incineration can
reduce the municipal solid waste by about 90
percent in volume and 75 percent in weight.
The risks of incineration however involve airquality problems and toxicity and disposal of the
fly and bottom ash produced during the incineration process. Fly ash consists of finely divided
particulate matter, including cinders, mineral
dust and soot. Most of the incinerator ash is

bottom ash while the remainder is fly ash. The
possible presence of heavy metals in incinerator
ash can be harmful. Thus toxic products and
materials containing heavy metals (for example
batteries and plastics) should be segregated.
Thus extensive air pollution control equipment
and high-level technical supervision and skilled
employees for proper operation and maintenance is required.
Thus while sanitary landfills and incinerators have
their own advantages and disadvantages, the
most effective method of solid waste management is source reduction and recycling.

Vermi – Composting
Nature has perfect solutions for managing the
waste it creates, if left undisturbed. The biogeochemical cycles are designed to clear the
waste material produced by animals and plants.
We can mimic the same methods that are
present in nature. All dead and dry leaves and
twigs decompose and are broken down by organisms such as worms and insects, and is finally broken down by bacteria and fungi, to form
a dark rich soil-like material called compost.
These organisms in the soil use the organic material as food, which provides them with nutrients for their growth and activities. These
nutrients are returned to the soil to be used again
by trees and other plants. This process recycles
nutrients in nature.
This soil can be used as a manure for farms and
gardens.

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

147

147

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

Steps for Vermi-Compost
•

Dig a pit about half a meter square, one
meter deep.

•

Line it with straw or dried leaves and
grass.

•

Organize the disposal of organic waste
into the pit as and when generated.

•

Introduce a culture of worms that is now
produced commercially.

•

Ensure that the contents are covered
with a sprinkling of dried leaves and soil
everyday.

•

Water the pit once or twice a week to
keep it moist.

•

Turn over the contents of the pit ever
15 days.

•

In about 45 days the waste will be decomposed by the action of the microorganisms.

•

The soil derived is fertile and rich in nutrients.

Characteristics of hazardous wastes
A waste is classified as a hazardous waste if it
exhibits any of the four primary characteristics
based on the physical or chemical properties of
toxicity, reactivity, ignitability and corrosivity. In
addition to this waste products that are either
infectious or radioactive are also classified as
hazardous

Toxic wastes are those substances that are poisonous even in very small or trace amounts.
Some may have an acute or immediate effect
on humans or animals causing death or violent
illness. Others may have a chronic or long term
effect slowly causing irreparable harm to exposed persons. Acute toxicity is readily apparent because organisms respond to the toxin
shortly after being exposed. Chronic toxicity is
much more difficult to determine because the
effects may not be seen for years. Certain toxic
wastes are known to be carcinogenic, causing
cancer and others may be mutagenic causing
biological changes in the children of exposed
people and animals.
Reactive wastes are those that have a tendency
to react vigorously with air or water, are unstable to shock or heat, generate toxic gases or
explode during routine management. For example, gunpowder, nitroglycerine, etc.

Hazardous wastes
Modern society produces large quantities of
hazardous waste which are generated by chemical manufacturing companies, petroleum refineries, paper mills, smelters and other industries.
Hazardous wastes are those that can cause harm
to humans or the environment. Wastes are normally classified as hazardous waste when they
cause or significantly contribute to an increase
in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible
or incapacitating reversible illness or pose a sub-

Ignitable wastes are those that burn at relatively
low temperatures (less than 60 C) and are capable of spontaneous combustion during storage, transport or disposal. For example, gasoline,
paint thinners, and alcohol.
Corrosive wastes are those that destroy materials and living tissue by chemical reaction. For
example, acids and bases.
Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

148

Chapter5.p65

stantial present or potential hazard to human
health or the environment when improperly
treated, stored, transported or disposed of.

148

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

Infectious wastes include human tissue from
surgery, used bandages and hypodermic
needles, microbiological materials, etc.

shortening their life span. Lead may also damage nerve tissue which can result in brain disease.

Radioactive waste is basically an output from
the nuclear power plants and can persist in the
environment for thousands of years before it
decays appreciably.

Mercury occurs in several different forms. Mercury is used in the production of chlorine. It is
also used as a catalyst in the production of some
plastics. Industrial processes such as the production of chlorine and plastics are responsible for
most of the environmental damage resulting
from mercury. Our body has a limited ability to
eliminate mercury. In the food web mercury
becomes more concentrated as it is taken up by
various organisms. In an aquatic environment,
mercury can be absorbed by the plankton which
are then consumed by fish. In addition, fish take
up mercury through their gills and by eating

Environmental problems and health risks
caused by hazardous wastes.
As most of the hazardous wastes are disposed
of on or in land the most serious environmental
effect is contaminated groundwater. Once
groundwater is polluted with hazardous wastes
it is very often not possible to reverse the damage.
Pesticides are used increasingly to protect and
increase food production. They form residues
in the soil which are washed into streams which
then carry them forwards. The residues may
persist in the soil or in the bottom of lakes and
rivers. Exposure can occur through ingestion,
inhalation and skin contact resulting in acute or
chronic poisoning. Today we have an alternative to the excess use of pesticides through the
use of Integrated Pest Management (IPM). The
IPM system uses a wide variety of plants and
insects to create a more natural process. The
natural balance between climate, soil and insect populations can help to prevent an insect
from overpopulating an area and destroying a
particular crop.
Lead, mercury and arsenic are hazardous substances which are often referred to as heavy
metals. Lead is an abundant heavy metal and is
relatively easy to obtain. It is used in batteries,
fuel, pesticides, paints, pipes and other places
where resistance to corrosion is required. Most
of the lead taken up by people and wildlife is
stored in bones. Lead can affect red blood cells
by reducing their ability to carry oxygen and

Minamata-An important lesson about
mercury
A case of human mercury poisoning which
occurred about forty years ago in the
Minamata bay in Japan taught the world an
important lesson about the dangers of mercury poisoning. A large plastics plant located
near the Minamata bay used a mercury containing compound in a reaction to produce
vinyl chloride a common plastic material. The
left over mercury was dumped into the Bay
along with other wastes from the plant.
Though the mercury was in its less toxic inorganic state when dumped microorganisms
at the bottom of the bay converted the mercury into its organic form. This organic mercury then entered into the tissues of fish
which were in turn consumed by the people
living in the area. The contaminated fish thus
caused an outbreak of poisoning killing and
affecting several people. Mothers who had
eaten the contaminated fish gave birth to
infants who showed signs of mercury poisoning. Mercury poisoning is thus called
Minamata Disease.

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

149

149

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

other fish contaminated with mercury. Generally older the fish greater is the mercury concentration in its body. Birds that eat the fish
concentrate even more mercury in their bodies.
It is a cumulative poison ( it builds up in the body
over long periods of time) and is known to cause
brain damage.
Thousands of chemicals are used in industry
everyday. When used incorrectly or inappropriately they can become health hazards. PCBs
(Polychlorinated biphenyls) are resistant to fire
and do not conduct electricity very well which
makes them excellent materials for several industrial purposes. Rainwater can wash PCBs out
of disposal areas in dumps and landfills thus
contaminating water. PCBs do not break down
very rapidly in the environment and thus retain
their toxic characteristics. They cause long term
exposure problems to both humans and wildlife. PCBs are concentrated in the kidneys and
liver and thus cause damage. They cause reproductive failure in birds and mammals.
Vinyl chloride is a chemical that is widely used
in the manufacture of plastic. Usually people are
only exposed to high levels of vinyl chloride if
they work with it or near it but exposure can
also occur from vinyl chloride gas leaks. After a
long continuous exposure (one to three years)
in humans, vinyl chloride can cause deafness,
vision problems, circulation disorders and bone
deformities. Vinyl chloride can also cause birth
defects.
It is essential to substitute the use of PCBs and
vinyl chloride with chemicals that are less toxic.
Polyvinyl chloride use can be lowered by reducing our use of plastics. Thus by reducing waste,
encouraging recycling and using products that
are well made and durable we can greatly reduce our consumption of these chemicals thus
curtailing our exposure to these substances.
We may not realize it but many household
chemicals can be quite toxic to humans as well

Today the most common methods for disposing off hazardous wastes are land disposal and
incineration. In countries where there is abundant land available for disposal for example,
North America land disposal is the most widely
used method. In countries like Europe and Japan where land is not readily available and is
expensive, incineration is the preferred method
for disposal. In spite of strong laws however illegal dumping of these wastes continues. Hazardous waste management must move beyond
burying and burning. Industries need to be encouraged to generate less hazardous waste in
their manufacturing processes. Although toxic
wastes cannot be entirely eliminated, technologies are available for minimizing, recycling and
treating wastes. An informed public can also
contribute in a big way towards this end. It is
essential for us to understand the ill effects of
chemical substances so that we can make informed decisions about its use. We might decide that the benefits of the use of a toxic
substance do not outweigh the risks and choose
not to use it at all or we may decide that it is
acceptable to use a substance under certain
specific circumstances where it is adequately
controlled and exposure to toxic levels is prevented.

5.4 ROLE OF AN INDIVIDUAL IN PREVENTION OF POLLUTION
There are a host of environmental problems
caused by human actions on the environment.
If we are to respond to these problems we have
to recognize that each of us is individually responsible for the quality of the environment we
live in. Our personal actions can either worsen
or improve our environmental quality. Several
Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

150

Chapter5.p65

as wildlife. Most of the dangerous substances
in our homes are found in various kinds of cleaners, solvents and products used in automotive
care. When these products are used incorrectly
they have the potential to be harmful.

150

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

people may feel that environmental problems
can be solved with quick technological fixes.
While a majority of individuals would want a
cleaner environment, not many of them want
to make major changes in their lifestyle that
could contribute to a cleaner environment. Decisions and actions taken by individuals to a very
large extent determine the quality of life for
everyone. This necessitates that individuals
should not only be aware of various environmental issues and the consequences of their
actions on the environment but should also
make a firm resolve to develop environmentally
ethical lifestyles.
With the help of solar energy, natural processes
developed over billions of years can indefinitely
renew the topsoil, water, air, forests, grasslands
and wildlife on which all forms of life depend,
but only as long as we do not use these potentially renewable resources faster than they are
replenished. Some of our wastes can be diluted,
decomposed and recycled by natural processes
indefinitely as long as these processes are not
overloaded. Natural processes also provide services of flood prevention, erosion control at no
costs at all. We must therefore learn to value
these resources and use them sustainably.

•

Try to plant trees wherever you can and
more importantly take care of them. They
reduce air pollution.

•

Reduce the use of wood and paper products wherever possible. Manufacturing paper leads to pollution and loss of forests
which releases oxygen and takes up carbon
dioxide. Try to recycle paper products and
use recycled paper wherever possible.

•

From the mail you receive reuse as many
envelopes that you can.

•

Do not buy furniture, doors, window frames
made from tropical hardwoods such as teak
and mahogany. These are forest based.

•

Help in restoring a degraded area near your
home or join in an afforestation program.

•

Use pesticides in your home only when absolutely necessary and use them in as small
amounts as necessary. Some insect species
help to keep a check on the populations of
pest species.

•

Advocate organic farming by asking your
grocery store to stock vegetables and fruits
grown by an organic method. This will automatically help to reduce the use of pesticides.

•

Reduce the use of fossil fuels by either walking up a short distance using a car pool,
sharing a bike or using public transport. This
reduces air pollution.

•

Shut off the lights and fans when not
needed.

•

Don’t use aerosol spray products and commercial room air fresheners. They damage
the ozone layer.

Concepts that help individuals contribute towards a better quality of our environment and
human life.
•

Develop respect or reverence for all forms
of life.

•

Each individual must try to answer four basic questions:
Where do the things that I consume
come from?
What do I know about the place where
I live?
How am I connected to the earth and
other living things?
What is my purpose and responsibility
as a human being?

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

151

151

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

•

Do not pour pesticides, paints, solvents, oil
or other products containing harmful chemicals down the drain or on the ground.

•

Start individual or community composting
or vemicomposting plants in your neighborhood and motivate people to join in.

•

Buy consumer goods that last, keep them
as long as possible and have them repaired
as far as possible instead of disposing them
off. Such products end up in landfills that
could pollute ground water.

•

Do not litter the roads and surroundings just
because the sweeper from the Municipal
Corporation will clean it up. Take care to
put trash into dustbins or bring it back home
with you where it can be appropriately disposed.

•

Buy consumer goods ages in refillable glass
containers instead of cans or throwaway
bottles.

•

You must realize that you cannot do everything and have solutions for every problem
in the world. You can however concentrate
on issues that you feel strongly about and
can do something about. Focusing your
energy on a particular issue will help you
get better results.

•

You could join any of the several NGOs that
exist in our country or become volunteers.
Organize small local community meetings
to discuss positive approaches of pollution
prevention.

•

Learn about the biodiversity of your own
area. Understand the natural and cultural
assets. This would help you to develop a
sense of pride in your city/town/village and
will also help you understand the problems
facing their survival.

•

Use rechargeable batteries.

•

Try to avoid asking for plastic carry bags
when you buy groceries or vegetables or
any other items. Use your own cloth bag
instead.

•

Use sponges and washable cloth napkins,
dish towels and handkerchiefs instead of
paper ones.

•

Don’t use throwaway paper and plastic
plates and cups when reusable versions are
available.

•

Recycle all newspaper, glass, aluminum and
other items accepted for recycling in your
area. You might have to take a little trouble
to locate such dealers.

•

Set up a compost bin in your garden or terrace and use it to produce manure for your
plants to reduce use of fertilizers.

You cannot improve your world by not voting. You have the option to make a choice
rather than complain later on.

•

It is important that you do not get discouraged at the first sign of trouble. Do not dwell
on the negative aspects. But take positive
actions wherever you can to make the world
a better place to live in.

•

When talking to elected officials always be
courteous and reasonable. You may disagree with a particular position but be re-

•

•

Try to lobby and push for setting up garbage separation and recycling programs in
your localities.

•

Choose items that have the least packaging or no packaging.

Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

152

Chapter5.p65

152

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

spectful in doing so as you will gain little by
being hostile and brash.
•

Take care to put into practice what you
preach. Remember environment protection
begins with YOU.

5.5 POLLUTION CASE STUDIES
A case study of groundwater pollution in
India
An example of groundwater pollution caused
by excessive extraction is that fluoride contamination. Fluorisis is not a localized problem. It has
spread across 19 states and across a variety of
ecological regions ranging from the Thar desert,
the Gangetic plains and the Deccan plateau.
Each of these regions are distinct in terms of
rainfall, soil type, groundwater recharge regime,
climatic conditions and hydrology. High fluoride
concentration in groundwater is a natural phenomenon in several countries such as China, Sri
Lanka, West Indies, Spain, Holland, Italy and
Mexico. Experts claim that a fluoride belt
stretches across the Middle East across Pakistan
and India and then into Southeast Asia and the
South of China. According to a report of the
Rajiv Gandhi National Drinking Water mission,
the bedrock of the Indian peninsula consists of
a number of fluoride bearing minerals. When
the bedrock weathers the fluoride leaches into
water and the soil. Although the Indian peninsular bedrock has always been the same, this
problem has only surfaced during the last three
decades. This is related to the over extraction of
groundwater which has resulted in the tapping
of aquifers with high fluoride concentrations.
The beginnings of this phenomenon can be
traced back to the 1970s and the 1980s when
there was massive state investment in rural
water development for irrigation as well as for
drinking. Encouraged by state subsidies on diesel and electricity, people invested in diesel and

submersible pumps in a bid to extract groundwater through borewells. This policy aggravated
the fluoride problem.
Fluoride mainly enters the human body through
drinking water where 96 to 99 percent of it
combines with the bones as it has an affinity for
calcium phosphate in the bones. Excess intake
of fluoride can lead to dental fluorosis, skeletal
fluorosis or non-skeletal fluorosis. Dental fluorosis is characterized by discoloured, blackened,
mottled or chalky white teeth. Skeletal fluorosis
leads to severe and permanent bone and joint
deformities. Non-skeletal fluorosis leads to
gastro-intestinal problems and neurological disorders. Fluoride can damage the foetus and
adversely affect the IQ of children.
Once fluoride is detected in water, the only solution is to deflouridate it. Various technologies
are available for this process. However the type
of technology to be selected depends upon the
fluoride levels in the water and the volume of
water to be deflouridated. None of the Indian
technologies are however fool-proof.
Deflouridation plants and household water treatment kits are stop-gap solutions.

A case study of pesticide pollution in India
One of the most terrifying effects of pesticide
contamination of ground water came to light
when pesticide residues were found in bottled
water. Between July and December 2002, the
Pollution Monitoring Laboratory of the New
Delhi based Center for Science and Environment
(CSE) analysed 17 brands of bottled water both
packaged drinking water and packaged natural
mineral water commonly sold in areas that fall
within the national capital region of Delhi. Pesticide residues of organochlorine and organophosphorus pesticides which are most
commonly used in India were found in all the
samples. Among organochlorines, gammahexachlorocyclohexane (lindane) and DDT were

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

153

153

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

prevalent while among organophosphorus pesticides, Malathion and Chlorpyrifos were most
common. All these were present above permissible limits specified by the European Economic
Community, which is the norm, used all over
Europe.
One may wonder as to how these pesticide residues get into bottled water that is manufactured by several big companies. This can be
traced to several facts. There is no regulation
that the bottled water industry must be located
in ‘clean’ zones. Currently the manufacturing
plants of most brands are situated in the dirtiest
industrial estates or in the midst of agricultural
fields. Most companies use bore wells to pump
out water from the ground from depths varying from 24m to even 152 m below the ground.
The raw water samples collected from the plants
also reveled the presence of pesticide residues.
This clearly indicated that the source of pesticide residues in the polluted groundwater are
used to manufacture the bottled water. This is
despite the fact that all bottled water plants use
a range of purification methods. Thus obviously
the fault lies in the treatment methods used.
These plants use the membrane technology
where the water is filtered using membranes
with ultra-small pores to remove fine suspended
solids and all bacteria and protozoa and even
viruses. While nanofiltration can remove insecticides and herbicides it is expensive and thus
rarely used. Most industries also use an activated
charcoal adsorption process, which is effective
in removing organic pesticides but not heavy
metals. To remove pesticides the plants use reverse osmosis and granular activated charcoal
methods. Thus even though manufacturers
claim to use these process the presence of pesticide residues points to the fact that either
manufacturers do not use the treatment process effectively or only treat a part of the raw
water.

Similarly six months after CSE reported pesticide residues in bottled water it also found these
pesticides in popular cold drink brands sold
across the country. This is because the main ingredient in a cold drink or a carbonated nonalcoholic beverage is water and there are no
standards specified for water to be used in these
beverages in India.
There were no standards for bottled water in
India till on September 29, 2000 the Union Ministry of Health and Family Welfare issued a notification (no759(E)) amending the Prevention of
Food Adulteration Rules, 1954. The BIS (Bureau
of Indian Standards) certification mark became
mandatory for bottled water from March 29,
2001. However the parameters for pesticide
residues remained ambiguous. Following the
report published by CSE in Down to Earth, Vol
11, no. 18, a series of Committees were established and eventually on 18th July 2003 amendments were made in the Prevention of Food
Adulteration Rules stating that pesticide residues
considered individually should not exceed
0.0001mg.lit and the total pesticide residues will
not be more than 0.0005 mg/lit that the analysis shall be conducted by using internationally
established test methods meeting the residue
limits specified herein. This notification came into
force from January 1, 2004.

A case study of river pollution in India
Almost all the rivers in India are polluted. The
causes of pollution may also be more or less similar. This is a case study of the river Damodar as
reported in Down to Earth. The 563 km long
Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

154

Chapter5.p65

The low concentration of pesticide residues in
bottled water do not cause acute or immediate
effect. However repeated exposure even to extremely miniscule amounts can result in chronic
effects like cancer, liver and kidney damage,
disorders of the nervous system, damage to the
immune system and birth defects.

154

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

Damodar river originates near Chandwa village
in the Chhotanagpur hills in Bihar’s Palamau
district. It flows through one of the richest mineral belts in the world before draining into the
Hooghly, about 50 km south of Calcutta. Indian industry depends heavily on this region as
60 percent of the coal consumed in our country
comes from the Chhotanagpur belt. Coal based
industries of all types dot the area because of
locational advantages and the easy availability
of water and power. In addition various industries such as the steel, cement, fertilizer and
explosive plants are also located here. The river
Damodar is polluted with minerals, mine rejects
and toxic effluents. Both its water and its sand
are infested by coal dust and waste from these
industries. There are seven thermal power plants
in the Damodar valley. The states of Bihar and
West Bengal depend almost entirely on this area
for their power requirements. These power
plants not only consume a lot of water but also
dump ash in the valley.

Mining
As underground mines cannot keep pace with
the rising demand, 60 percent of the coal extracted from the area comes from open cast
mines which are responsible for serious land
degradation. The disposal of rock and soil extracted along with the coal only adds to the
problem.

Industries
The industries in the area do not have proper
effluent treatment plants. Among the big coal
based industries the washeries account for the
bulk of the pollution in terms of the total suspended solids (TSS), oil and grease. About 20
percent of the coal handled goes out in the form
of slurry which is deposited in the ponds outside. After the slurry settles, coalfine (the sediment) is collected manually. Due to inadequate
retrieval methods very often the water discharges into the river from the pond carries high

amounts of fine coal particles and oil thus polluting the river. The other major coal based polluters are the coke oven plants that heat coal to
temperatures as high as 1100oC in the absence
of oxygen to prepare it for use in blast furnaces
and foundries. The volatile components in the
coal are removed, leaving hot, non-volatile coke
in the oven which is washed with huge quantities of water. This water that contains oil and
suspended particles is then discharged into the
river.

Flyash from the thermal power plants
Only one of the thermal power plants has an
electrostatic precipitator to collect the fly ash
while the other just make do with mechanical
dust collectors. As most of these plants are located on the banks of the river the fly ash eventually finds its way into the river. The bottom
ash from the boilers is mixed with water to form
a slurry which is then drained into ash ponds.
Most of the ponds are full and in several cases
the drainage pipes are choked. The slurry is
therefore directly discharged into the river.

Effects
The river and its tributaries are the largest source
of drinking water for the huge population that
lives in the valley. On April 2, 1990 about
200,000 litres of furnace oil spilled into the river
from the Bokaro Steel Plant. This oil traveled
150 km downstream to Durgapur. For a week
after the incident five million people drank contaminated water in which the oil levels were 40
to 80 times higher than the permissible value of
0.03 mg/l.
The Damodar Action Plan an end-of-the pipe
pollution treatment scheme seeks to tackle effluents. One viable option could be to switch to
less polluting industries and cleaner technology.
This would need strong Government initiative
and also a mass movement by people.

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

155

155

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

5.6 DISASTER MANAGEMENT: FLOODS,
EARTHQUAKES, CYCLONES, LANDSLIDES
The Indian subcontinent is very vulnerable to
droughts, floods, cyclones, earthquakes, landslides, avalanches and forest fires. Among the
36 states and Union territories in the country,
22 are prone to disasters.
Among all the disasters that occur in the country, floods are the most frequently occurring
natural disasters, due to the irregularities of the
Indian monsoon. About 75 percent of the annual rainfall in India is concentrated in three to
four months of the monsoon season. As a result there is a very heavy discharge from the
rivers during this period causing widespread
floods. Approximately 40 million hectares of land
in the country has been identified as being prone
to floods. Major floods are mainly caused in the
Ganga-Brahmaputra-Meghna basin which carries 60 percent of the total river flow of our country.

From management to mitigation of disasters

India has a long coastline of 5700 kms, which is
exposed to tropical cyclones arising in the Bay
of Bengal and the Arabian sea. The Indian Ocean
is one of the six major cyclone prone regions of
the world. In India, cyclones occur usually between April and May and also between October and December. The eastern coastline is more
prone to cyclones as it is hit by about 80 percent of the total cyclones generated in the region.

It is evident today that human activities are responsible for accelerating the frequency and
severity of natural disasters. Natural occurrences
such as floods, earthquakes, cyclones, etc. will
always occur. They are a part of the environment that we live in. However destruction from
natural hazards can be minimized by the presence of a well functioning warning system combined with preparedness on part of the
community that will be affected. Thus though
traditionally disaster management consisted primarily of reactive mechanisms, the past few
years have witnessed a gradual shift towards a
more proactive, mitigation based approach.

Droughts are a perennial feature in some states
of India. Sixteen percent of the country’s total
area is drought prone. Drought is a significant
environmental problem as it is caused by a lower
than average rainfall over a long period of time.
Most of the drought prone areas identified by
the Government lie in the arid and semi-arid
areas of the country.
Earthquakes are considered to be one of the
most destructive natural hazards. The impact of

Till very recently the approach towards dealing
with natural disasters has been post disaster
management involving problems such as evacuation, warnings, communications, search and
rescue, fire-fighting, medical and psychiatric
assistance, provision of relief, shelter, etc. After
the initial trauma and the occurrence of the
natural disaster is over and reconstruction and
rehabilitation is done by people, NGOs and the
Government, its memories are relegated to history.

Disaster management is a multidisciplinary area
in which a wide range of issues that range from
forecasting, warning, evacuation, search and
rescue, relief, reconstruction and rehabilitation
are included. It is also multi-sectoral as it involves
administrators, scientists, planners, volunteers
and communities. These roles and activities span
Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

156

Chapter5.p65

this phenomenon occurs with so little warning
that it is almost impossible to make preparations against damages and collapse of buildings.
About 50 to 60 percent of India is vulnerable to
seismic activity of varying intensities. Most of
the vulnerable areas are located in the Himalayan and sub-Himalayan regions.

156

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

the pre-disaster, during disaster and post disaster plans. Since their activities are complementary as well as supplementary to each other there
is a critical need for coordinating these activities.
In order to transfer the benefits of scientific research and development to the communities
links must be developed between scientific communities and field agencies. Coordination between Government agencies and NGOs needs
to be built up so that overlap of activities may
be avoided and linkages between the Government and communities are established.
Today we have a range of early warning systems for a range of natural hazards. Although
they are more accurate than before and can help
in prediction it is not enough to ensure communities are safe from disasters. This is where disaster mitigation can play an important role.
Mitigation means lessening the negative impact
of the natural hazards. It is defined as sustained
action taken to reduce long term vulnerability
of human life and property to natural hazards.
While the preparatory, response and the recovery phases of emergency management relate
to specific events, mitigation activities have the
potential to produce repetitive benefits over
time.
Certain guidelines if followed can result in an
effective mitigation program.
•

Pre-disaster mitigation can help in ensuring
faster recovery from the impacts of disasters.

•

Mitigation measures must ensure protection of the natural and cultural assets of the
community.

•

Hazard reduction methods must take into
account the various hazards faced by the
affected community and their desires and
priorities.

•

Any mitigation program must also ensure
effective partnership between Government,
scientific, private sector, NGOs and the community.

The main elements of a mitigation strategy are
as follows:

Risk assessment and Vulnerability analysis
This involves identification of hot spot areas of
prime concern, collection of information on past
natural hazards, information of the natural ecosystems and information on the population and
infrastructure. Once this information is collected
a risk assessment should be done to determine
the frequency, intensity, impact and the time
taken to return to normalcy after the disaster.
The assessment of risk and vulnerabilities will
need to be revised periodically. A regular mechanism will therefore have to be established for
this. The use of Geographical Information Systems (GIS) a computer program can be a valuable tool in this process as the primary data can
be easily updated and the corresponding assessments can be made.

Applied research and technology transfer
There is a need to establish or upgrade observation equipment and networks, monitor the
hazards properly, improve the quality of forecasting and warning, disseminate information
quickly through the warning systems and undertake disaster simulation exercises.
Thus space technologies such as remote sensing, satellite communications and Global Positioning Systems have a very important role to
play. Government organizations like ISRO (Indian Space Research Organization) can play a
vital role. Similarly Government organizations
the National Building Research Organization, the
Meteorological Department, Irrigation Department, etc. can undertake applied research for
devising locale specific mitigation strategies in

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

157

157

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

collaboration with educational institutions or
Universities.
Such steps could lead to the formulation of locale specific mitigation measures. A combination of scientific knowledge and expertise with
the community based mitigation measures
would not only enhance the database but would
also form the basis of a successful mitigation
strategy.

Public awareness and training
One of the most critical components of a mitigation strategy is the training to be imparted to
the officials and staff of the various departments
involved at the state and the district level. This
enables sharing of information and methodology. The success of a mitigation strategy will
depend to a large extent on the inter-sectional,
inter-departmental coordination and efficient
teamwork. Thus a training program that is designed after assessment of gaps in knowledge,
skills and attitude with respect to the various
tasks that need to be undertaken is a vital component.

Institutional mechanisms
The most important need at the National level
is to strengthen or develop the capacity to undertake disaster mitigation strategies. There is
a need to emphasize on proactive and pre-disaster measures rather than post disaster response. It is thus essential to have a permanent
administrative structure which can monitor the
developmental activities across departments and
provides suggestions for necessary mitigation
measures. The National Disaster Management
Center (NDMC) can perform such a task. Professionals like architects, structural engineers,
doctors, chemical engineers who are involved
with management of hazardous chemicals can
be asked to form groups that can design specific mitigation measures.

Landuse planning and regulations
Long term disaster reduction efforts should aim
at promoting appropriate land-use in the disaster prone areas. Separation of industrial areas
from residential areas, maintaining wetlands as
buffer zones for floods, creation of public awareness of proper land practices and formation of
land-use policies for long term sustainable development is imperative.

Hazard resistant design and construction
In areas that are prone to disasters protection
can be enhanced by careful selection of sites
and the way the buildings are built. Thus it is
essential to promote the knowledge of disaster
resistant construction techniques and practices
among engineers, architects and technical personnel.

Structural and Constructional reinforcement of
existing buildings
It is also possible to reduce the vulnerability of
existing buildings through minor adaptations or
alterations thereby ensuring their safety. This can
be done by insertion of walls on the outside of
the building, buttresses, walls in the interior of
the building, portico fill-in-walls, specially anEnvironmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

158

Chapter5.p65

Incentives and resources for mitigation
To a very large extent the success of mitigation
programs will depend upon the availability of
continued funding. There is thus a need to develop mechanisms to provide stable sources of
funding for all mitigation programs. This will
include incentives for relocation of commercial
and residential activities outside the disaster
prone areas. Housing finance companies should
make it mandatory for structures in such hazard prone areas to follow special building specifications. The introduction of disaster linked
insurance should be explored and should cover
not only life but also household goods, cattle,
structures and crops.

158

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

chored frames, covering of columns and beams,
construction of new frame system, placing residential electrical equipment above flood level,
designing water storage tanks to be able to withstand cyclonic winds, earthquakes and floods,
etc.

•

Prevention of over-bank spilling by the construction of embankments and floodwalls.

•

Improvement of flow conditions in the channel and anti-erosion measures.

•

Improved drainage.

Floods and mitigation measures
The lower plain regions of India in particular
Bihar, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal in respect
of the Ganga and Assam in respect of the
Brahmaputra suffer from the adverse effects of
floods every year. The Ganga Brahmaputra basin receives maximum run off within the three
monsoon months. Based on hydrological studies carried out, it is estimated that only 18 percent of the rainwater can be stored in dams,
reservoirs, etc. while 82 percent of the rainwater flows through rivers ultimately into the sea.
Floods are therefore a recurring phenomenon
in our country.
Floods can be caused by natural, ecological or
anthropogenic factors either individually or as a
combined result. Anthropogenic activities such
as deforestation and shifting cultivation can also
contribute to floods. Forests on the hill slopes
normally exert a sponge effect soaking up the
abundant rainfall and storing it before releasing it in small amounts over a period of time.
However when the forests are cleared the rivers turn muddy and swollen during the wet
monsoon season and run dry later on in the year
during the drier periods. An increasing proportion of the rainfall is therefore released shortly
after precipitation in the form of floods.
The mitigation measures for floods include both
structural and non-structural measures. The
structural measures include:
•

Reservoirs for impounding monsoon flows
to be released in a regulated manner after
the peak flood flow passes.

The non-structural measures include:
•

Flood plain management such as Flood Plain
Zoning and Flood Proofing including Disaster Preparedness

•

Maintaining wetlands

•

Flood forecasting and warning services

•

Disaster relief, flood fighting and public
health measures

•

Flood insurance

Earthquakes and mitigation measures
It has been several years since the earthquake
struck Gujarat on January 26, 2001. In these
years rehabilitation has been done on a massive
scale. Gujarat’s experience has taught that building shelters with less vulnerability to earthquakes
should also take into consideration the specific
needs of the victims instead of being a top down
approach. The role of NGOs in this is very important. Their strength lies in their manpower,
informality in operations and valuable human
resources. Their ability to reach out to the community and sensitivity to local traditions is an
asset in such situations. A report on the various
initiatives in Gujarat reported in Down to Earth
(Vol 12, No. 2) by Mihir Bhatt throws light on
the various developments that have taken place
after the earthquake. According to the report
the initiatives of the International Fund for

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

159

159

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

Agriculture Development in supporting the Self
Employed Women’s Association and the
Government’s initiative in community based livelihood security for earthquakes and drought victims have the potential to shape future disaster
response and development projects in Gujarat.
Similarly the Gujarat Woman’s Economic Development Corporation initiative in reviving
women’s businesses after the calamity also provides many practical lessons in regenerating local economies and artisan markets. This project
supported by the Asian Development Bank, puts
premium on investments in income generation
and asset building after a natural disaster. The
farming kits provided to affected farmers by
Gujarat’s agriculture ministry is also showing
promising results after two seasons. The author
however states that coordination between Government, local NGOs and local community initiatives both for rescue as well as rehabilitation
needs to be strengthened as this can cause delays, overlaps and waste of relief material and
efforts.

Cyclones and mitigation measures
Tropical cyclones are the worst natural hazards
in the tropics. They are large revolving vortices
in the atmosphere extending horizontally from
150 to1000 km and vertically from the surface
to 12 to 14 km. These are intense low-pressure
areas. Strong winds spiraling anti clockwise in
the Northern Hemisphere blow around the cyclone center at the lower level. At the higher
levels the sense of rotation is just opposite to
that at the lower level. They generally move 300
to 5000 km per day over the ocean. While moving over the ocean they pick up energy from
the warm water of the ocean and some of them
grow into a devastating intensity. On an average about 5 to 6 tropical cyclones form in the
Bay of Bengal and the Arabian Sea every year
out of which 2 to 3 may be severe. More cyclones form in the Bay of Bengal than in the
Arabian Sea. The main dangers from cyclones

Although one cannot control cyclones, the effects of cyclones can be mitigated through effective and efficient mitigation policies and
strategies. A brief description of the same is
given below.

Installation of early warning systems: Such systems fitted along the coastlines can greatly assist forecasting techniques thus helping in early
evacuation of people in the storm surge areas.
Developing communication infrastructure: Communication plays a vital role in cyclone disaster
mitigation and yet this is one of the first services that gets disrupted during cyclones. Amateur Radio has today emerged as a second line
unconventional communications systems and is
an important tool for disaster mitigation.
Developing shelter belts: Shelter belts with plantations of trees can act as effective wind and
tide breakers. Apart from acting as effective
windbreakers and protecting soil crops from
being damaged they prevent soil erosion.
Developing community cyclone shelters: Cyclone
shelters at strategic locations can help minimizing the loss of human life. In the normal course
these shelters can be used as public utility buildings.

Construction of permanent houses: There is a
need to build appropriately designed concrete
houses that can withstand high winds and tidal
waves.
Training and education: Public awareness programs that inform the population about their
response to cyclone warnings and preparedness
can go a long way in reducing causalities.
Environmental Studies for Undergraduate Courses

160

Chapter5.p65

are very strong winds, torrential rains and high
storm tides. Most of the causalities are caused
by coastal inundation by storm tides. This is often followed by heavy rainfall and floods. Storm
surges cause the greatest destruction.

160

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

Landuse control and settlement planning: No
residential and industrial units should be ideally
permitted in the coastal belt of 5 km from the
sea as it is the most vulnerable belt. No further
growth of settlements in this region should allowed. Major settlements and other important
establishments should be located beyond 10 km
from the sea.

Landslides and mitigation measures
Landslides are recurring phenomena in the Himalayan region. In the recent years however
intensive construction activity and the destabilizing forces of nature have aggravated the problem. Landslides occur as a result of changes on
a slope, sudden or gradual, either in its composition, structure, hydrology or vegetation. The
changes can be due to geology, climate, weathering, land-use and earthquakes.
A significant reduction in the hazards caused
by landslides can be achieved by preventing the
exposure of population and facilities to landslides
and by physically controlling the landslides. Developmental programs that involve modification
of the topography, exploitation of natural resources and change in the balance load on the
ground should not be permitted. Some critical
measures that could be undertaken to prevent
further landslides are drainage measures, erosion control measures such a bamboo check
dams, terracing, jute and coir netting and rockfall control measures such as grass plantation,
vegetated dry masonry wall, retaining wall and
most importantly preventing deforestation and
improving afforestation.
Disasters cannot be totally prevented. However
early warning systems, careful planning and preparedness on part of the vulnerable community
would help in minimizing the loss of life and
property due to these disasters.

Pollution

Chapter5.p65

161

161

4/9/2004, 5:09 PM

