 

 
Service Assessment 
 
Hurricane Charley, August 9-15, 2004  
 

 

 
U.S. DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
National Weather Service 
Silver Spring, Maryland 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Cover:  Reflectivity image from the WSR-88D located at the Weather Forecast Office in 
Tampa, FL taken at 1956 UTC, August 13, 2004 as Hurricane Charley made landfall. 

ii 

 

 

 

 

 
Service Assessment 
 
 
Hurricane Charley  
August 9-15, 2004  
 
 
 
 
January 2006 
 
 
 
 
 
NOAAs National Weather Service 
Brigadier General David L. Johnson, USAF (Ret.)  
Assistant Administrator for Weather Services 

iii 

Preface 

Hurricane Charley made landfall on the southwest coast of Florida near Cayo 

Costa, just west of Ft. Myers around 3:45 p.m. EDT on August 13, with maximum 
sustained surface winds near 150 mph.  This made Charley a category 4 storm on the 
Saffir-Simpson Scale.  The maximum storm surge associated with Charley was six to 
seven feet on Sanibel and Estero Islands.  This was less than expected due to a number of 
factors including an increase in the storms speed, the eyewall shrinking, and the tide 
receding.  Charley then moved north-northeastward causing significant damage across 
the Florida peninsula from Punta Gorda, Port Charlotte, Orlando, to Palm Coast (north of 
Daytona Beach).  Charley caused ten direct fatalities in the U.S. and an estimated $14 
billion in economic losses.  It was a harbinger of things to come, being the first of four 
hurricanes to affect Florida in August and September of 2004.     
  

This assessment evaluates the service of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric 

Administrations (NOAA) National Weather Service (NWS) before and during the 
landfall of Hurricane Charley and provides recommendations to improve services in the 
future.  It takes into consideration the affected audiences in the media and emergency 
management communities as well as the public.  

 
Service assessments significantly enhance ongoing efforts to improve the quality, 

 
timeliness, and value of NWS products and services.  Findings of this assessment will 
further NOAAs goal to serve societys needs for water and weather information. 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

                                          

Brigadier General David L. Johnson, USAF (Ret.) 
Assistant Administrator for Weather Services 
January 2006 

 

 
 
 
 

iv 

 

Table of Contents 

 

Preface................................................................................................................................ iv 
 
Service Assessment Team.................................................................................................. vi 
 
Executive Summary............................................................................................................ 1 
 
Service Assessment Report................................................................................................. 2 
Introduction..................................................................................................................... 2 
Hurricane Forecast Track and Intensity.......................................................................... 3 
Figure 1  Three-Day Hurricane Forecast Graphic .................................................... 4 
WFO Operations and Services........................................................................................ 6 
Figure 2  Wind Speed and Direction Graphic........................................................... 7 
Other NOAA Offices Assisting NWS Operations and Services .................................... 9 
Internet Services............................................................................................................ 11 
Conclusion .................................................................................................................... 12 

 
Best Practices.................................................................................................................... 14 
 
Appendix A  The Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale....................................................... A-1 
 
Appendix B  Track, Intensity, Verification, and Landfall Data for Charley ................ B-1 
 
 

v 

 

  

Service Assessment Team 

An assessment team was activated on August 20, 2004.  The team assembled at 

the Weather Forecast Office (WFO) in Miami, FL on Tuesday, August 24, 2004.  During 
August 25-29, team members visited four Florida WFOs located in Key West, Miami, 
Melbourne, and the Tampa area; the Tropical Prediction Center (TPC)/National 
Hurricane Center (NHC); and damage areas.  They interviewed Federal, State and County 
emergency managers, media outlets, and the public in Florida.  On September 1, 2004, 
the Team Leader visited the Southern Regional Headquarters (SRH) Regional Operations 
Center (ROC) to review their operations.  In addition, the Team Leader conducted a 
review of Hurricane Charley operations at the Southeast River Forecast Center (SERFC) 
via phone on August 31, 2004. 
 
 
 
Jim Weyman  

The team was comprised of the following members: 

Team Leader, Meteorologist in Charge (MIC), WFO 
Honolulu, Hawaii and Director, Central Pacific Hurricane 
Center, Honolulu, Hawaii 

 

 

 

 
 
 

 
Frank Marks  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Jim Duke 
 
Gary Woodall 
 
 
 
John Cole 
 
Reid Hawkins 
 
 
Dan Nietfeld   
 
Ron Trumbla  
 
Brian LaMarre  

 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

Director, Hurricane Research Division 
Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory 
Office of Oceanic and Atmospheric Research 
Miami, Florida 

MIC, WFO Memphis, Tennessee 

Warning Coordination Meteorologist (WCM),  
WFO Fort Worth, Texas 

WCM, WFO Newport/Morehead City, North Carolina 

Science and Operations Officer (SOO),  
WFO Wilmington, North Carolina 

SOO, WFO Omaha, Nebraska 

NOAA Public Affairs, Fort Worth, Texas 

Marine and Coastal Services Program Manager, Office of 
Climate, Water, and Weather (OCWWS), National 
Weather Service (NWS) Headquarters, Silver Spring, 
Maryland 

vi 

 
Other valuable contributors include: 
 
Aimee Devaris 

 

 
Wayne Presnell 

 
Scott Kiser 

 

 

 
Larry Dunn 
 
Jim Purpura   
 
Larry Mooney 
 
 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Betty Morrow 

Social Scientist, Professor Emeritus at Florida International 
University (Miami) and former Director, Laboratory for 
Social and Behavior Research at the International 
Hurricane Research Center  

Performance Branch Chief, OCWWS, NWS Headquarters, 
Silver Spring, Maryland 

Service Assessment Program Leader, OCWWS, NWS 
Headquarters, Silver Spring, Maryland 

Tropical Weather Services Program Manager, OCWWS, 
NWS Headquarters, Silver Spring, Maryland 

MIC, WFO Salt Lake City, Utah 

MIC, WFO San Diego, California 

MIC, WFO Denver/Boulder Colorado 

vii 

 

Acronyms 

 

Atlantic Oceanographic and Meteorological Laboratory 
Automated Surface Observing System 
Emergency Alert System 
Eastern Daylight Time 
Emergency Manager 
Federal Emergency Management Agency 
Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory 
Global Forecast System (numerical forecast model) 
HAZARDS U.S. (FEMA loss estimation model) 
Hurricane Local Statement 
Hurricane Research Division 

AOML  
ASOS   
EAS 
 
 
EDT 
EM 
 
FEMA  
GFDL   
GFS 
 
HAZUS 
HLS 
 
HRD 
 
HURREVAC  Hurricane Evacuation software 
Millibar 
 
mb 
Meteorologist in Charge 
 
MIC  
Miles per hour 
mph 
 
National Centers for Environmental Prediction 
NCEP   
National Digital Forecast Database 
NDFD  
National Hurricane Center 
 
NHC 
Nautical miles 
nm 
 
NOAA Marine and Aviation Operations 
NMAO 
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration 
NOAA  
Short Term Forecast 
NOW   
NOAA Weather Radio All Hazards 
NWR    
National Weather Service 
NWS    
Office of Climate, Water and Weather Services 
OCWWS 
Radius of Maximum Winds 
RMW   
Regional Operations Center 
 
ROC 
River Forecast Center 
RFC 
 
Rapid Intensification Index 
RI 
 
Southeast River Forecast Center 
SERFC 
Step Frequency Microwave Radiometer 
SFMR  
Science and Operations Officer 
SOO  
 
Southern Region Headquarters 
 
SRH 
Tropical Prediction Center 
 
TPC 
Volume Coverage Pattern 
VCP 
 
Warning Coordination Meteorologist 
WCM   
Weather Forecast Office 
 
WFO 
WSH 
National Weather Service Headquarters 
 
WSR-88D  Weather Service Radar, 1988 Doppler 
WWA   
Watch, Warning, Advisory [software] 
 
 

viii 

 

Executive Summary 

 

Hurricane Charley was a small but powerful hurricane.  It intensified rapidly just 

 
before moving onshore near Cayo Costa, Florida on August 13, 2004 as a category 4 
hurricane on the Saffir-Simpson Scale.  It is rare for hurricanes to make landfall as a 
category 4 or 5 and to intensify rapidly just before making landfall.  Charleys storm 
surge (maximum of six to seven feet) was relatively low for a category 4 because the 
hurricane force winds were confined to a small area and the storm was moving at 25 
mph.  However, there were ten direct fatalities in the U.S. associated with Charley, and 
preliminary estimates of the total damage and economic loss were $14 billion.  Charley 
was the third costliest hurricane in the U.S. behind Katrina (August 2005) and Andrew 
(August 1992).   
 
 
The National Hurricane Center (NHC) predicted the center of Hurricane Charley 
to make landfall near Tampa Bay, Florida as a category 3 hurricane throughout most of 
its lifetime.  NHC had placed much of Floridas gulf coast under hurricane watches and 
warnings approximately 24 to 36 hours before landfall, and they had highlighted the area 
for possible landfall for four days.  However, a slight easterly shift in Charleys track 
toward the coast south of Tampa less than three hours before landfall caused some coastal 
residents to feel they had inadequate time to prepare.  Media and residents seemed to 
have focused only on the exact forecasted track of the center of Charley, rather than the 
cone of uncertainty which NHC had included in these track forecasts.  
 
 
hydro-meteorological events to highlight best practices and recommend improvements.  
Overall, the NWS performed well as indicated by the eighteen best practices identified 
during this assessment.  The WFOs used some creative ideas such as Internet hurricane 
safety videos, new volume coverage patterns for the WSR-88D (which detected 
tornadoes better), and media interviews in Spanish, and they issued enhanced statements 
and warnings which provided clearer and concise information on Charleys potential for 
destruction.  NOAAs Atlantic Oceanographic Meteorological Laboratory and Hurricane 
Research Division (AOML/HRD) provided near real time wind analyses to NHC 
forecasters, researchers, and the Federal Emergency Management Administrations 
(FEMA) Hazardous U.S. model specialists to assist these decision makers.    
 
 
hurricane products needed improving, particularly with regard to the forecast track cone 
of uncertainty.  The flow and content of information updates during the hours just prior to 
hurricane landfall were critical to users and partners.  Due either to equipment failures or 
interruptions in power or communications, disruptions in the availability of real-time 
observations impacted forecast and warning operations.  Information from Step 
Frequency Microwave Radiometers (SFMR) may have allowed the NHC forecasters to 
detect the rapid intensification sooner.  Finally, some coordination and software problems 
at the WFOs impacted gridded wind forecasts and the dissemination of some products.  
The following report contains ten recommendations for addressing these issues.

The NWS uses assessment teams to evaluate NWS service during significant 

The team also noted some opportunities for improvement.  Education on 

1 

 

Service Assessment Report 

 

Introduction 

The mission of the U.S. tropical cyclone weather services program is to save 

There were ten direct fatalities in the U.S. associated with Charley and insurance 

 
 
lives, mitigate property loss, and improve economic efficiency.  NOAA accomplishes this 
by issuing accurate watches, warnings, forecasts, and analyses of hazardous tropical 
weather, and also by increasing public understanding of these hazards.  NOAAs NHC 
partners with WFOs, FEMA, media outlets, and state and local officials to conduct 
extensive outreach campaigns and promote hurricane preparedness.  These entities also 
work very closely when hurricanes and tropical storms make landfall in the U.S. to 
provide timely and accurate information on the associated hazards, potential impacts, and 
public safety.   
 
 
companies preliminary estimates of the total damage and economic loss was $14 billion.  
Charley was the third costliest hurricane in the U.S. behind Katrina (August 2005) and 
Andrew (August 1992).  It caused devastating wind damage across Florida from Punta 
Gorda, to Port Charlotte, to Orlando, and then to Palm Coast. 
 
 
category 4 on the Saffir-Simpson scale (Appendix A) just before moving onshore at the 
barrier islands of Sanibel and Captiva near Cayo Costa, Florida on August 13, 2004.  
Charleys intensity increased rapidly (a drop of 23 millibars (mb) of pressure in less than 
five hours) as it approached the southwest coast of Florida.  It is unusual for hurricanes to 
intensify rapidly just before making landfall  they usually weaken  and it is rare for 
hurricanes to make landfall as a category 4 or 5.  Refer to Appendix B for details on the 
observed track of Charley, the NHC forecast track, the rapid pressure drop indicating the 
strengthening, and a WSR-88D radar image from Weather Forecast Office (WFO) Tampa 
as Charley made landfall.   
 
 
track forecast.  However, NHC had communicated its uncertainty with the track and 
intensity of the hurricane and the potential for Hurricane Charley to make landfall at 
locations other than Tampa through several different ways.  At the time of landfall, 
Captiva Island, Punta Gorda, and Fort Myers areas had been: 

Tampa had been highlighted as the potential landfall location based solely on the 

Hurricane Charley was a relatively small hurricane, but it intensified rapidly to 

 

 

 
in the cone of uncertainty for almost 4 days (the cone of uncertainty is the area in 
which 70 percent of all past tropical cyclone track forecasts fell based upon the 
last 10 year average),  

  under a hurricane watch for almost 35 hours, and 
  under a hurricane warning for almost 23 hours.  

Since many southwest Florida residents felt they did not have adequate time to 

 
 
prepare and Charley was such a costly hurricane, NWS sent a service assessment team to 
evaluate its service during the event.  The team identified eighteen best practices which 

2 

 

may serve to benefit operations in other NWS offices.  The report presents some of the 
most vital lessons learned during Charley and provides a complete listing of all the best 
practices on the pages following the reports conclusion.       
 
 
improvement.  The team captured these in the ten findings and recommendations 
described throughout this report. 
 

In addition, the NWS service assessment team found opportunities for 

Hurricane Forecast Track and Intensity 

 

In the three to five day range, the NHC forecasted the center of Charley to move 
onshore near the Tampa area with maximum sustained winds on the high end of category 
2 or low end of category 3.  In general, NHC maintained this forecast until about three 
hours before actual landfall.  At approximately 1:00 p.m., NHC adjusted its forecast track 
to show Charleys eye moving onshore near Charlotte Harbor, FL (south of Tampa) and 
increased the intensity forecast to a category 3.  They based this change on information 
received from the reconnaissance aircraft investigating the hurricane and radar trends.  
Charley underwent rapid intensification and made landfall near Cayo Costa along the 
barrier islands of Captiva and Sanibel at approximately 3:45 p.m. August 13, 2004 as a 
category 4 hurricane.  
 
 
The Tampa area was not significantly impacted as originally projected.  This was 
due to the change in track and Charleys eye, the area of strongest winds, was shrinking 
in size keeping the greatest impacts in a relatively small area.  However as noted in the 
Introduction, NHC had issued hurricane watches and warnings for the landfall area well 
before the occurrence.   
 

Many people focused on the specific forecast track which indicated the projected 
path of the center of Hurricane Charley making landfall near Tampa Bay instead of the 
cone of uncertainty (see Figure 1).  The cone around the projected track indicated areas 
of possible landfalls on either side of Tampa.  Betty Morrow, Social Scientist, Professor 
Emeritus at Florida International University (Miami) and an Assessment Team member, 
interviewed approximately 100 people in the Fort Myers and Punta Gorda areas.  She 
found many did not understand the uncertainty associated with the track forecast.  Over 
90 percent said they heard the hurricane was going to hit Tampa and not them until it was 
too late to do something.  Steve Jerve, Chief Meteorologist, WFLA-TV, Tampa, echoed 
this perception, What people dont understand is the great amount of error in those 
tracks.  We know that and try to communicate it to the people, but they see the graphic on 
the air and just focus on that.  Bryan Norcross, Director of Meteorology, WFOR-TV 
Miami wrote, Many Floridians, if not most, have the perception that the forecast was 
wrong and that the storm bamboozled the experts.  But thats not true and the 
misperception harms the hurricane warning program.   

Finding 1:  Many people focused on the specific forecast track which showed the center 
of Hurricane Charley making landfall near Tampa rather than considering the cone of 

 

3 

 

uncertainty which indicated areas of possible landfalls on either side of the predicted 
path.   
 
Recommendation 1:  The NWS needs to increase their education efforts on 
hurricane tracks and the uncertainty in tropical cyclone forecasts and to find ways 
to better communicate the uncertainty and risk.  

 

Figure 1.  The three-day hurricane forecast, including coastal watches and warnings in effect at 
11 am EDT Thursday, August 12  about 28 hours prior to Charley making landfall.  The 1-3 day 
cone of uncertainty is represented by the white shading.  (Note: This is just one example of this 
graphical product.  The product is issued every 6 hours at 11 a.m. and 11 p.m. and 5 a.m. and 5 
p.m. Eastern Time.)  The graphic consistently showed the ultimate landfall area within the 
forecast cone of uncertainty. 

 

 
When Charley was within six hours of landfall, radar and satellite images 

indicated the eye began to wobble slightly giving the appearance of a possible change in 
track.  Many NWS users perceived these wobbles as changes in the predicted track and 
became concerned when NHC did not provide information on these possible changes.  
Some of the TV meteorologists and Emergency Managers (EM) began to adjust the track 
forecast themselves without official information from NHC.  Jim Reif, Chief 
Meteorologist at WZVN-TV Fort Myers stated, Everyone was warned, but in the last 6 
hours, something failed.  There were a lot of forecasters from Orlando to Tampa to Fort 

4 

 

Myers who believed they were out on a limb without the NHC during the last couple 
hours before landfall whether rightfully or not.  Alan Winfield, Chief Meteorologist, 
Bay News 9, Pinellas Park stated, They (NHC) just need to communicate a little more 
often in the last moments.  Dave Roberts from WFTX-TV4 FOX, Cape Coral, echoed 
this statement, The forecast was very good, but the communication was poor.  During 
the last 6 hours, we needed a play by play of events, explanation of wobbles, NHCs 
thinking or else the public and media are going to arrive at their own conclusions.   

 

 

Finding 2a:  Many NWS users in the Tampa, Fort Myers, and Orlando areas perceived a 
change in Hurricane Charleys track due to wobbles indicated by radar and satellite 
information, and they felt there was a lack of information from NHC concerning this 
change.   
 
Finding 2b.  Local television meteorologists and emergency managers began to make 
decisions and disseminate information based upon their perceptions of a track change 
before NHC issued official information.   
 
Recommendation 2:  As part of its continuous flow of information prior to landfall, 
NHC should provide information on possible hurricane track and intensity changes.  
NHC should continue to emphasize people not in the direct track area of the 
hurricane need to stay alert for possible rapid changes.   

 
The observed increase in Charleys winds might have been recognized four to six 
hours sooner if the NHC had received Step Frequency Microwave Radiometer (SFMR) 
data.  NOAA uses their two P3 aircraft for a combination of research and hurricane 
reconnaissance operations.  When Hurricane Charley approached landfall, the NOAA P3 
reconnaissance aircraft did not have SFMR instrumentation on board.  NWS and NMAO 
have since coordinated the use of the P3s to ensure SFMR data collection capability is 
available for all hurricanes approaching the U.S. coastline.  Currently, the U.S. Air Force 
Reserves weather reconnaissance C-130J aircraft are not instrumented with the SFMR. 

Finding 3:  Timely SFMR data could have indicated the intensification of Hurricane 
Charley prior to landfall.   
 
Recommendation 3:  NOAA should work with the U.S. Air Force Reserves to put 
SFMRs on C-130s Js and then obtain certification for reconnaissance missions as 
soon as possible.1 

 
Automated Surface Observing System (ASOS) observations are very important 

 
inputs to the NHC forecasts, especially when tropical cyclones are near the U.S. 
coastline.  Class I ASOS systems, located at non-towered airports and other observation 
sites, have no backup power or communications source and are not designed to withstand 
hurricane force winds in excess of 125 knots.  As a result, ASOS wind measurements 
during hurricanes rarely record the maximum sustained winds or peak wind gusts due to 
the lack of a backup power source and/or equipment failure during the period of strongest 
                                                 
1 This action is in progress. 

5 

 

Valuable ASOS data during the extreme weather conditions of Hurricane Charley 

winds.  This has been documented in several articles, and an example can be found in the 
March 2005 edition of the American Association for Wind Engineering newsletter at:  
http://www.aawe.org.   
 
 
were lost.  Yet, during Charleys passage over western Cuba, anemometers remained 
operational to report 1-minute average winds up to 103 knots with gusts to 130 knots.   
 
Finding 4:  Many ASOSs lost valuable data during the extreme weather conditions of 
Charley.  The primary power sources and communication systems (telephones) failed 
and/or the data measuring instruments were damaged or destroyed.  These data losses: 
a.  prevented forecasters at WFOs and NHC from receiving real-time wind speed 

and direction data which are crucial to providing life-saving information, 
products, and services to users at a time when most needed. 

b.  limited accuracy of decision-makers risk assessment. 
c.  limited the ability to ground truth the radar observed winds. 
d.  impacted wind forecast accuracy for areas downstream of the hurricane. 
e.  deprived emergency first responders of important information to aid in their 

decisions to prioritize response resources. 

f.  compromised the long-term climate record of extreme weather events. 
g.  limited structural engineers from determining the correlation between wind 

speeds and damage which impacts the development of suitable building codes.  

h.  affected hurricane researchers in improving hurricane forecasting by limiting 

knowledge on the structure and intensity of specific hurricanes.  

 
Recommendation 4a:  NWS Headquarters should assess the installation of backup 
power sources for ASOS, such as UPSs lasting 12 hours or more, batteries, and solar 
panels with power storage devices.  The highest priority for backup power should be 
given to ASOSs located in hurricane prone areas (coastal and near-coastal).   
 
Recommendation 4b:  ASOS anemometers in hurricane prone areas should be 
engineered to withstand Category 4-5 hurricane force winds.    
 

WFO Operations and Services 

 
 
The WFOs most affected during Charley performed well and employed some 
innovative techniques for getting critical updates to their partners and users; however, 
there are some opportunities for improvement.  The team found the preparation of wind 
grids for the National Digital Forecast Database (NDFD) increased the workload 
significantly during already busy hurricane operations.  Sometimes the offices were too 
busy to coordinate, update, and quality control many of the grids.  This resulted in some 
inconsistent wind graphics produced by the NDFD (Figure 2).   
 
Finding 5.  Images from the NDFD wind grids for Hurricane Charley showed large 
inconsistencies among Florida WFOs. 
 
Recommendation 5:  OCWWS and the Tropical Cyclone Forecast Advisory Wind 

6 

 

Team should explore ways to decrease the workload associated with the preparation 
of the wind grids and to improve forecasters capability to produce more consistent 
gridded forecasts during extreme events such as hurricanes. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2.  Wind speed and direction grids from NDFD issued on August 11, 2004 at 2 p.m. EDT 
valid at 2 p.m. EDT August 13, 2004.  The WFOs prepared these grids two days before landfall 
and they were valid approximately 2 hours before landfall near Captiva Island.   
 

The WFOs used a program called WWA (watch, warning, and advisory) software 

 

to produce watches, warnings, and advisories.  Forecasters identified significant 
limitations with the use of the WWA editor.  The NWS no longer uses WWA in NWS 
warning operations; however, this finding was important in the context of Hurricane 
Charley operations.  Any software used for production of warnings, watches and 
advisories should be simple and easy to use. 

Finding 6:  Some of the WFOs found the WWA software difficult and time-consuming 
to use and stated WWA contributed to a number of errors in their products.  Because it 
was easier to edit previous products rather than use WWA, the offices experienced 
problems with headers, expiration times, and other entries.  These formatting problems, 
especially errors in the product valid time, led to product dissemination errors in some 
cases and caused some users to not receive or to not process the products properly. 
 

7 

 

Recommendation 6:  Software used for production of warnings, watches, and 
advisories should be easy and efficient to use and require minimal manual quality 
control. 
 

WFO Key West enhanced their Hurricane Local Statements (HLS) by identifying 

...NEW INFORMATION SINCE LAST UPDATE... 

The NOAA Weather Radio All Hazards (NWR) broadcast cycle was excessively 

Not all HLS users across Florida shared this sentiment.  Some found the HLSs to 

information changed since the previous issuance by beginning each section with the 
following bullet: 
 
 
Bryan Norcross stated, WFO Key Wests HLSs were the best ones I have seen.  (Best 
Practice 6) 
 
 
be of little use because they contained too much information given in other products, 
covered too wide of an area, were too long, and often repeated the same information 
contained in previously issued HLSs.   
 
Finding 7:  Some users considered the variety of NWS tropical cyclone weather products 
excessive and overlapping without a single place to go for a concise summary.  They 
found the HLS did not fulfill this need.   
 
Recommendation 7:  NWS should improve the HLS issuance time, format, 
structure, and content to meet the needs of the users. 
 
 
long on several transmitters as Charley approached the Florida coast.  WFO Tampas 
broadcast cycles reached 33 minutes at times during Charley, and the staff tried to 
mitigate this by changing the periodicity of some of their products to play only once or 
twice an hour.  There were user complaints about broadcast cycle length, including one in 
writing.  WFO Melbournes broadcast cycles exceeded 20 minutes, and they took action 
to monitor the cycle length and combine products for broadcast purposes to keep the 
cycle length under eight minutes.  WFO Key West used scripts to reduce the length of 
their NWR broadcast (Best Practice 7).   
 
Finding 8:  NWR broadcast cycles were too long at some WFOs.  NWS Instruction 10-
1710, NOAA Weather Radio Dissemination provides guidance for NWR programming 
during hazardous weather events.  The policy contains explicit instructions for hurricane 
situations: During hurricane and tropical storm warnings, limit the programming to: 
separate warning message with the advisory, service area forecast, short term forecast, 
tracking, conditions in the weather roundup, safety rules, or any HLS.   
 
Recommendation 8:  To minimize the NWR broadcast cycle length, WFOs should 
make use of the capability for assigning priority to weather products and for 
transitioning the broadcast into high or exclusive product suites to follow the 
guidelines in 10-1710.  
 

8 

 

WFO Key West used the new Volume Coverage Pattern (VCP) 121 for their radar 

 
to better detect tornadoes.  Using VCP 121 eliminates range folding, increases the 
frequency of data, and increases the maximum Doppler range for better detection of 
significant radar velocity and reflectivity imagery.  (Best Practice 4).   
 
 
WFOs Miami and Tampa conducted media interviews in Spanish, helping to 
reach the large Spanish-speaking population in Florida.  The Science and Operations 
Officer (SOO) at WFO Miami is fluent in Spanish, and he provided Spanish language 
translations of the HLSs to local users.  He also provided six live interviews in Spanish 
for local and national Spanish media, including markets covering Tampa, Melbourne, and 
San Juan, Puerto Rico.  The WFO Tampa Meteorologist-in-Charge (MIC) conducted 
numerous interviews in Spanish for the media as well (Best Practice 8). 
 

Due to the small radius of maximum winds and the intensity of the hurricane 
winds over land, WFO Melbourne issued a Tornado Warning approximately one hour 
prior to the extreme winds of the eye-wall entered their area of responsibility.  The 
warning emphasized the destructive winds over 100 mph and possible tornadoes (Best 
Practice 10).  Following the Tornado Warning, WFO Melbourne issued 12 Severe 
Weather Statements about every 20 minutes for 5 12 hours to give the latest location of 
the eye-wall and areas to be impacted.  The warning activated all EAS outlets and was 
broadcasted on 69 radio stations and numerous television stations simultaneously.  This 
approach worked well in this extraordinary circumstance.   

 
Cheryl Grabowski, Osceola County Emergency Management Director, viewed the 

use of a Tornado Warning with Severe Weather Statements updates to heighten 
awareness of the devastating winds as Fantastic.  They gave me almost to the minute 
locations, and were really helpful.  Grabowski went on to say, We could use the 
products to track the power outages in Osceola County.  Dean ONeal said the Tornado 
Warning was a, Stroke of genius for getting onto EAS.  ONeal commented on the 
follow up Severe Weather Statements saying, ...they were incredibly helpful and 
contained new data that we did not have.   

 
The Office of Climate, Water, and Weather Services (OCWWS) at NWS 

headquarters (WSH) has created a team to work on science issues, warning criteria, 
nomenclature, distribution issues, and public response for possible Hurricane Eye-Wall 
Warnings or other possible short-term and long-term solutions to the issues of inland 
affects from very intense eye-walls.  

 

Other NOAA Offices Assisting NWS Operations and Services 

   

During the lifecycle of Hurricane Charley, NOAAs AOML/HRD ran two 

 
versions of the rapid intensification (RI) forecast index in real time.  The RI may help 
estimate the probability of rapid intensification of a hurricane.  AOML/HRD personnel 
provided the output to the hurricane specialists at NHC.  The RI showed potential as a 
forecast tool as it performed 8-13% better than hurricane climatology during Charley 
(Best Practice 15). 

9 

 

 

   

NWS Southern Region Headquarters (SRH) detailed two meteorologists (from 

WFOs Austin/San Antonio and Birmingham) to WFOs Tallahassee and Tampa to 
supplement their operational staffs.  WFO Tampa believed the additional forecaster was 
very helpful.  In addition, the Regional Operations Center (ROC) responded to a radar 
outage in Tampa effectively and efficiently.  They coordinated with WFO Tampa, the 
Radar Operations Center staff, the National Logistics Supply Center, and a contractor and 
ensured prompt delivery of required parts to get Tampas WSR-88D fixed fourteen hours 
before the hurricane struck.   

During the event, limited Internet bandwidth caused problems with access to 

NWS Florida websites.  SRH performed the necessary steps to bring on-line two 
additional web servers.  SRH completed this operation several hours prior to landfall.  
This provided the SRH with ample access capability to accommodate the multitude of 
data requests, especially for radar imagery.  All of the Florida WFOs stated the SRH 
ROC was very proactive and provided valuable support to the WFOs in Florida during 
Hurricane Charley (Best Practice 16). 

The Southeast River Forecast center (SERFC) took a number of actions to 

enhance information flow to support decision makers and users of hydrologic 
information.  They used a variety of means to communicate with partners, including 
pushing graphics to a web site, resulting in a combined audio/video briefing.  The 
SERFC sent SERFC Flood Alert email messages to key partners to provide a heads up 
on anticipated conditions (Best Practice 17). 
  
 
anticipated Lake Okeechobee elevations.  SERFC hydrologists issued basin-specific 
Hydrologist Forecast Discussions, and improved the 24-hour Graphical Hydro-
meteorological Discussion to depict conditions expected during the near term.  The 
SERFC also produced the Significant River Flood Outlook to identify and communicate 
areas of concern throughout the event. 
 

The SERFC for the first time provided daily guidance to WFO Miami on 

Hurricane Evacuation software (HURREVAC) is used by government EMs as an 

Ben Nelson, Florida State Meteorologist, wrote, The SERFC nailed this one.  
They had been saying for a week that the St. Johns and Tampa area Rivers would be 
hit...and they were.  
 
 
aid in evacuation decision-making.  HURREVAC uses NHC information to track 
hurricanes and estimates when evacuation decisions should be made based on a number 
of inputs.  Several EM officials in inland counties expressed the need for HURREVAC to 
indicate the location of Inland Hurricane and Tropical Storm Wind Watches and 
Warnings.  In August 2004, shortly after Charley, the Director of TPC/NHC asked the 
software developer about the feasibility of this enhancement.  The developer stated the 
requested enhancement would be a very difficult task unless there was a single product, 
issued in a computer friendly format, that contained all of these warnings.  Currently no 
such product exists; the individual WFOs issue their warnings individually. 

10 

 

 
Finding 9:  HURREVAC software did not identify the areas of Inland Hurricane and 
Tropical Storm Wind Watches and Warnings. 
 
Recommendation 9:  NWS should encourage the developers of HURREVAC to 
enhance the software to identify areas of inland hurricane wind watches and 
warnings and offer to collaborate on the most efficient way to accomplish this.  
  

Dissemination Services 

The Internet was a popular dissemination tool for NWS products during Charley.  

 
 
From August 12 through 15, the total number of hits (i.e., the retrieval of an image or 
other content from a server) received by NWS websites was approximately 412 million.  
In comparison, during the five-day hurricane Isabel event, the same NWS websites 
collectively received about 255 million hits.     
 

At the approach of tropical storm Bonnie, two days before hurricane Charley, 

NWS established a number of protocols to facilitate communications among NWS 
webmasters for manual load balancing of radar pages.  NWS did this to mitigate the 
anticipated high web traffic from the Southern Region by shifting some demands to the 
Central, Eastern, and WSH web servers.  In addition, NOAA, NWS, and NHC 
coordinated to better support the NHC website.   

 
Despite these efforts, severe server loads taxed commodity bandwidth at mirror 
sites and occasional mirror site outages occurred.  Some EMs said they were unable to 
get updated radar information, and other users reported being unable to get updated 
forecasts and warnings from local WFO Internet sites and the NHC Internet site.  The 
NWS contracted with a commercial web provider to host the TPC/NHC web site for the 
remainder of the 2004 hurricane season.  However, the switch over to the commercial 
provider did not occur until the afternoon of August 13, at approximately the same time 
of Charleys landfall.   

 
The NWR transmitters in Orlando and Daytona Beach lost electrical power as the 
hurricane force winds swept through and failed because no backup power was available.   
The NWR transmitter at Sugarloaf (Key West area) lost power due to a transmission line 
being struck by a sailboat that broke loose.  This particular transmitter does have a 
backup generator, but it also failed.  NWR is a primary entry point for warning messages 
to the Emergency Alert System (EAS), so these failures disabled a primary dissemination 
channel for NWS to send warnings to commercial television and radio outlets.  WFO Key 
West issued a Tornado Warning for the Lower Keys in Monroe County, including Key 
West, during the period the NWR transmitter was non-operational. 
 
Finding 10a:  Some NWR transmitters lost electrical power during Charley.  Previous 
assessment reports documented this problem; however currently, there is no funding 
available to provide backup power to all NWS NWR sites. 
 

11 

 

Finding 10b:  Since the NWR transmitter was not operational, the EAS was not activated 
when the Key West tornado warning was sent.  WFO Key West was unaware of the 
NWR outage and did not notify the EAS primary and secondary stations of the Tornado 
Warning until 17 minutes after it was issued. 
 
Recommendation 10a:  The NWS should acquire emergency power generators for 
all NWR transmitters in hurricane prone areas and eventually for all of the 
remaining sites as funding permits. 
 
Recommendation 10b:  WFO Key West should work with EAS stations to establish 
backup EAS entry points and timely backup notification for tornado warnings.  
These procedures should be documented in their Station Duty Manual and local 
EAS Plan. 
 

Conclusion  

 

Although Hurricane Charleys behavior was unusual with its change in track and 

 
rapid intensification just before landfall, all NOAA offices worked well as a team and 
provided valuable information to its partners and users.  NHC had proper watches and 
warnings in effect for southwest Florida well before Charley made landfall, and they 
forecasted the possibility of a major hurricane (i.e., category 3, 4, or 5) affecting Florida.  
The WFOs met performance standards for products and services and used creative 
methods for statements, warnings, and product dissemination.  They also provided 
excellent public service by delivering media interviews in both Spanish and English.  The 
SR ROC and SERFC provided valuable resources and information to the NHC and 
WFOs.  NOAAs HRD provided real time hurricane wind analyses.  Michael Lowder, 
Director of Operations, Response Division, FEMA, Department of Homeland Security, 
stated,  
 

Outstanding  10 out of 10!  The White House was totally amazed we had this 
process in place that brought [everyone] together... and then the hurricane 
specialist on duty personally participated, so they got information straight from 
the expert.  The key part of the success with Hurricane Charley was the 
participation and coordination of all agencies in NWS and EM communities. 

The team also discovered some opportunities for improvement in NWS services.  

 
 
The NWS needs to provide additional education and outreach efforts and to improve 
communication methods on the uncertainty in hurricane track forecasts.  NHCs issuance 
of additional information on possible track or intensity changes during the last few hours 
before landfall would have assisted the media, the public, and decision-makers.  In 
addition, NWS needs to improve the HLS issuance times, format, structure, and content 
to meet the users requirements. 
 
 
transmit due to power and/or communications failures or damage to the instruments 
during the time of the strongest winds, and therefore critical wind and pressure data were 

In addition, the team identified some technical problems.  ASOSs were unable to 

12 

 

unavailable.  SFMR data for Charley were not available, and this could have hindered 
NHCs forecasters from recognizing the rapid intensification sooner.  The preparation of 
forecasted wind grids for the NDFD was inefficient, and the final product was of low 
quality.  WWA software was difficult to use and produced some product errors.   
 
 
valuable products and services from the NWS during future hurricanes affecting the U.S. 
 

The recommendations in this report will improve these areas and create more 

13 

 

Best Practices 

 
1.  Because of NHCs extensive coordination before the hurricane season, TPC, WFOs, 

RFC, SRH, WSH, NCEP, EMs, FEMA Headquarters, FEMA Region IV, military, 
media, and many other government and non-government agencies worked well 
together to protect the American public. 

 
2.  NOAA Public Affairs ensured PA representatives were on standby to help NHC 

with the media during hurricane events. 

To ensure smooth and efficient operations, WFO Key West staff had easy access to 
an Intranet-based hurricane operations plan, which had a decision-assistance flow 
chart and worksheet. 

 
4.  WFO Key West used the new Volume Coverage Pattern (VCP) 121 to eliminate 

range folding, increase frequency of data, and increase in maximum Doppler range 
for better detection of significant radar velocity and reflectivity imagery.  VCP 121 
is designed to aid in the detection of tornadoes. 

 
5.  WFO Key West prepared two videos for the Internet on hurricane safety and HLSs.  

A local county government access channel and two local tourism channels aired 
these, prior to and during the hurricane season, reaching thousands of Florida Keys 
residents and non-residents. 

 
6.  WFO Key West made the HLS easier to use by identifying information changed 

since the previous issuance.  The section began with the following bullet: 

...NEW INFORMATION SINCE LAST UPDATE... 

  
 
7.  WFO Key West used local scripting to reduce the NWR cycle time during critical 

weather operations.  This produced a short, concise broadcast of the tropical 
cyclone suite of products.  The office reduced broadcast cycle times to less than ten 
minutes with some as low as seven minutes. 

 
3. 

 
8. 

   

The WFO Tampa MIC and WFO Miami SOO conducted numerous interviews for 
the Spanish media in Spanish.  They provided Spanish language translations of the 
HLSs to local users.  They also provided live interviews in Spanish for local and 
national media including markets covering Tampa, Melbourne, and San Juan, 
Puerto Rico. 

 

9.  WFO Miami provided a constant flow of information to their users through issuing 

Severe Weather Statements, Local Storm Reports, and Short Term Forecasts 
(NOW).  They issued NOWs nearly hourly from August 12 at 6 a.m. EDT through 
8 p.m. EDT on August 13 containing updates on local conditions.  The media and 
the EMs praised the usefulness of these products in providing information. 

14 

 

10.  Because of the small radius of the most intense winds, WFO Melbourne issued a 
Tornado Warning, valid for one hour, emphasizing the destructive winds over 100 
mph and tornadoes associated with the eye-wall of Charley before the destructive 
winds entered their area of responsibility.  

 
11.  WFO Melbourne assigned each Hydro-meteorological Technician the responsibility 
to recruit storm spotters in two counties.  This increased the pool of storm spotters, 
particularly in sparsely populated areas. 

 
12.  WFO Melbourne used the weekly NWR Tone Alarm test conducted on Wednesday, 

August 11, as an opportunity to conduct a live briefing to alert people Tropical 
Storm Charley would intensify into a hurricane over the northwest Caribbean that 
afternoon and be a threat to central Florida later in the week. 

 
13.  The WFO Tampa webmasters combined documentation from the damage surveys 

with over 250 damage photographs, radar loops, and electronic versions of all 
hurricane-related products into a comprehensive page on their website. 

 
14.  WFO Tampa, SRH and, a contractor, corrected a back up power problem with the 

WFO Tampa WSR-88D.  The radar was restarted and manually transferred to 
generator power.  The system was returned to service at approximately 2 a.m. EDT, 
on August 13, about 14 hours before landfall. 

 
15.  NOAAs AOML/HRD ran two versions of the RI forecast index.  Performance of 
the RI index during Charley showed it had skill ranging from 8-13 percent better 
than climatology.  

 
16.  All of the Florida WFOs stated the SRH ROC was very proactive and provided 

valuable support to the WFOs in Florida during Hurricane Charley. 

 

17.  The SERFC took a number of actions to enhance information flow to users.  They 
used a variety of means to communicate with their partners, including pushing 
graphics to a web site, resulting in a combined audio/video briefing.  The SERFC 
sent SERFC Flood Alert email messages to key partners to provide a heads up on 
anticipated conditions.   

15 

 

 

 

Appendix A 

The Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale 

Barometric 
Pressure in 
millibars 

>980 
965-979 
945-964 
920-944 
<920 

Storm 
Surge in 
feet above 
normal 
4-5 
6-8 
9-12 
13-18 
>18 

Damage 

Minimal 
Moderate 
Extensive 
Extreme 

Catastrophic 

The Saffir-Simpson Hurricane Scale is a 1-5 rating scale based upon the 

hurricanes intensity.  The National Weather Service and others use this to estimate the 
potential property damage and storm surge expected along the coast from a hurricane 
landfall for the continental United States.  Wind speed is the determining factor in the 
scale, as storm surge values are highly dependent on the slope of the continental shelf in 
the landfall region.  All winds speeds are the US standard 1-minute mean wind speeds in 
mph.   

 

 

Category 

1 
2 
3 
4 
5 

Sustained 
Wind in 
mph 

74-95 
96-110 
111-130 
131-155 
>155 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

A-1 

 

 

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5
-110
 
 

Track, Intensity, Verification, and Landfall Data for Hurricane Charley 

Map of the Best Track positions for Hurricane Charley, August 9-14, 2004 

Appendix B 

 

15

941 mb

14

13

Hurricane Charley
August 9-14 2004

Hurricane
Tropical Storm
Tropical Dep.
Extratropical
Subtr. Storm
Subtr. Dep.
Low / Wave
00 UTC Pos/Date
12 UTC Position
PPP  Min. press (mb)

12

11

10

-105

-100

-95

-90

-85

-80

-75

-70

-65

-60

-55

-50

 

B-1 

Hurricane Charley preliminary verification data for track in nm and intensity 

forecast in knots.  Numbers of cases are shown in parentheses. 

 

Charley 
10 year average 
intensity 
official track 
forecast error  
error  
  9 (18) 
  78 (2894) 
19 (14) 
146 (2368) 
25 (10) 
217 (1929) 
248  (421)1           23  (6) 
319  (341)1          
  8  (2) 

10 year average 
intensity 
forecast error  
10 
15 
19 
201 
211 

Forecast period  Charley 

average official 
track error  
24 hrs (1 day) 
  71 (18) 
48 hrs (2 days) 
  83 (14) 
72 hrs (3 days) 
176 (10) 
96 hrs (4 days) 
459  (6) 
120 hrs (5 days)  777  (2) 
1Errors given for the 96 and 120 hr periods are averages over the three-year period 2001-2003 
 
 
Preliminary forecast track errors (in nm) for Charley for the official forecast 
(OFCL), Clipper (CLP5), Geophysical Fluid Dynamics Laboratory (GFDL), Global 
Forecast System (GFS), and Florida State University Super ensemble (FSSE) with 
the number of cases in parentheses.   
 
12 h     24 h     36 h     48 h   
72 h    
OFCL  37 (20)  71 (18)  89 (16)  83 (14) 
CLP5 
GFDL  36(19)  66(17)  89(15)  119(13) 
GFSO  35(19)  54(17)  74(14)  103(12) 
FSSE 
36(16)  59(14)  79(12)  96(10) 
 
 

96 h        120 h 
176 (10) 459 (6)  777 (2) 
53 (20)  130 (18) 201 (16) 258 (14)  394 (10) 587 (6)  969 (2) 
128(9)  276(5)  629(1) 
167(8)  362(4) 
187(7)  572(3) 

B-2 

Comparison of Hurricane Charleys Forecast Track and Observed Radar Track 

 
Blue Line:  Radar Track from 8:00 a.m. to 8:00 p.m., August 13, 2004 
Red Dashed Line:  Forecast Track.  The 5:00 a.m. and 11:00 a.m. forecast track showed 
Hurricane Charley making landfall in the Tampa area.  The 2:00 p.m. Special Advisory 
showed landfall near Captiva Island and then in the Punta Gorda/Port Charlotte area. 
 
 

 

 

 

B-3 

Chart of Hurricane Charleys Minimum Central Pressure  

From August 9 through August 14, 2004. 

 
 
Note:  Minimum central pressure fell 23 mb from 964 mb at 9:22 a.m. to 941 mb at 1:57 
p.m. prior to landfall at 3:45 p.m. 
 
 

 

Hurricane Charley Minimum Central Pressure

9 - 14 August 2004

1020

1010

1000

990

980

970

960

950

940

)
b
m

(
 
e
r
u
s
s
e
r
P

BEST TRACK
Sat (TAFB)
Sat (SAB)
Sat (AFWA)
Obj T-Num
AC (sfc)
Surface

930

8/9

8/10

8/11

8/13

8/12
Date (Month/Day)

8/14

8/15

8/16

 

B-4 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

WFO Tampas WSR-88D Reflectivity Image on August 13, 2004 at 3:56 p.m. 

 

 

 

B-5 

