 

1
r
a
l
u
c
r
i
C

w
Copyright Basics

What Is Copyright?

Copyright is a form of protection provided by the laws of the United States 
(title 17, U. S. Code) to the authors of original works of authorship, including 
literary, dramatic, musical, artistic, and certain other intellectual works. This 
protection is available to both published and unpublished works. Section 106 
of the 1976 Copyright Act generally gives the owner of copyright the exclusive 
right to do and to authorize others to do the following:

	 reproduce	the	work	in	copies	or	phonorecords

	 prepare	derivative	works	based	upon	the	work

	 distribute	copies	or	phonorecords	of	the	work	to	the	public	by	sale	or	other	

transfer of ownership, or by rental, lease, or lending

	 perform	the	work	publicly,	in	the	case	of	literary,	musical,	dramatic,	and	
choreographic works, pantomimes, and motion pictures and other audio
visual works

	 display	the	work	publicly,	in	the	case	of	literary,	musical,	dramatic,	and	
choreographic works, pantomimes, and pictorial, graphic, or sculptural 
works, including the individual images of a motion picture or other  
audio visual work

	 perform	the	work	publicly	(in	the	case	of	sound	recordings*)		by	means	of	

a digital audio transmission

In addition, certain authors of works of visual art have the rights of attribu
tion and integrity as described in section 106A of the 1976 Copyright Act. For 
further information, see Circular 40, Copyright Registration for Works of the 
Visual Arts.

It is illegal for anyone to violate any of the rights provided by the copyright 

law to the owner of copyright. These rights, however, are not unlimited in 
scope. Sections 107 through 122 of the 1976 Copyright Act establish limitations 
on these rights. In some cases, these limitations are specified exemptions from 
copyright liability. One major limitation is the doctrine of fair use, which 
is given a statutory basis in section 107 of the 1976 Copyright Act. In other 
instances, the limitation takes the form of a compulsory license under which 
certain limited uses of copyrighted works are permitted upon payment of 
specified royalties and compliance with statutory conditions. For further infor
mation about the limitations of any of these rights, consult the copyright law or 
write to the Copyright Office.

*note: Sound recordings are defined in the law as works that result from the 
fixation of a series of musical, spoken, or other sounds, but not including the 
sounds accompanying a motion picture or other audiovisual work. Common 

2  1.0512

examples include recordings of music, drama, or lectures. A 
sound recording is not the same as a phonorecord. A phono-
record is the physical object in which works of authorship are 
embodied. The word phonorecord includes cassette tapes, 
CDs, and vinyl disks as well as other formats.

	 Minors	may	claim	copyright,	but	state	laws	may	regulate	

the business dealings involving copyrights owned by 
minors. For information on relevant state laws, consult an 
attorney.

Copyright Basics    2

Who Can Claim Copyright?

Copyright protection subsists from the time the work is cre
ated in fixed form. The copyright in the work of authorship 
immediately becomes the property of the author who cre
ated the work. Only the author or those deriving their rights 
through the author can rightfully claim copyright.

In the case of works made for hire, the employer and not 
the employee is considered to be the author. Section 101 of 
the copyright law defines a work made for hire as:

1  a work prepared by an employee within the scope of his or 

her employment; or

2  a work specially ordered or commissioned for use as:

	 a	contribution	to	a	collective	work
	 a	part	of	a	motion	picture	or	other	audiovisual	work
	 a	translation
	 a	supplementary	work
	 a	compilation
	 an	instructional	text
	 a	test
	 answer	material	for	a	test
	 an	atlas

 

if the parties expressly agree in a written instrument 
signed by them that the work shall be considered a work 
made for hire.

The authors of a joint work are coowners of the copyright 

in the work, unless there is an agreement to the contrary.

Copyright in each separate contribution to a periodical 
or other collective work is distinct from copyright in the col
lective work as a whole and vests initially with the author of 
the contribution.

Two General Principles
	 Mere	ownership	of	a	book,	manuscript,	painting,	or	any	

other copy or phonorecord does not give the possessor 
the copyright. The law provides that transfer of ownership 
of any material object that embodies a protected work 
does not of itself convey any rights in the copyright.

Copyright and National Origin of the Work

Copyright protection is available for all unpublished works, 
regardless of the nationality or domicile of the author.

Published works are eligible for copyright protection in the 

United States if any one of the following conditions is met:

	 On	the	date	of	first	publication,	one	or	more	of	the	

authors is a national or domiciliary of the United States, 
or is a national, domiciliary, or sovereign authority of a 
treaty	party,*	or	is	a	stateless	person	wherever	that	person	
may be domiciled; or

	 The	work	is	first	published	in	the	United	States	or	in	a	
foreign nation that, on the date of first publication, is a 
treaty party. For purposes of this condition, a work that is 
published in the United States or a treaty party within 30 
days after publication in a foreign nation that is not a 
treaty party shall be considered to be first published in the 
United States or such treaty party, as the case may be; or

	 The	work	is	a	sound	recording	that	was	first	fixed	in	a	

treaty party; or

	 The	work	is	a	pictorial,	graphic,	or	sculptural	work	that	

is incorporated in a building or other structure, or an 
architectural work that is embodied in a building and the 
building or structure is located in the United States or a 
treaty party; or

	 The	work	is	first	published	by	the	United	Nations	or	

any of its specialized agencies, or by the Organization of 
American States; or

	 The	work	is	a	foreign	work	that	was	in	the	public	domain	

in the United States prior to 1996 and its copyright was 
restored under the Uruguay Round Agreements Act 
(URAA). See Circular 38b, Highlights of Copyright Amend-
ments Contained in the Uruguay Round Agreements Act 
(URAA-GATT), for further information.

	 The	work	comes	within	the	scope	of	a	presidential	 

proclamation.

*A treaty party is a country or intergovernmental organization 
other than the United States that is a party to an interna-
tional agreement.

What Works Are Protected?

Copyright protects original works of authorship that are 
fixed in a tangible form of expression. The fixation need not 
be directly perceptible so long as it may be communicated 
with the aid of a machine or device. Copyrightable works 
include the following categories:
1  literary works
2  musical works, including any accompanying words
3  dramatic works, including any accompanying music
4  pantomimes and choreographic works
5  pictorial, graphic, and sculptural works
6  motion pictures and other audiovisual works
7  sound recordings
8  architectural works

These categories should be viewed broadly. For example, 
computer programs and most compilations may be regis
tered as literary works; maps and architectural plans may 
be registered as pictorial, graphic, and sculptural works.

What Is Not Protected by Copyright?

Several categories of material are generally not eligible for 
federal copyright protection. These include among others:

	 works	that	have	not	been	fixed	in	a	tangible	form	of	

expression (for example, choreographic works that have 
not been notated or recorded, or improvisational speeches 
or performances that have not been written or recorded)

	 titles,	names,	short	phrases,	and	slogans;	familiar	symbols	
or designs; mere variations of typographic ornamentation, 
lettering, or coloring; mere listings of ingredients or contents

	 ideas,	procedures,	methods,	systems,	processes,	concepts,	
principles, discoveries, or devices, as distinguished from a 
description, explanation, or illustration

	 works	consisting	entirely	of	information	that	is	common	

property and containing no original authorship (for 
example: standard calendars, height and weight charts, 
tape measures and rulers, and lists or tables taken from 
public documents or other common sources)

How to Secure a Copyright
Copyright Secured Automatically upon Creation
The way in which copyright protection is secured is frequently 
misunderstood.	No	publication	or	registration	or	other	action

Copyright Basics    3

in the Copyright Office is required to secure copyright. See the 
following note. There are, however, certain definite advantages 
to registration. See Copyright Registration on page 7.

Copyright is secured automatically when the work is cre

ated, and a work is created when it is fixed in a copy or 
phonorecord for the first time. Copies are material objects 
from which a work can be read or visually perceived either 
directly or with the aid of a machine or device, such as books, 
manuscripts, sheet music, film, videotape, or microfilm. 
Phonorecords are material objects embodying fixations of 
sounds (excluding, by statutory definition, motion picture 
soundtracks), such as cassette tapes, CDs, or vinyl disks. 
Thus, for example, a song (the work) can be fixed in sheet 
music (copies) or in phonograph disks (phonorecords), 
or both. If a work is prepared over a period of time, the part 
of the work that is fixed on a particular date constitutes the 
created work as of that date.

Publication

Publication is no longer the key to obtaining federal copy
right as it was under the Copyright Act of 1909. However, 
publication remains important to copyright owners.

The 1976 Copyright Act defines publication as follows:

Publication is the distribution of copies or phonorecords 
of a work to the public by sale or other transfer of owner-
ship, or by rental, lease, or lending. The offering to distribute 
copies or phonorecords to a group of persons for purposes 
of further distribution, public performance, or public 
display constitutes publication. A public performance or 
display of a work does not of itself constitute publication.

note: Before 1978, federal copyright was generally secured 
by the act of publication with notice of copyright, assuming 
compliance with all other relevant statutory conditions. U. S. 
works in the public domain on January 1, 1978, (for example, 
works published without satisfying all conditions for securing 
federal copyright under the Copyright Act of 1909) remain in 
the public domain under the 1976 Copyright Act. 
  Certain foreign works originally published without notice 
had their copyrights restored under the Uruguay Round 
Agreements Act (URAA). See Circular 38b and see Notice of 
Copyright section on page 4 for further information. 
 
Federal copyright could also be secured before 1978 by the 
act of registration in the case of certain unpublished works 
and works eligible for ad interim copyright. The 1976 Copy-
right Act automatically extended copyright protection to full 
term for all works that, as of January 1, 1978, were subject to 
statutory protection.

A further discussion of the definition of publication can 

be found in the legislative history of the 1976 Copyright 
Act. The legislative reports define to the public as distri
bution to persons under no explicit or implicit restrictions 
with respect to disclosure of the contents. The reports state 
that the definition makes it clear that the sale of phonore
cords constitutes publication of the underlying work, for 
example, the musical, dramatic, or literary work embodied 
in a phonorecord. The reports also state that it is clear that 
any form of dissemination in which the material object does 
not change hands, for example, performances or displays on 
television, is not a publication no matter how many people 
are exposed to the work. However, when copies or phono
records are offered for sale or lease to a group of wholesalers, 
broadcasters, or motion picture theaters, publication does 
take place if the purpose is further distribution, public per
formance, or public display.

Publication is an important concept in the copyright law 

for several reasons:

	 Works	that	are	published	in	the	United	States	are	subject	
to mandatory deposit with the Library of Congress. See 
discussion	on	Mandatory	Deposit	for	Works	Published	
in the United States on page 10.

	 Publication	of	a	work	can	affect	the	limitations	on	the	

exclusive rights of the copyright owner that are set forth 
in sections 107 through 122 of the law.

	 The	year	of	publication	may	determine	the	duration	of	

copyright protection for anonymous and pseudonymous 
works (when the authors identity is not revealed in the 
rec ords of the Copyright Office) and for works made for 
hire.

	 Deposit	requirements	for	registration	of	published	works	

differ from those for registration of unpublished works. 
See discussion on Registration Procedures on page 7.

	 When	a	work	is	published,	it	may	bear	a	notice	of	copy
right to identify the year of publication and the name of 
the copyright owner and to inform the public that the 
work is protected by copyright. Copies of works pub
lished	before	March	1,	1989,	must	bear	the	notice	or	risk	
loss	of	copyright	protection.	See	discussion	on	Notice	of	
Copyright below.

Notice of Copyright

Copyright Basics    4

contain such a requirement, however, the use of notice is still 
relevant to the copyright status of older works.

Notice	was	required	under	the	1976	Copyright	Act.	This	

requirement was eliminated when the United States adhered 
to	the	Berne	Convention,	effective	March	1,	1989.	Although	
works published without notice before that date could have 
entered the public domain in the United States, the Uruguay 
Round Agreements Act (URAA) restores copyright in certain 
foreign works originally published without notice. For fur
ther information about copyright amendments in the URAA, 
see Circular 38b.

The Copyright Office does not take a position on whether 

copies	of	works	first	published	with	notice	before	March	1,	
1989,	which	are	distributed	on	or	after	March	1,	1989,	must	
bear the copyright notice.

Use of the notice may be important because it informs 

the public that the work is protected by copyright, identifies 
the copyright owner, and shows the year of first publication. 
Furthermore, in the event that a work is infringed, if a proper 
notice of copyright appears on the published copy or copies to 
which a defendant in a copyright infringement suit had access, 
then no weight shall be given to such a defendants interposi
tion of a defense based on innocent infringement in mitigation 
of actual or statutory damages, except as provided in section 
504(c)(2) of the copyright law. Innocent infringement occurs 
when the infringer did not realize that the work was protected.
The use of the copyright notice is the responsibility of the 

copyright owner and does not require advance permission 
from, or registration with, the Copyright Office.

Form of Notice for Visually Perceptible Copies
The notice for visually perceptible copies should contain all 
the following three elements:
1  The symbol  (the letter C in a circle), or the word 

Copyright, or the abbreviation Copr.; and

2  The year of first publication of the work. In the case of 

compilations or derivative works incorporating previously 
published material, the year date of first publication of 
the compilation or derivative work is sufficient. The year 
date may be omitted where a pictorial, graphic, or sculp
tural work, with accompanying textual matter, if any, is 
reproduced in or on greeting cards, postcards, stationery, 
jewelry, dolls, toys, or any useful article; and

3  The name of the owner of copyright in the work, or an 
abbreviation by which the name can be recognized, or a 
generally known alternative designation of the owner.

The use of a copyright notice is no longer required under 
U. S. law, although it is often beneficial. Because prior law did 

Example:   2011 John Doe

The C in a circle notice is used only on visually percep
tible copies. Certain kinds of worksfor example, musical, 
dramatic, and literary worksmay be fixed not in copies 
but by means of sound in an audio recording. Since audio 
recordings such as audio tapes and phonograph disks are 
phonorecords and not copies, the C in a circle notice is 
not used to indicate protection of the underlying musical, 
dramatic, or literary work that is recorded.

Form of Notice for Phonorecords of Sound Recordings
The notice for phonorecords embodying a sound recording 
should contain all the following three elements:
1  The symbol  (the letter P in a circle); and
2  The year of first publication of the sound recording; and

3  The name of the owner of copyright in the sound 

recording, or an abbreviation by which the name can be 
recognized, or a generally known alternative designation 
of the owner. If the producer of the sound recording is 
named on the phonorecord label or container and if no 
other name appears in conjunction with the notice, the 
producers name shall be considered a part of the notice.

Example:   2011 A.B.C. Records Inc.

note: Since questions may arise from the use of variant 
forms of the notice, you may wish to seek legal advice before 
using any form of the notice other than those given here.

Position of Notice
The copyright notice should be affixed to copies or phonore
cords in such a way as to give reasonable notice of the claim 
of copyright. The three elements of the notice should ordi
narily appear together on the copies or phonorecords or on 
the phonorecord label or container. The Copyright Office 
has issued regulations concerning the form and position of 
the copyright notice in the Code of Federal Regulations (37 CFR 
201.20). For more information, see Circular 3, Copyright Notice.

Publications Incorporating U. S. Government Works
Works	by	the	U. S. government are not eligible for U. S. copy
right	protection.	For	works	published	on	and	after	March	
1, 1989, the previous notice requirement for works consist
ing primarily of one or more U. S. government works has 
been eliminated. However, use of a notice on such a work 
will defeat a claim of innocent infringement as previously 
described provided the notice also includes a statement that 
identifies either those portions of the work in which copy
right is claimed or those portions that constitute U. S. gov
ernment material.

Copyright Basics    5

Example:   2011 Jane Brown 

Copyright claimed in chapters 710, 
exclusive of U. S. government maps

Copies	of	works	published	before	March	1,	1989,	that	con
sist primarily of one or more works of the U. S. government 
should have a notice and the identifying statement.

Unpublished Works
The author or copyright owner may wish to place a copyright 
notice on any unpublished copies or phonorecords that leave 
his or her control.

Example: Unpublished work  2011 Jane Doe

Omission of Notice and Errors in Notice
The 1976 Copyright Act attempted to ameliorate the strict 
consequences of failure to include notice under prior law. It 
contained provisions that set out specific corrective steps 
to cure omissions or certain errors in notice. Under these 
provisions, an applicant had five years after publication to 
cure omission of notice or certain errors. Although these 
provisions are technically still in the law, their impact has 
been limited by the amendment making notice optional for 
all	works	published	on	and	after	March	1,	1989.	For	further	
information, see Circular 3.

How Long Copyright Protection Endures
Works Originally Created on or after January 1, 1978
A work that was created (fixed in tangible form for the first 
time) on or after January 1, 1978, is automatically protected 
from the moment of its creation and is ordinarily given a 
term enduring for the authors life plus an additional 70 
years after the authors death. In the case of a joint work 
prepared by two or more authors who did not work for hire, 
the term lasts for 70 years after the last surviving authors 
death. For works made for hire, and for anonymous and 
pseudonymous works (unless the authors identity is revealed 
in Copyright Office records), the duration of copyright will 
be 95 years from publication or 120 years from creation, 
whichever is shorter.

Works Originally Created Before January 1, 1978,  
But Not Published or Registered by That Date
These works have been automatically brought under the stat
ute and are now given federal copyright protection. The du 
ration of copyright in these works is generally computed in 
the same way as for works created on or after January 1, 1978: 

the lifeplus70 or 95/120year terms apply to them as well. 
The law provides that in no case would the term of copy right 
for works in this category expire before December 31, 2002, 
and for works published on or before December 31, 2002, the 
term of copyright will not expire before December 31, 2047.

Works Originally Created and Published or Registered 
before January 1, 1978
Under the law in effect before 1978, copyright was secured 
either on the date a work was published with a copyright 
notice or on the date of registration if the work was reg
istered in unpublished form. In either case, the copyright 
endured for a first term of 28 years from the date it was 
secured. During the last (28th) year of the first term, the 
copyright was eligible for renewal. The Copyright Act of 1976 
extended the renewal term from 28 to 47 years for copyrights 
that were subsisting on January 1, 1978, or for pre1978 copy
rights restored under the Uruguay Round Agreements Act 
(URAA), making these works eligible for a total term of pro
tection of 75 years. Public Law 105298, enacted on October 
27, 1998, further extended the renewal term of copyrights 
still subsisting on that date by an additional 20 years, provid
ing for a renewal term of 67 years and a total term of protec
tion of 95 years.

Public Law 102307, enacted on June 26, 1992, amended 
the 1976 Copyright Act to provide for automatic renewal of 
the term of copyrights secured between January 1, 1964, and 
December 31, 1977. Although the renewal term is automati
cally provided, the Copyright Office does not issue a renewal 
certificate for these works unless a renewal application and 
fee are received and registered in the Copyright Office.

Public Law 102307 makes renewal registration optional. 

Thus, filing for renewal registration is no longer required 
to extend the original 28year copyright term to the full 95 
years. However, some benefits accrue to renewal registrations 
that were made during the 28th year.

For more detailed information on renewal of copyright 

and the copyright term, see Circular 15, Renewal of Copyright; 
Circular 15a, Duration of Copyright; and Circular 15t, Extension 
of Copyright Terms.

Copyright Basics    6

A copyright may also be conveyed by operation of law and 

may be bequeathed by will or pass as personal property by 
the applicable laws of intestate succession.

Copyright is a personal property right, and it is subject to 
the various state laws and regulations that govern the owner
ship, inheritance, or transfer of personal property as well as 
terms of contracts or conduct of business. For information 
about relevant state laws, consult an attorney.

Transfers of copyright are normally made by contract. The 
Copyright Office does not have any forms for such transfers. 
The law does provide for the recordation in the Copyright 
Office of transfers of copyright ownership. Although recor
dation is not required to make a valid transfer between the 
parties, it does provide certain legal advantages and may be 
required to validate the transfer as against third parties. For 
information on recordation of transfers and other docu
ments related to copyright, see Circular 12, Recordation of 
Transfers and Other Documents.

Termination of Transfers
Under the previous law, the copyright in a work reverted to 
the author, if living, or if the author was not living, to other 
specified beneficiaries, provided a renewal claim was regis
tered	in	the	28th	year	of	the	original	term.*	The	present	law	
drops the renewal feature except for works already in the first 
term of statutory protection when the present law took effect. 
Instead, the present law permits termination of a grant of 
rights after 35 years under certain conditions by serving writ
ten notice on the transferee within specified time limits.

For works already under statutory copyright protection 
before 1978, the present law provides a similar right of ter
mination covering the newly added years that extended the 
former maximum term of the copyright from 56 to 95 years. 
For further information, see circulars 15a and 15t.

*note: The copyright in works eligible for renewal on or after 
June 26, 1992, will vest in the name of the renewal claimant 
on the effective date of any renewal registration made during 
the 28th year of the original term. Otherwise, the renewal 
copyright will vest in the party entitled to claim renewal as of 
December 31st of the 28th year.

Transfer of Copyright

Any or all of the copyright owners exclusive rights or any 
subdivision of those rights may be transferred, but the trans
fer of exclusive rights is not valid unless that transfer is in 
writing and signed by the owner of the rights conveyed or 
such owners duly authorized agent. Transfer of a right on a 
nonexclusive basis does not require a written agreement.

International Copyright Protection

There is no such thing as an international copyright that 
will automatically protect an authors writings throughout 
the entire world. Protection against unauthorized use in a 
particular country depends, basically, on the national laws of 
that country. However, most countries do offer protection to 

foreign works under certain conditions, and these conditions 
have been greatly simplified by international copyright trea
ties and conventions. For further information and a list of 
countries that maintain copyright relations with the United 
States, see Circular 38a, International Copyright Relations of 
the United States.

Copyright Registration

In general, copyright registration is a legal formality intended 
to make a public record of the basic facts of a particular copy 
right. However, registration is not a condition of copyright 
protection. Even though registration is not a requirement for 
protection, the copyright law provides several inducements 
or advantages to encourage copyright owners to make regis
tration. Among these advantages are the following:

Copyright Basics    7

Registration Procedures
Filing an Original Claim to Copyright with the  
U.S. Copyright Office
An application for copyright registration contains three 
essential elements: a completed application form, a nonre
fundable filing fee, and a nonreturnable depositthat is, a 
copy or copies of the work being registered and deposited 
with the Copyright Office.

If you apply online for copyright registration, you will 
receive an email saying that your application was received. 
If you apply for copyright registration using a paper appli
cation, you will not receive an acknowledgment that your 
application has been received (the Office receives more than 
600,000	applications	annually).	With	either	online	or	paper	
applications, you can expect:

	 a	letter,	telephone	call	or	email	from	a	Copyright	Office	

	 Registration	establishes	a	public	record	of	the	copyright	

staff member if further information is needed or

claim.

	 Before	an	infringement	suit	may	be	filed	in	court,	regis

tration is necessary for works of U. S. origin.

	 If	made	before	or	within	five	years	of	publication,	regis

tration will establish prima facie evidence in court of  
the validity of the copyright and of the facts stated in  
the certificate.

	 If	registration	is	made	within	three	months	after	publica
tion of the work or prior to an infringement of the work, 
statutory damages and attorneys fees will be available to 
the copyright owner in court actions. Otherwise, only an 
award of actual damages and profits is available to the 
copyright owner.

	 Registration	allows	the	owner	of	the	copyright	to	record	

the registration with the U. S. Customs Service for pro
tection against the importation of infringing copies. For 
additional information, go to the U. S. Customs and 
Border Protection website at www.cbp.gov/. 

  Registration may be made at any time within the life of 
the copyright. Unlike the law before 1978, when a work has 
been registered in unpublished form, it is not necessary to 
make another registration when the work becomes published, 
although the copyright owner may register the published 
edition, if desired.

	 a	certificate	of	registration	indicating	that	the	work	has	

been registered, or if the application cannot be accepted, 
a letter explaining why it has been rejected

Requests to have certificates available for pickup in the 

Public Information Office or to have certificates sent by Fed
eral Express or another mail service cannot be honored.

If you apply using a paper application and you want to 

know the date that the Copyright Office receives your mate
rial, send it by registered or certified mail and request a 
return receipt.

You can apply to register your copyright in one of two 

ways.

Online Application
Online registration through the electronic Copyright Office 
(eCO) is the preferred way to register basic claims for literary 
works; visual arts works; performing arts works, including 
motion pictures; sound recordings; and single serials. Advan
tages of online filing include:

	 a	lower	filing	fee

	 the	fastest	processing	time

	 online	status	tracking

	 secure	payment	by	credit	or	debit	card,	electronic	check,	

or Copyright Office deposit account

	 the	ability	to	upload	certain	categories	of	deposits		directly	

into eCO as electronic files

note: You can still register using eCO and save money even if 
you will submit a hard-copy deposit, which is required under 
the mandatory deposit requirements for certain published 
works. The system will prompt you to specify whether you 
intend to submit an electronic or a hard-copy deposit, and it 
will provide instructions accordingly. 

Basic claims include (1) a single work; (2) multiple unpub

lished works if the elements are assembled in an orderly 
form; the combined elements bear a single title identifying 
the collection as a whole; the copyright claimant in all the 
elements and in the collection as a whole is the same; and 
all the elements are by the same author or, if they are by dif
ferent authors, at least one of the authors has contributed 
copyrightable authorship to each element; and (3) multiple 
published works if they are all first published together in the 
same publication on the same date and owned by the same 
claimant. 

Online submissions of groups of published photographs 

and automated databases consisting predominantly of 
photographs may be permitted if the applicant first calls 
the Visual Arts Division (202) 7078202) for approval and 
special instructions. See the Copyright Office website at 
www.copyright.gov for further information. To access eCO, 
go to the Copyright Office website and click on electronic 
Copyright Office.

Paper Application
You can also register your copyright using forms TX (literary 
works); VA (visual arts works); PA (performing arts works, 
including motion pictures); SR (sound recordings); and SE 
(single serials). To access all forms, go to the Copyright Office 
website and click on Forms. On your personal computer, 
complete the form for the type of work you are registering, 
print it out, and mail it with a check or money order and 
your deposit. Blank forms can also be printed out and com
pleted by hand, or they may be requested by postal mail or by 
calling the Forms and Publications Hotline at (202) 7079100 
(limit of two copies of each form by mail). Informational 
circulars about the types of applications and current regis
tration fees are available on the Copyright Office website at 
www.copyright.gov or by phone.

Applications That Must Be Completed on Paper
Certain applications must be completed on paper and 
mailed to the Copyright Office with the appropriate fee and 
deposit. Forms for these applications include the following: 

	 Form	D-VH for registration of vessel hull designs

	 Form	MW for registration of mask works

Copyright Basics    8

	 Form	CA to correct an error or to amplify the informa

tion given in a registration

	 Form	GATT for registration of works in which the U.S. 
copyright was restored under the 1994 Uruguay Round 
Agreements Act

	 Form	RE for renewal of copyright claims

	 Applications	for	group	registration,	including	group	regis
tration of automated databases consisting predominantly 
of photographs and Form GR/PPh (published photo
graphs), unless permission to enter the online pilot proj
ect mentioned above in Online Application is approved 
by the Visual Arts Division; Form GR/CP (contributions 
to periodicals); Form SE/Group (serials); and Form G/DN 
(daily newspapers and newsletters).

note: If you complete the application form by hand, use black 
ink pen or type. You may photocopy blank application forms. 
However, photocopied forms submitted to the Copyright 
Office must be clear and legible on a good grade of 8V" * 11" 
white paper. Forms not meeting these requirements may be 
returned, resulting in delayed registration. You must have 
Adobe Acrobat Reader installed on your computer to view 
and print the forms accessed on the Internet. Adobe Acrobat 
Reader may be downloaded free from www.copyright.gov.

Mailing Addresses for Applications Filed on  
Paper and for Hard-copy Deposits

Library of Congress 
U.S. Copyright Office 
101 Independence Avenue SE 
Washington, DC 20559

Filing a Renewal Registration
To register a renewal, send the following:

1  a properly completed application Form RE and, if neces

sary, Form RE Addendum, and

2	 a	nonrefundable	filing	fee*	for	each	application	and	each	
Addendum. Each Addendum form must be accompanied 
by a deposit representing the work being renewed. See 
Circular 15, Renewal of Copyright.

*note: For current fee information, check the Copyright Office 
website at www.copyright.gov, write the Copyright Office, or 
call (202) 707-3000 or 1-877-476-0778.

Deposit Requirements 
If you file an application for copyright registration online 
using eCO, you may in some cases attach an electronic copy 

of your deposit. If you do not have an electronic copy or 
if you must send a hard copy or copies of your deposit to 
comply with the best edition requirements for published 
works, you must print out a shipping slip, attach it to your 
deposit, and mail the deposit to the Copyright Office. Send 
the deposit, fee, and paper registration form packaged 
together to: 

Library of Congress 
U.S. Copyright Office 
101 Independence Avenue SE 
Washington, DC 20559

The hardcopy deposit of the work being registered will 

not be returned to you.

The deposit requirements vary in particular situations. 

The general requirements follow. Also note the information 
under Special Deposit Requirements in the next column.

	 if	the	work	is	unpublished,	one	complete	copy	or	phono

record

	 if	the	work	was	first	published	in	the	United	States	on	or	

after January 1, 1978, two complete copies or phonore
cords of the best edition

	 if	the	work	was	first	published	in	the	United	States	before	
January 1, 1978, two complete copies or phonorecords of 
the work as first published

	 if	the	work	was	first	published	outside	the	United	States,	

one complete copy or phonorecord of the work as first 
published

When	registering	with	eCO, you will receive via your 
printer a shipping slip that you must include with your 
deposit that you send to the Copyright Office. This shipping 
slip is unique to your claim to copyright and will link your 
deposit to your application. Do not reuse the shipping slip.

note: It is imperative when sending multiple works that you 
place all applications, deposits, and fees in the same package. If 
it is not possible to fit everything in one package, number each 
package (e.g., 1 of 3; 2 of 4) to facilitate processing and, where 
possible, attach applications to the appropriate deposits.

Special Deposit Requirements
Special deposit requirements exist for many types of works. 
The following are prominent examples of exceptions to the 
general deposit requirements:

	 If	the	work	is	a	motion	picture,	the	deposit	requirement	

is one complete copy of the unpublished or published 
motion picture and a separate written description of its 
contents, such as a continuity, press book, or synopsis.

Copyright Basics    9

	 If	the	work	is	a	literary,	dramatic,	or	musical	work	pub
lished only in a phonorecord, the deposit requirement is 
one complete phonorecord.

	 If	the	work	is	an	unpublished	or	published	computer	pro
gram, the deposit requirement is one visually perceptible 
copy in source code of the first 25 and last 25 pages of 
the program. For a program of fewer than 50 pages, the 
deposit is a copy of the entire program. For more infor
mation on com puter program registration, including 
deposits for re vised programs and provisions for trade 
secrets, see Circular 61, Copyright Registration for Com-
puter Programs.

	 If	the	work	is	in	a	CD-ROM format, the deposit require

ment is one complete copy of the material, that is, the 
CD-ROM, the operating software, and any manual(s) 
accompanying it. If registration is sought for the com
puter program on the CD-ROM, the deposit should 
also include a printout of the first 25 and last 25 pages of 
source code for the program.

In the case of works reproduced in threedimensional 

copies, identifying material such as photographs or drawings 
is ordinarily required. Other examples of special deposit 
requirements (but by no means an exhaustive list) include 
many works of the visual arts such as greeting cards, toys, 
fabrics, and oversized materials (see Circular 40a, Deposit 
Requirements for Registration of Claims to Copyright in Visual 
Arts Material); computer programs, video games, and other 
machinereadable audiovisual works (see Circular 61); auto
mated databases (see Circular 65, Copyright Registration for 
Automated Databases); and contributions to collective works. 
For information about deposit requirements for group regis
tration of serials, see Circular 62, Copyright Registration for 
Serials.

If you are unsure of the deposit requirement for your 
work, write or call the Copyright Office and describe the 
work you wish to register.

Unpublished Collections
Under the following conditions, a work may be registered 
in unpublished form as a collection, with one application 
form and one fee:

	 The	elements	of	the	collection	are	assembled	in	an	

orderly form;

	 The	combined	elements	bear	a	single	title	identifying	the	

collection as a whole;

	 The	copyright	claimant	in	all	the	elements	and	in	the	col

lection as a whole is the same; and

	 All	the	elements	are	by	the	same	author,	or,	if	they	are	by	
different authors, at least one of the authors has contrib
uted copyrightable authorship to each element.

note: A Library of Congress Control Number is different from 
a copyright registration number. The Cataloging in Publica-
tion (CIP) Division of the Library of Congress is responsible for 
assigning LC Control Numbers and is operationally separate 
from the Copyright Office. A book may be registered in or 
deposited with the Copyright Office but not necessarily cata-
loged and added to the Librarys collections. For information 
about obtaining an LC Control Number, see the following  
website: http://pcn.loc.gov/pcn. For information on Inter-
national Standard Book Numbering (ISBN), write to: ISBN, R.R. 
Bowker, 630 Central Ave., New Providence, NJ 07974. Call 
(800) 269-5372. For further information and to apply online, 
see www.isbn.org. For information on International Stan-
dard Serial Numbering (ISSN), write to: Library of Congress, 
National Serials Data Program, Serial Record Division, 
Washington, DC 20540-4160. Call (202) 707-6452. Or obtain 
information from www.loc.gov/issn.

An unpublished collection is not indexed under the 

individ ual titles of the contents but under the title of the 
collection.

Filing a Preregistration
Preregistration is a service intended for works that have had a 
history of prerelease infringement. To be eligible for preregis
tration, a work must be unpublished and must be in the pro
cess of being prepared for commercial distribution. It must 
also fall within a class of works determined by the Register of 
Copyrights to have had a history of infringement prior to 
authorized commercial distribution. Preregistration is not a 
substitute for registration. The preregistration application 
Form PRE is only available online. For further information, 
go to the Copyright Office website at www.copyright.gov.

Effective Date of Registration

When	the	Copyright	Office	issues	a	registration	certificate,	
it assigns as the effective date of registration the date it 
received all required elementsan application, a nonrefund
able filing fee, and a nonreturnable depositin acceptable 
form, regardless of how long it took to process the applica
tion and mail the certificate. You do not have to receive your 
certificate before you publish or produce your work, nor 
do you need permission from the Copyright Office to place 
a copyright notice on your work. However, the Copyright 
Office must have acted on your application before you can 

Copyright Basics    10

file a suit for copyright infringement, and certain remedies, 
such as statutory damages and attorneys fees, are available 
only for acts of infringement that occurred after the effective 
date of registration. If a published work was infringed before 
the effective date of registration, those remedies may also be 
available if the effective date of registration is no later than 
three months after the first publication of the work.

Corrections and Amplifications of  
Existing Registrations

To correct an error in a copyright registration or to amplify 
the information given in a registration, file with the Copy
right Office a supplementary registration Form CA. File 
Form CA in the same manner as described above under 
Registration Procedures. The information in a supplementary 
registration augments but does not supersede that contained 
in	the	earlier	registration.	Note	also	that	a	supplementary	
registration is not a substitute for original registration, for 
renewal registration, or for recordation of a transfer of own
ership. For further information about supplementary regis
tration, see Circular 8, Supplementary Copyright Registration.

Mandatory Deposit for Works Published  
in the United States

Although a copyright registration is not required, the Copy
right Act establishes a mandatory deposit requirement for 
works published in the United States. See the definition of 
publication on page 3. In general, the owner of copyright or 
the owner of the exclusive right of publication in the work 
has a legal obligation to deposit in the Copyright Office, 
within three months of publication in the United States, two 
copies (or in the case of sound recordings, two phonore
cords) for the use of the Library of Congress. Failure to make 
the deposit can result in fines and other penalties but does 
not affect copyright protection.

If a registration for a claim to copyright in a published 

work is filed online and the deposit is submitted online, the 
actual physical deposit must still be submitted to satisfy 
mandatory deposit requirements.

Certain categories of works are exempt entirely from 

the mandatory deposit requirements, and the obligation is 
reduced for certain other categories. For further informa
tion about mandatory deposit, see Circular 7d, Mandatory 
Deposit of Copies or Phonorecords for the Library of Congress.

Use of Mandatory Deposit to Satisfy  
Registration Requirements

Fees*

Copyright Basics    11

For works published in the United States, the copyright law 
contains a provision under which a single deposit can be 
made to satisfy both the deposit requirements for the Library 
and the registration requirements. To have this dual effect, 
the copies or phonorecords must be accompanied by the pre
scribed application form and filing fee. If applicable, a copy 
of the mandatory deposit notice must also be included with 
the submission.

Who May File an Application Form?

The following persons are legally entitled to submit an appli
cation form:
	 The author. This is either the person who actually created 
the work or, if the work was made for hire, the employer 
or other person for whom the work was prepared.
	 The copyright claimant. The copyright claimant is 

defined in Copyright Office regulations as either the 
author of the work or a person or organization that has 
obtained ownership of all the rights under the copyright 
initially belonging to the author. This category includes a 
person or organization who has obtained by contract the 
right to claim legal title to the copyright in an application 
for copyright registration.

	 The owner of exclusive right(s). Under the law, any of the 
exclusive rights that make up a copyright and any subdi
vision of them can be transferred and owned separately, 
even though the transfer may be limited in time or place of 
effect. The term copyright owner with respect to any one 
of the exclusive rights contained in a copyright refers to 
the owner of that particular right. Any owner of an exclu
sive right may apply for registration of a claim in the work.
	 The duly authorized agent of such author, other copy right 
claimant, or owner of exclusive right(s). Any person author
 ized to act on behalf of the author, other copyright claim
ant, or owner of exclusive rights may apply for registration.

There is no requirement that applications be prepared or 

filed by an attorney.

All remittances that are not made online or by deposit 
account should be in the form of drafts, that is, checks, 
money orders, or bank drafts, payable to Register of Copy-
rights. Do not send cash. Drafts must be redeemable without 
service or exchange fee through a U. S. institution, must be 
payable in U. S. dollars, and must be imprinted with Ameri
can Banking Association routing numbers. International 
Money	Orders	and	Postal	Money	Orders	that	are	negotiable	
only at a post office are not acceptable.

If a check received in payment of the filing fee is returned 
to the Copyright Office as uncollectible, the Copyright Office 
will cancel the registration and will notify the remitter.

The filing fee for processing an original, supplementary, 

or renewal claim is nonrefundable, whether or not copyright 
registration is ultimately made. Do not send cash. The Copy
right Office cannot assume any responsibility for the loss 
of currency sent in payment of copyright fees. For further 
information, read Circular 4, Copyright Fees.

*note: Copyright Office fees are subject to change. For current 
fees, check the Copyright Office website at www.copyright.
gov, write the Copyright Office, or call (202) 707-3000 or 1-877-
476-0778.

Certain Fees and Services May Be Charged to a Credit Card

If an application is submitted online, payment may be made 
by credit card or Copyright Office deposit account. If an 
application is submitted on a paper application form, the fee 
may not be charged to a credit card. 

Some fees may be charged by telephone and in person in 

the office. Others may only be charged in person in the office. 
Fees related to items that are handcarried into the Public 
Information Office may be charged to a credit card.
	 Records Research and Certification Section: Fees for the 

following can be charged in person in the Office or by 
phone: additional certificates; copies of documents and 
deposits; search and retrieval of deposits; certifications; 
and expedited processing. In addition, fees for estimates 
of the cost of searching Copyright Office records and for 
searches of the copyright facts of registrations and recor
dations on a regular or expedited basis may be charged to 
a credit card by phone.

	 Public Information Office: These fees may only be charged 

in person in the office, not by phone: standard registra
tion request forms; special handling requests for all stan
dard registrations; requests for services provided by the 
Records, Research, and Certification Section when the 

request is accompanied by a request for special handling; 
additional fee for each claim using the same deposit; full 
term retention fees; appeal fees; secure test processing fee; 
short fee payments when accompanied by a remittance 
due notice; and online service providers fees.

5:00 pm,	eastern	time,	Monday	through	Friday,	except	federal	
holidays. Recorded information is available 24 hours a day. If 
you want to request paper application forms or circulars, call 
the Forms and Publications Hotline at (202) 7079100 and 
leave a recorded message.

Copyright Basics    12

	 Public Records Reading Room: Onsite use of Copyright 

Office computers, printers, or  photocopiers can be 
charged in person in the office.

	 Accounts Section: Deposit accounts maintained by the 
Accounts Section may be replenished by credit card. See 
Circular 5, How to Open and Maintain a Deposit Account 
in the Copyright Office.

By Regular Mail
Write	to:

Library of Congress 
Copyright Office-COPUBS 
101 Independence Avenue SE 
Washington, DC 20559

The Copyright Public Information Office is open to the 
public 8:30 am to 5:00 pm	Monday	through	Friday,	eastern	
time, except federal holidays. The office is located in the 
Library	of	Congress,	James	Madison	Memorial	Building,	101	
Independence Avenue SE,	Washington,	DC, near the Capitol 
South	Metro	stop.	Staff	members	are	available	to	answer	
questions, provide circulars, and accept paper applications 
for registration. Access for disabled individuals is at the front 
door on Independence Avenue SE.

The Copyright Office may not give legal advice. If you 
need information or guidance on matters such as disputes 
over copyright ownership, suits against possible infringers, 
procedures for publishing a work, or methods of obtaining 
royalty payments, you may need to consult an attorney.

note: The Copyright Office provides NewsNet, a free elec-
tronic mailing list that issues periodic email messages on the 
sub ject of copyright. The messages alert subscribers to hear-
ings, dead lines for comments, new and proposed regulations, 
updates on eService, and other copyright-related subjects. 
NewsNet is not an interactive discussion group. Subscribe to 
NewsNet on the Copyright Office website at www.copyright.
gov. Click on News. You will receive a standard welcoming 
message indicating that your subscription to NewsNet has 
been accepted.

NIE recordations and claims filed on Form GATT may be 

paid by credit card if the card number is included in a sepa
rate letter that accompanies the form.

Search of Copyright Office Records

The records of the Copyright Office are open for inspection 
and searching by the public. Upon request and payment of 
a	fee,*	the	Copyright	Office	will	search	its	records	for	you.	
For information on searching the Office records concerning 
the copyright status or ownership of a work, see Circular 22, 
How to Investigate the Copyright Status of a Work, and Circu
lar 23, The Copyright Card Catalog and the Online Files of the 
Copyright Office.

Copyright Office records in machinereadable form cata
loged from January 1, 1978, to the present, including registra
tion and renewal information and recorded documents, are 
available for searching on the Copyright Office website at 
www.copyright.gov.

For Further Information
By Internet
Circulars, announcements, regulations, all application forms, 
and other materials are available from the Copyright Office 
website at www.copyright.gov. To send an email communica
tion, click on Contact Us at the bottom of the homepage.

By Telephone
For general information about copyright, call the Copyright 
Public Information Office at (202) 7073000 or 1877476
0778 (toll free). Staff members are on duty from 8:30 am to 

U.S. Copyright Office 
  Library of Congress 
circular 1  reviewed: 05  2012  Printed on recycled paper 

  101 Independence Avenue SE 

  Washington, DC 20559 

  www.copyright.gov
u.s. government printing office: 2012-xxx-xxx  xx,xxx

