Economic Incentives and Wildlife Conservation

Erwin H. Bulte
Department of Economics
Tilburg University, The Netherlands

G. Cornelis van Kooten
Department of Economics
University of Victoria, Canada

Timothy Swanson
Department of Economics
University of London, United Kingdom

Draft: October 27, 2003
________________________________________________________________________

Wildlife exploitation and conservation involves various costs and benefits, which
should all be taken into account to achieve an optimal outcome.  For this to occur, it will
be necessary to develop appropriate economic instruments and incentives. Examining the
scope for his is the topic of the current study.  The time and funds available to complete
this  paper  were  extremely  limited,  which  effectively  made  it  impossible  to  complete  a
thorough and detailed analysis.  As a result, in the paper we focus on what can be learned
from  standard  economics.    The  paper  lacks  the  level  of  detail  and  data  to  provide
guidance in many operational issues.

Wildlife  management  poses  a  particular  challenge  to  the  global  community
because wildlife has an impact not only on people living in areas where wildlife is found,
but also on people located considerable distances away. The problem is that the costs and
benefits  of  wildlife  exploitation  facing  source  states  differ  substantially  from  those
faced by other countries.  From an economists perspective, the main wildlife problem is
that all too often many of the costs of harvesting wildlife are not appropriately taken into
account.  In  particular,  the  values  that  wildlife  such  as  elephants,  tigers  and  rhinoceros
have for people who may someday view them in the wild and the values that such fauna
have  for  people  who  are  simply  delighted  to  know  that  such  wildlife  exist  (having  no
intention of ever viewing them) are ignored in most harvesting decisions. Further, when
property rights are insecure, those who harvest wildlife do not take into account the cost
of their actions on the future availability of the resource because they do not have a stake
in wildlife beyond those accessible to them today. This cost is referred to as the user
cost  and  it  is  typically  ignored  in  harvest  decisions  unless  property  rights  are  clearly
stated, and protected. As a result, in situ wildlife is undervalued leading to their possible
overexploitation (see below).

1

In  essence,  there  is  a  divergence  between  what  is  optimal  from  a  regional,
community  or  individual  perspective,  and  what  is  optimal  from  the  perspective  of  a
country  or  even  global  society.  To  address  this  divergence,  a  variety  of  economic
instruments can be employed. The term economic instrument is used to describe any
device/method used by government to achieve an outcome contrary to (other than) the
one  that  occurs  in  the  absence  of  any  government  intervention.  The  government
essentially  has  three  categories  of  economic  instruments  available  to  it:  (1)  common
values  and  norms  (threats  or  moral  suasion  in  economic  terms),  (2)  command  and
control,  and  (3)  market  incentives,  which  are  also  referred  to  as  economic  incentives
(EIs).  Moral  suasion  refers  to  the  ability  of  the  state  to  convince  economic  agents
(individuals or firms) to act in a fashion that is socially desirable. Voluntary instruments
(e.g., product certification/labeling by an industry association), perhaps accompanied by
threats, are one aspect, but there also exist opportunities to convince citizens to report
poachers,  protect  wildlife  habitat  and  so  on.    Economic  or  market  incentives  and
command  and  control  (i.e.,  regulation)  are  generally  used  in  combination,  often  out  of
necessity.

The objective of this study is to examine the scope of economic incentives in the
conservation of wildlife. The focus of the study is on developing countries as these host
most of the biodiversity and wildlife. The main results are as follows: While economists
often  believe  that,  in  general,  the  best  way  to  conserve  wildlife  and  their  habitat  is  to
encourage  efficient  and  sustainable  use  of  these  resources,  the  scope  of  EIs  in  such
conservation efforts as an extra measure to regulate harvesting pressure may in some
cases be limited. Specifically, we argue that there are cases where the usual gains of EIs
may be of secondary importance.  Whether or not such gains materialize depends on the
specific characteristics of a species and the parties involved in its harvesting. This should
be  assessed  on  a  case-by-case  basis.  If  both  the  habitat  and  the  harvesters  are
homogenous (in the sense that there is little variation in the area in which the species is
harvested and the skills/technologies of those harvesting the species), then the gains from
EIs are small. These conditions may hold for (low-tech) open-access harvesting of certain
species in Africa, but not for fisheries where firms of various sizes from individuals to
large corporately-sponsored vessels are engaged in harvesting.

Two important qualifications are in order. First, while the role of EIs in regulation
of harvesting may (but need not) be modest, we argue that international EIs may be of
great  importance  when  it  comes  to  habitat  conservation  (indirectly  contributing  to
wildlife conservation).  In this respect we mainly think of means to capture and channel
non-use values associated with conservation to affected parties living with (or owning)
wildlife  in  developing  countries    an  example  of  international  transfers  or  subsidies.
Second, establishing property rights (or secure use rights for extended periods  that is
establishing  property  rights  in  legal  or  physical  space)  is  consistently  encouraged  by
economists as a first step towards efficient management of resources  both of land and
the wildlife it supports. Whether this first step must be complemented by additional EIs
(tax,  tradable  quota)  to  arrive  at  a  truly  global  optimum,  however,  is  not  certain.
Sometimes additional command and control measures are to be preferred, and sometimes
no additional measures are necessary (for example when external effects are small  see
the next section).

2

We begin by examining why society might wish to intervene in the protection and
provision of wildlife  the economic theory underpinning public wildlife management. In
section  2,  we  provide  a  general  discussion  of  the  types  of  EIs  that  are  available  for
addressing environmental spillovers, focusing on those instruments that may be useful in
wildlife  management.  In  section  3  we  compare  the  performance  of  EIs  with  that  of
command  and  control  instruments  when  addressing  the  two  most  important  threats  to
wildlife;  overexploitation  and  habitat  conversion.  In  section  4  we  emphasize  the
importance of the institutional context, and discuss implications for developing countries.
Section 5 summarizes and concludes, and we propose a few priorities for targeted follow-
up research that can be useful for making progress towards implementation of key issues
raised in the paper.

1. ECONOMIC EFFICIENCY AND VARIOUS FAILURES

Environmental economics has become an important subject within economics as
people  have  become  increasingly  concerned  with  pollution  and  other  forms  of
environmental  damage.  The  fact  that  some  wild  fauna  and  flora  is  threatened  and
endangered can be considered a special form of environmental damage. Therefore, ideas
from  environmental  economics  are  relevant  to  wildlife  management.  What  then  does
economic efficiency mean in a wildlife context?  We consider wildlife  as  broadly  as
possible, encompassing all biotic resources, including timber and fish.

First  off,  economic  efficiency  refers  to  the  maximization  of  the  well-being  or
welfare of citizens within a society. Economists measure welfare using a monetary metric
and define it in terms of the economic surpluses (or rents) that accrue to economic agents
in  their  capacities  as  consumers  and  producers.  The  surplus  accruing  to  consumers  is
given  by  the  difference  between  the  benefit that  they  get  from  consuming  a  bundle  of
goods and services and what they have to pay for those goods and services. In technical
terms, the consumer surplus is the difference between what people are willing to pay
for goods and services and what they actually do pay. Likewise, the producer surplus is
defined as the difference between the revenues from the sale of goods and services and
the  cost  of  providing  them.  Since  fixed  costs  are  sunk  (i.e.,  made  in  the  past  and
unaffected by current decisions), the net benefit accruing to economic agents as owners
of factors of production is given as the difference between total revenue and total variable
costs. In essence, therefore, the total surplus or economic welfare at any time is given by
the difference between the benefit that citizens receive as consumers and the costs of
providing the goods and services consumed  the area between the demand and supply
curves (Figure 1).

To maximize societys overall well being when producing a good, an additional
unit of the good should be provided as long as the benefit from this additional unit (the
marginal benefit), to whomsoever they accrue, exceed the cost of this additional unit (the
marginal  cost),  no  matter  who  incurs  them.  Provision  should  stop  when  the  benefit
received from the last unit equals the cost of supplying that unit  marginal costs equal
marginal benefits.  Marginal benefits (or marginal willingness to pay) define the demand
function,  and  marginal  costs  determine  the  supply  function  (Figure  1).  Then  societys

3

welfare is maximized at the price and quantity where demand intersects supply  where
marginal benefit (demand price) equals marginal cost (supply price). The area between a
falling demand function and a rising supply function, up to the point where they intersect,
represents  the  maximum  sum  of  the  consumer  and  producer  surpluses,  or  maximum
societal welfare, as shown in Figure 1. However, environmental problems arise because
of  three  sorts  of  failure:  institutional  failure,  market  failure  and  policy  failure.    These
forms of failure are clearly interdependent. For example, property rights to resources may
be  insecure  (institutional  failure)  because  governments  fail  to  provide  the  legal
environment that supports them (policy failure) or because of public good characteristics
associated with the resource (market failure).  One result of imperfect property rights can
be  external  effects  (another  form  of  market  failure).    We  will  explain  these  concepts
below.

Price ($ per unit)
Price ($ per unit)

P*
P*

price =
price =
marginal
marginal
cost
cost

Consumer
Consumer
Surplus
Surplus

Producer
Producer
Surplus
Surplus

Supply = marginal cost
Supply = marginal cost

Demand = marginal benefit
Demand = marginal benefit

0
0

Q*
Q*

Quantity per unit time
Quantity per unit time

Figure 1: Maximizing Social Welfare when there is No Market Failure

1.1 Institutional failure: Ill-defined and enforced property rights

First,  consider  the  pervasive  problem  of  institutional  failure.  The  most  relevant
manifestation  of  institutional  failure  for  the  case  of  wildlife  and  trade  in  species  is
probably  insecure  property  rights,  or  open  access  to  resources    both  the  species
themselves  and  the  land  upon  which  they  live.  Property  rights  can  be  understood  as
characteristics  that  define  the  rights  and  duties  associated  with  the  use  of  a  particular
asset or resource. Four property regimes are usually identified.

4

Private property In this case, the private owner has the right to utilize and benefit
1. 
from  the  exploitation,  conservation  or  sale  of  wildlife,  as  long  as  no  (socially
unacceptable) externalities are imposed on others (e.g., when shooting wildlife endangers
the  lives  of  others).  Private  ownership  does  not  imply  absence  of  state  regulation
(control), as private property cannot exist without state sanction and protection.

State  property  The  state  owns  the  wildlife  and  individuals  may  be  allowed  to
2. 
harvest them, but only according to rules imposed by the state or the CITES Management
Authority.

Common property In this case, a group owns and manages the wildlife resource,
3. 
and the group excludes those who are not members. Members of the group have specified
rights and duties, while non-members must accept exclusion. Coordination (regulation) of
management may or may not be forthcoming, depending on local circumstances.

No property rights (res nullius) When a property right is not assigned, open or
4. 
free  access  is  the  result.  Under  open-access,  each  potential  user  of  the  resource  has
complete  autonomy  to  utilize  wildlife  since  none  has  the  legal  right  to  keep  another
potential user out.

A  summary  is  provided  in  Table  1.  In  practice,  resources  are  often  held  in
overlapping  combinations  of  these  regimes,  and  it  is  possible  to  shift  from  one
(dominant)  regime  to  another  when  conditions  change.  Failure  to  enforce  or  manage
properly a state or common property resource (which is frequent) leads to open-access,
which is the case for some endangered large-game species. The switch from common and
state regimes to open-access as a result of population growth is well documented (Murty
1994; Bromley 1999).

Table 1: Classification and Characteristics of Property Rights
Type

Characteristics

Implications for economic incentives

Private property

Exclusive rights assigned to
individuals

Strong incentives for conservation of
resources and for investment as well

State property

Rights held in collectivity with
control exercised by CITES
authority or designated agency

Creating opportunities for attenuation of
rights; managers have incentives for personal
gains

Common property

Exclusive rights assigned to all
members of a community;
approaching private property
when coordination arises.

Creating free-riders problem and low
incentives for conservation

Open access

Rights unassigned; lack of
exclusivity

Lack of incentives to conserve; often resulting
in resource degradation

5

Property  rights  do  not  really  exist  under  open  access,  and  if  there  is  no
cooperation  under  communal  ownership  (or  no  enforcement  under  state  and  private
ownership), then property rights are insecure. The absence of secure property rights (or
even open-access) has resulted in excessive depletion of resources and biological assets
for the following reason. The true cost of exploiting a resource consists of two distinct
components:  the  private  extraction  costs  and  the  unobserved  opportunity  cost,  or  the
value of the resource in situ  the user cost. The intuition behind user cost in the context
of a renewable resource is as follows: harvesting a unit of the resource today means that
this unit and the growth (including any offspring) it causes are not available for future
consumption.  The  (future)  value  of  uncaught  game  depends  on  many  different  factors,
including the discount rate, future markets for the resource, technological developments,
reproductive features and so on. A sole private owner aiming to maximize profits will
maximize the discounted value of this rent, and treat the resource as an asset. Hence, the
value of unharvested animals and plants prevents a rational wildlife manager from over
harvesting the resource, but only as long as she expects to be the one to benefit from this
investment.  Private  property  may  result  in  a  conservative  harvesting  policy.  In  the
absence  of  externalities  and  given  similar  discount  rates,  the  same  applies  for  state
ownership.

An open-access resource exists if there is no possibility to exclude firms attracted
by  excess  profits,  with  their  entry  competing  away  those  profits.  If  there  is  unrestricted
access  to  the  resource,  no  person  can  be  sure  of  who  will  benefit  from  the  value  of
uncaught  game.  In  an  open-access  situation,  no  individual  harvester  has  an  economic
incentive  to  conserve  the  wildlife,  and  none  can  efficiently  conserve  the  wildlife  by
delaying  harvest.  Doing  so  will  only  enhance  the  harvest  opportunities  of  competitors,
which is the tragedy of open-access. One might say that the individual does not care about
escaped  game,  and  discounts  future  harvests  at  an  infinite  rate  (Neher  1990).  New
harvesters will be attracted to the activity, or existing ones will expand their efforts so long
as they earn more than the (opportunity) cost of their effort. In bionomic equilibrium, all
rent is dissipated, and total cost equals total revenue, rather than marginal cost being equal
to marginal benefit. The situation where marginal cost exceeds marginal benefit is usually
referred to as economic overexploitation.

In terms of Figure 1, failure to account for the user cost implies that agents will not
base their harvest decisions on the supply (social marginal cost) curve as drawn, but instead
on another marginal cost curve that is below it. This is illustrated in Figure 2 (discussed
further below). As a consequence, harvested quantities in the short run will increase and
prices will fall.

1.2 Market failure: Spillover effects and public goods

Two  general  types  of  market  failure  may  occur  and  undermine  economic
efficiency  of  resource  management,  even  when  property  rights  are  secure.  First,  the
supply  function  may  not  embody  all  of  the  costs  of  producing  goods  and  services,  in
which case market prices are no longer reliable as a measure of value. In the context of
wildlife conservation we may think of nonuse values associated with in situ conservation

6

 the utility (or well being) that people derive from knowing that certain species exist or
thrive, even though they will never use or view such species themselves.

One can think of wildlife as providing two sorts of products  products that result
in the consumption of the specimen (e.g. fiber, wool, caviar, timber, ivory, bones, gall
bladders, hides and bush meat, live export to zoos or as pets, ornamental and medicinal
plants),  and  non-consumptive  uses  like  eco-tourism,  bird-watching  and  photography
associated with the protection of in situ amenities and wildlife. A negative external effect
can  occur  when  consumptive  use  of  wildlife  reduces  their  numbers,  and,  as  a  wildlife
population declines, the total economic (in situ) value to preservers falls. However, the
consumers of wildlife products fail to take this into account in their  decisions  because
there do not exist appropriate economic institutions and incentives to get consumers of
wildlife to regard the costs they impose on those deriving utility from conservation. This
is referred to as an externality, although the term spillover may be more descriptive of
what happens and will be used here interchangeably with externality. Externalities can be
good or bad, but their effect is that the supply price no longer reflects the true cost to
(global) society of the activity. There is a divergence between private and social costs of
provision,  because  one  of  the  inputs  in  production,  namely  the  environment,  is  not
appropriately priced; the environmental cost or damage is not taken into account. In terms
of Figure 2, agents do not base harvesting decisions on the marginal social cost (the true
supply  curve),  but  on  private  marginal  costs.  When  uncorrected,  they  will  supply  too
much and social marginal cost lies above marginal benefit.

Second, there are many situations where private  provision  of  a  good  or  service
does  not  occur  because,  once  it  is  provided,  no  one  can  be  excluded,  and  use  or
consumption by one person does not diminish the amount available to others. This is
the  definition  of  a  public  good.  Public  goods  such  as  national  defense,  clean  air  and
water, wilderness, biodiversity, and other environmental amenities will not be supplied
privately because the provider cannot capture the benefits of so doing  once provided,
no one can be excluded, so free riding is possible. Clearly some aspects of wildlife bear
the characteristics of a public good.  Wildlife contributes to global biodiversity (the web
of life) and enhances the well being of the majority of people (through the provision of
non-use  values).  However,  no  one  has  the  appropriate  incentive  to  provide  wildlife
habitat  or  otherwise  protect  wildlife  as  they  cannot  capture  the  full  benefits  from  the
needed investments. Market failure occurs because the amount of a public good is under-
provided,  and  thus  marginal  social  benefits  exceed  marginal  social  costs.  In  this  case,
more  of  the  (public)  good  should  be  provided,  but  it  is  forthcoming  only  if  society
subsidizes a private supplier, or provides it publicly.

1.3 Policy failure: Perverse government incentives

A  final  reason  why  wildlife  may  be  overharvested  (or  why  their  habitat  is
degraded in many regions) has to do with perverse government policies. One well-known
form  of  policy  failure  is  subsidization  of  harvesting  or  habitat  conversion.  As  will
become clear below, one way to address market failure is through implementation of a
tax or user charge. However, rather than charging users to exploit natural resources, there
are  many  real-world  examples  where  exploitation  of  natural  resources  is  encouraged

7

rather  that  restricted    policies  aggravate  rather  than  mitigate  pre-existing  distortions.
When use of resources is subsidized, the marginal cost curve is pushed downwards and
short-term supply expanded. This could be illustrated in Figure 2 (but is not) by adding
another  marginal  cost  function  that  would  lie  below  the  marginal  private  harvest  cost
function with insecure property rights.

$
$
$
$

P*
P*
P*
P*

PS
PS
PS
PS

c
c
c
c

b
b
b
b
a
a
a
a

0
0
0
0

Marginal social costs = marginal 
Marginal social costs = marginal 
Marginal social costs = marginal 
Marginal social costs = marginal 
private harvest costs + user costs 
private harvest costs + user costs 
private harvest costs + user costs 
private harvest costs + user costs 
+ spillover costs
+ spillover costs
+ spillover costs
+ spillover costs

Marginal private harvest
Marginal private harvest
Marginal private harvest
Marginal private harvest
costs with secure property 
costs with secure property 
costs with secure property 
costs with secure property 
rights (no spillovers)
rights (no spillovers)
rights (no spillovers)
rights (no spillovers)

Marginal private harvest 
Marginal private harvest 
Marginal private harvest 
Marginal private harvest 
costs with insecure property rights 
costs with insecure property rights 
costs with insecure property rights 
costs with insecure property rights 
(no user cost) and no spillovers
(no user cost) and no spillovers
(no user cost) and no spillovers
(no user cost) and no spillovers

Marginal private benefit 
Marginal private benefit 
Marginal private benefit 
Marginal private benefit 
from wildlife harvest
from wildlife harvest
from wildlife harvest
from wildlife harvest

e
e
e
e

d
d

f
f
f
f

g
g
g
g

h*
h*
h*
h*

h1
h1
h1
h1

hS
hS
hS
hS

Harvests in a given period (h)
Harvests in a given period (h)
Harvests in a given period (h)
Harvests in a given period (h)

Figure 2: Divergence of Social and Marginal Costs of Harvesting

1.4 Policy and land-use decisions

Figures 1 and 2 suggest that some harvesting of wildlife is typically optimal in the
sense that it maximizes welfare for society at large  this is the case when the marginal
social cost curve and the demand curve intersect for some positive harvest level h*. But
there  is  more.  Economists  have  long  known  that  allowing  profitable  use  of  resources
provides incentives for their conservation, and could lower enforcement costs associated
with conservation.

Prins et al. (2002) argue that arbitrary restrictions on use of wildlife in regions in
Africa have contributed to the demise of these species  a rather paradoxical statement

8

perhaps.  The  reason  is  that  restrictions  on  use  erode  the  incentive  that  people  have  to
invest  in  the  protection  of  the  species  for  potential  future  harvesting.  People  have  no
incentive  to  invest  in  the  conservation  of  the  species.  The  result  will  be  that  base
resources on which wildlife depend for their survival (such as land) will be allocated to
other, more profitable uses. The key insight is that taking away the short-term incentive
to harvest may not be in the species best interests. In effect, this is another manifestation
of policy failure.

Local people make the decisions concerning land use and resource exploitation. It
is costly to enforce prohibitions against their chosen activities, and so prohibitions often
increase monitoring cost without conservation benefits. This is because the conversion of
reserve lands and incursions for wildlife poaching halt when local people want it to do so,
not when they are told to do so. The least costly policies provide incentives for the local
people  to  support  the  reserves  designated  uses,  not  bans  against  non-designated  uses.
This  implies  that  the  most  successful  policies  for  the  conservation  of  wildlife  and
wildlands have been those that encourage their limited and managed development.  For a
review of experiences in the context of crocodile management, roughly consistent with
this insight, refer to Hutton et al (2001).

The  allowance  of  restricted  use  of  wildlife  encourages  the  local  community  to
view the wildlife as an asset for development. The allowance of restricted uses of reserve
lands allows the local people to receive some use of the lands while affording other uses
to the wildlife. In any event it is necessary for the benefits of wildlife conservation to be
distributed across the local community, by means of benefit sharing policies. This might
also  take  the  form  of  sharing  tourism  revenues  from  the  reserve  with  locals,  or  the
maintenance of a certain share of the jobs in the reserve for locals. The locals must be
encouraged by such policies to view the designation of the reserve for wildlife uses as a
specific form of local development policy for their benefit, not as a constraint on their
development of the reserved lands.

In the context of lands that are heavily used by local peoples, the designation of
protected  areas  and  reserves  simply  acted  as  a  mechanism  for  generating  hostility
amongst  the  local  populations.  This  hostility  then  became  translated  into  management
costliness, as park managers attempted to enforce the restrictions on the use of the lands.
When  local  peoples  viewed  these  restrictions  with  hostility,  they  simply  made  even
greater efforts to make use of lands that they believed to be theirs. Park managers had a
near impossible job of enforcement, and always insufficient funding to accomplish it.

An important caveat is in order here.  There are exceptions to the statement that
use  restrictions  should  not  be  too  stringent.  In  certain  cases  zero  use  is  economically
optimal.  This  is  the  case,  for  example,  when  full  internalization  of  costs  (including
spillover cost) would lead the market to break down  that is; the relevant supply curve
would lay above the demand curve such that there is no intersection where h*>0.  In that
case, assuming there is no pressure for habitat conversion, strict preservation (possibly
supported through a trade ban) is globally optimal.  Alternatively, strict preservation may
also  be  optimal  when  values  derived  from  using  the  resource  conflict  with  non-use
values. Economists typically assume that non-use values are associated with the size of

9

the  wild  stock,  but  recent  research  suggests  that  there  may  also  be  direct  disutility
following from uses that are harmful to individual  animals.    For  example,  people  may
care about the fact that individual whales are shot, rather than care about the fact that the
whale population becomes a bit smaller as a result. When direct disutility is sufficiently
large,  global  welfare  is  maximized  by  refraining  from  use  altogether.  Swanson  and
Kontoleon (2003) have established that this condition holds for the black rhino, where
intrusive uses include trophy hunting and seducing rhinos to remove their horn. However,
the earlier statement about benefits sharing still applies in this context: If non-use values
are large, they should be captured (through transfer payments from the North, say) and
channeled to those who bear the burden of living with the wildlife. In the absence of such
transfers, advocating zero use may simply be non-sustainable.

1.5 Summary

Economics prescribes that  wildlife  should  be  harvested  as  long  as  the  marginal
social  benefits  of  so  doing  exceed  the  marginal  social  costs.  Included  in  (marginal)
benefits are values of wildlife products (e.g., caviar, medicinal plants, ivory, bush meat,
hides) or the live specimen (if sold to a zoo or herbarium). In addition, (marginal) social
costs include (i) the loss in situ (existence, viewing) value that wildlife provide citizens
who may be located in countries other than the source country, (ii) the opportunity cost
from harvesting the wildlife today rather than waiting for a more opportune time in the
future  when  the  specimen(s)  may  fetch  a  higher  price,  (iii)  the  lost  future  value  of
offspring that might result from leaving the specimen(s) in place, and (iv) the opportunity
cost  of  the  resources  employed  in  the  harvest  activity.  This  is  illustrated  in  Figure  2,
where failure to include all costs and benefits leads to suboptimal levels of harvest, hS,
that are likely well above those desired by global society, h*. The loss to global society
from harvesting hs rather than h* is area deg in Figure 2.

We can compare outcomes relative to the suboptimal level of harvest hs (and even
higher  harvests  if  harvest  subsidies  are  in  place).  If  property  rights  to  wildlife  (and
habitat) are clearly spelled out and protected by the courts, then the harvest level would
fall  to  h1.  In  that  case,  global  benefits  would  increase  by  area  abfg  in  Figure  2.  If  in
addition it is possible to pay wildlife owners for the nonuse benefits of in situ wildlife,
harvest levels would decline further to h*, the globally optimal level of harvest. In that
case,  global  well-being  would  increase  by  an  additional  amount  given  by  area  bcef  in
Figure 2. Our contention based on previous research concerning marginal willingness to
pay  for  increased  numbers  of  wildlife  and  minimum  viable  populations  required  for
preservation  of  the  species  (e.g.,  see  van  Kooten  and  Bulte  2000)  is  that  area  abfg  is
larger  than  bcef    that  the  benefits  for  wildlife  protection  of  specifying  and  protecting
property rights is greater than those from attempting to subsidize owners of wildlife for
protecting  in  situ  numbers.  Indeed,  without  appropriate  protection  of  property  rights,
transfer payments to protect in situ wildlife cannot even be attempted. This is discussed
further below.

10

2. WILDLIFE AND ECONOMIC INSTRUMENTS

In this section, we examine the various economic instruments that are available to
countries, and discuss their advantages and disadvantages. As noted in the introductory
section, economists generally identify three economic instruments for addressing market
failure  due  to  environmental  externalities  (or  spillovers):  (1)  command  and  control
(hereafter C&C), (2) common values and norms (or more cryptically moral suasion), and
(3) market incentives. Conceptually, common values and norms are intermediary between
the extremes of the market and C&C (Loasby 1990; Stavins 2002). Common values
and  norms  develop  more  easily  in  a  homogeneous  society,  while  markets  are  more
appropriate in a heterogeneous society (CPB 1997, pp.42-44). However, there is much
confusion about the different instruments that are available and which are preferred (see,
e.g., Richards 2000).

One way to classify economic instruments for resolving environmental spillovers
and user cost is illustrated in Table 2, where instruments are classified according to two
dimensions  whether control of the means used to address the externality resides with
the  private  party  or  with  the  state,  and  who  bears  the  costs.  Market  incentives  include
subsidies,  contracts,  taxes  and  rights  trading.  (Rights  are  defined  as  an  entitlement,
whether to a harvest quota of a wildlife species or fish stock, or the ability to develop or
conduct  other  activities  on  land,  such  as  plowing  or  harvesting  before  a  certain  date.)
These give private parties complete discretion over the actions taken.

In  contrast,  C&C  regulations  generally  provide  much  less  discretion.  As  will
become  clear  below,  this  will  lead  to  inefficiencies  in  the  context  of  asymmetric
information  between  agent  and  regulator.  At  one  extreme,  regulations  may  specify
technology-based  standards  that  regulated  firms  must  use  or,  in  the  case  of  wildlife
perhaps, prescribe management standards  the party-on-the-ground (individual, firm,
wildlife  management  agency)  has  no  degrees  of  freedom 
in  decision-making.
Alternatively, regulations could provide the party-on-the-ground some degree of freedom
on how to proceed, as would be the case if the regulation only specified the number of
specimens  that  can  be  harvested  each  period  (a  quota  of  h*  in  Figure  2,  say).  The
regulator  or  CITES  authority  could  then  employ  a  market  instrument  (e.g.,  tradable
quota) to allocate the harvest in an efficient manner. In either case, the cost is borne by
the private party.

Table 2: Classification of Instruments for Addressing Wildlife Conservation
Government
Who Bears the
Costs?

Private Party Control
Quantity Based

Price Based

Control

Government/
Society

Subsidies,
transfers

Grandfathered (tradable) quota
Contracts

Public provision

Private Party

Taxes, fees,
charges, tariffs

Auctioned (tradable) quota

C&C regulation
Harvest quota

11

The instruments included in Table 2 do not exhaust the full range of instruments for
environmental  protection.  For  example,  the  literature  contains  discussions  of  liability
systems,  and  bond-and-deposit  systems.  However,  neither  of  these  types  is  likely  to  be
important for the case of wildlife conservation, and they will therefore be ignored in what
follows. We will focus on the most important economic instruments in the context of the
protection of wildlife  taxes/charges and tradable quota or rights. In addition, we consider
physical property rights, since tradable quota constitutes a legal right.  Before we turn to a
discussion of these EIs, however, we will briefly evaluate the subsidy instrument.

Economists are typically critical about the use of subsidies to achieve conservation.
Consider the case where harvesters are subsidized to lower their harvest rate (this is the
logical  counterpart  of  the  literature  on  subsidies  and  pollution,  where  firms  are  paid  to
lower  their  emissions).    Assuming  such  agreements  can  be  enforced,  subsidies  would
work  in  the  sense  that  they  tend  to  lower  the  optimal  harvesting  level  of  individual
harvesters.  But there is a large potential problem with such subsidies when property rights
to the resource are imperfect: they can encourage entry into the harvesting sector that the
government aims to control.  That is, even though harvesting per harvester goes down, the
number of harvesters will likely go up, compromising conservation objectives.  Unless the
number  of  harvesters  is  somehow  fixed  such  that  new  entry  does  not  occur  (e.g.,  when
property  rights  are  secure),  subsidies  are  a  poor  instrument  to  regulate  harvesting.    But,
importantly, there is another issue to consider in this context.  In addition to suffering from
excess harvesting, many wildlife species are threatened by habitat conversion.  Subsidies
can be an efficient, effective and equitable instrument to deal with habitat conversion.  By
basing  transfer  flows  on  habitat  made  available  by  landowners,  habitat  conversion  (and,
thus, indirectly also wildlife conservation) will be promoted.  The fact that entry in the
habitat sector is promoted by subsidies is, of course, no problem  quite to the contrary; this
is the main intention.  We return to this in section 3.3.

Following  Panayotou  (1994),  we  distinguish  between  property  rights  in  physical
space  (land  ownership,  ownership  of  wild  fauna  and  flora  on  ones  land)  and  property
rights  in  legal  space  (e.g.,  a  right  to  hunt  or  collect  one  or  more  specimens,  trade  live
specimens or parts or derivatives of them). The latter right specifies a narrower bundle of
rights to the resource than the former.  Many species are migratory, so it is not possible to
establish full property rights (i.e., rights in physical space) as access will be shared with
others.  But rights can still be established in legal space by defining an allowable harvest
level for individuals when the migratory species is on their land.  Note that, when property
rights  are  established  in  legal  space,  the  regulator  can  set  the  quota  by  taking  external
effects into account. In contrast, if a private agent has the property rights to the resource in
physical space, the agent will fail to take these effects into account. When such spillovers
are  important,  assignment  of  property  rights  in  physical  space  should  be  complemented
with other instruments in Table 2.

Establishing  and  enforcing  property  rights  to  resources  in  physical  space  can
provide an important impetus for sustainable use and conservation. In Figure 2, a private
agent  given  the  right  to  a  resource  will  change  harvests  from  hS  to  h1,  still  below  the
optimal harvest level h*, but movement is in the right direction. Other instruments are
needed  to  move  from  h1  to  h*.  Whether  or  not  the  change  from  h1  to  h*  can  be

12

accomplished via EIs is debatable, but it may also be the case that the effort required to
go from from h1 to h* is not worth making: By appropriate specification of property rights
in physical space, most of the spillover problem may be overcome and the species spared
from potential extinction. Property rights depend on cultural conditions, so it may be better
in some sense to allocate them to a well-defined group or community rather than private
individuals/firms (see Table 1 and the excellent book by Baland and Platteau 1996).

The existence of property rights and the associated right to exclude others from
using the resource implies that the user cost will no longer be ignored by those with access
to  the  resource.  When  property  rights  are  secure,  owners  know  that  the  fruits  of  their
investments  (such  as  refraining  from  current  harvesting,  or  postponing  the  decision  to
convert habitat) will accrue to them. This means that they are more inclined to make such
investments.  Addressing  this  institutional  failure  therefore  enhances  efficiency,  and
comprises  an  important  first  step  in  enhancing  efficiency  and  sustainability  of  resource
management. This is illustrated in the following case study, which illustrates the benefits of
defining property rights in legal space, and of benefits sharing.

2.1 Establishing secure property or use rights  The CAMPFIRE case study

In  Southern  Africa  there  was  a  widespread  problem  of  poaching  in  designated
parks and reserves until government officials began to institute benefit-sharing programs.
These programs have taken many different forms. Sometimes they simply allow the local
community to set up tourist related facilities within the park (Natals Good Neighbour
Policy), other times they give the local community a share in the value of wildlife that
wanders  onto  their  neighbouring  lands  (Zimbabwes  CAMPFIRE  program),  and
sometimes the community is allotted a share of the receipts from wildlife management on
reserve lands (Wildlife Management Trusts). It is important to note how these community
funds  were  channeled  back  to  the  community  in  a  manner  that  is  widely  visible
throughout the community. Sometimes this can be accomplished by means of purchasing
community goods such as schools etc. Other times it is best to send the benefits back to
the individuals in the form of jobs or money.

Zimbabwe's approach of sustainable wildlife utilization has now been extended to all
of the communal areas by the CAMPFIRE program. Communities have been granted the
rights to manage as well as the means to capture the benefits from wildlife use. Since its
introduction, CAMPFIRE has managed to promote cooperation among village members and
has enhanced the institutional capacity of other community programs.

During the colonial times and up to 1978, legislation  in  Zimbabwe  prohibited  all
utilisation  of  wildlife  for  commercial  as  well  as  traditional  hunting.  Locals  were  even
relocated  to  make  way  for  National  Parks.  As  a  result,  many  communities  have  been
disenfranchised from their natural resources and wildlife became not only valueless, but a
symbol of oppression and its destruction was encouraged. This alienation of people from
wildlife was clearly unsustainable. In 1955, the Department of National Parks and Wildlife
Management  allowed  commercial,  (mainly  white)  farmers  to  utilize  their  wildlife
commercially. Consequently, farmers began to benefit from wildlife and started to look after
it.  The  value  of  wildlife  products  combined  with  the  marginal  economic  viability  of

13

conventional  agriculture 
to  natural  ecosystems
accommodating a wide range of species. While cattle could only be sold for meat, wildlife
could be photographed, sold as hunting trophies, as well as being sold as meat. At present,
some 75 percent of Zimbabwe's commercial ranches now participate in the wildlife industry.

induced  a  shift 

from 

livestock 

The  first  attempt  to  extend  this  system  to  communal  areas  was  a  program  called
WINDFALL. The program involved allocating revenues from wildlife culling in National
Park and from safari hunting to district councils, but overall wildlife management remained
with the State. The results of this program were disappointing since the councils kept all the
money and local people saw few benefits. In 1975, a further step was taken which granted
councils the same rights as private  landholders  to  appropriate  the  value  from  wildlife.  In
order  to  increase  the  accountability  of  the  councils  the  CAMPFIRE  program  was
established. The program ensured that producer communities rather than councils, managed
and benefited from wildlife.

Consider  the  impact  of  CAMPFIRE  at  the  local  level.  Chikwarakwara  is  a  small
village. Its population is exceedingly poor, largely uneducated and aging, since many of the
young people have migrated out of the area in search of work. As with many other villages,
disenfranchisement from its resource resulted in open access and over exploitation of their
wild resources. Chikwarakwara was characterised by an erosion of traditional controls on
resource  use,  growing  population  pressure,  open  access  resources  and  unsustainable
resource use.

In  1989,  there  was  a  major  step  towards  the  implementation  of  CAMPFIRE
principles including the appropriation of wildlife revenues by the villagers. In the process,
special  care  was  taken  to  ensure  that  villagers  related  the  revenues  they  received  to  the
actual value of wildlife in their area. Moreover, the revenues were allocated to individuals
rather than to the community as a whole. This not only helped to increase the perception of
important  individual  revenues  to  be  gained  from  wildlife  management,  but  also  boosted
accountability of the project.

As a result of this approach, more positive attitudes were fostered towards wildlife
and towards the management of the wildlife revenues. Villagers were able to carry out better
resource trade-offs and gained self-esteem. New institutions were created including wildlife
committees  to  ensure  accountability  and  transparency.  With  stronger  community  unity,  a
number of new opportunities began to open. Snaring was reduced as informal social controls
were  established  and  strengthened.  Entrepreneurial  skills  learned  in  wildlife  management
were transferable to other projects such as the expansion of the irrigation system and the
management of the grinding mill.

To control levels of wildlife use, each council develops a sustainable hunting quota
in collaboration with the state departments. Middle agents who have the capital and skills
are employed to attract international clients. In order to avoid excessive monopoly power
and  appropriation  of  the  wildlife  rents  by  the  middle  agents,  a  system  of  tenders  was
established. Through time, the communities have improved their marketing skills, managing
to  double  their  incomes  between  1989-93.  In  fact,  they  have  managed  to  capture  better
prices than the government in key safari areas in Zimbabwe. The program has shown that

14

communities  have  rapidly  learnt  the  necessary  skills  for  natural  resource  management
despite the limited capacity of the state to provide technical assistance. In fact, districts with
donor support tended to be slower to develop and have suffered from excessive overhead
costs.

The  philosophy  of  CAMPFIRE  has  been  to  set  initially  the  conditions  right  for
sustainable wildlife management  by  local  communities.  The  communities  have  started  to
cooperate and build institutions for management of resources. A key insight is that allowing
use by well-defined groups (akin to establishing property rights) may go a long way towards
achieving efficiency. However, to arrive at the optimal outcome property or use rights will
generally have to be complemented with additional policies. As will become clear below,
economists usually prefer economic incentives in this case.

2.2 Preference for economic incentives

Economists  generally  express  a  preference  for  private  party  control,  or  market
incentives. A common feature of such incentives is that the market allocates resources,
with  the  role  of  the  government  or  regulator  restricted  to  providing  the  legal  and
institutional framework, rather than interfering with the conduct of business itself, as is
often the case in C&C approaches. Economic or market incentives consist primarily of
taxes  (or  charges)  and  tradable  rights.1  Before  taxes  can  be  levied  or  (tradable)  rights
issued, the authority must have in mind some target. In the context of Figure 2, the target
is  h*,  which  is  much  lower  than  the  unregulated  harvest  hS.  (Clearly,  government
intervention is only required if h*=hS.)

In  this  subsection,  we  present  the  main  arguments  in  favor  of  economic
instruments found in the literature. These four arguments are often advanced to manage
polluting industries, rather than wildlife, and we will explore to what extent these insights
spill over to the realm of CITES in section 2.3.

A. Least cost approach: It is realistic to assume that agents in the economy are
heterogeneous  in  their  ability  to  produce  commodities    some  people  will  be  more
efficient than others in producing output, harvesting wildlife or abating emissions. It is
also  realistic  to  assume  that  knowledge  about  the  capacities  of  different  agents  is  not
public; economic agents themselves have more information about their true type than
the government, and it may not be in the interest of private parties to reveal their true type
to  the  regulator.  If  these  two  assumptions  are  met,  then  market  incentives  are  more

                                                     
1 The choice between a harvest tax and quota depends on uncertainty. If there is no uncertainty about the
marginal cost and marginal  benefit functions  (about  species  growth,  their future  value,  etc.),  it  does not
matter whether the authority chooses a tax or quota to achieve its goal (h* in Figure 2, say). If there is
uncertainty, picking a harvest tax can lead to the wrong level of harvests, while choosing a quantity can
result in a mistake about the forecasted price that agents will have to pay for harvesting rights (Weitzman
1974).  Such  errors  have  social  costs.  However,  unless  high  values  for  rights  encourage  excessive
poaching, it would seem that a quota is preferred from an uncertainty standpoint because, subject to the
effectiveness  of  policing  efforts  (which  is  also  required  with  a  tax),  it  guarantees  that  harvests  do  not
exceed socially desired levels.

15

efficient than across the board regulatory C&C measures. If these conditions are not met,
the regulator can mimic the market outcome by tailoring regulations for each and every
firm/agent.  However,  even 
the
administrative  requirements  and  costs  of  such  regulations  exceed  those  of  market
incentives. To circumvent such costs, the regulator typically ignores heterogeneity at the
agent level and treats each agent the same (e.g., requiring each one to harvest the same
quantity). As will become clear, this comes at a cost.

in  such  an  unlikely  full-information  context, 

The main market incentives are harvest taxes and quota trading. Harvest taxes are a
way to internalize the spillovers associated with harvesting. The optimal level of the tax is
determined by the institutional setting. When property rights are not secure, the tax should
be set at a relatively high level to account for both external effects and user costs. When
property rights are secure, resource owners already account for the user cost, such that the
optimal tax only reflects the external cost (nonuse values foregone or possibly ecological
costs) associated with harvesting at the optimal level.

Quota  trading  first  requires  the  establishment  of  an  aggregate  cap  (or  quota)  on
harvesting, followed by the issuance of rights to harvest (quota or permits) that can then
be traded. Tradable emission permits can be allocated to existing harvesters at no cost to
them (referred to as grandfathering) or sold via an auction to the highest bidders, thereby
generating revenue for the government.

The common feature of taxes and tradable rights is that, in equilibrium, harvesting
occurs  by  the  most  efficient  firms/agents.  With  taxes,  only  agents  with  low  harvesting
costs will be able to pay the tax and stay in business. The important thing to note here is
that  agents  themselves  reveal  their  costs  by  their  actions  (exiting  or  entering  the
industry by harvesting wildlife)  the regulator does not need to know anything about
individual agents. With tradable quota, harvesting rights will gravitate to firms with the
lowest marginal harvest costs. They are the ones that stand to benefit most from acquiring
these permits (as their profits per unit of harvesting are greatest), and therefore they are
able  to  either  outbid  other  agents  at  an  auction,  or  simply  purchase  quota  from  less
efficient  firms/agents  directly.  Again  trade  among  firms  themselves,  with  superior
knowledge  about  their  costs  than  the  regulator,  ensures  that  an  efficient  outcome
emerges. This is an important result: with taxes and quota the total harvesting costs are
minimized for a given (pre-determined) total harvest level.

B. Easy to enforce: Market incentives are no panacea. Regardless of whether the
authority chooses regulations or market incentives, or a mix of both, there is no escaping
the need to monitor agents behavior and enforce the regulations. Regardless of the type
of  regulation  chosen,  agents  have  an  incentive  to  ignore  it  and  free  ride  on  the
conservation efforts of others  over-harvest their quota, understate their catch to save on
taxes,  and  so  on.  However,  it  can  be  argued  that  enforcement  requirements  can  be
lowered when property rights are created (regardless of whether they exist at the level of
the individual or the community). This will have two important effects. First, as stated
above, secure property rights will induce owners to take the user cost of extraction into
account, and therefore it diminishes the incentive to over-harvest in the short run. Second,
while access to the resource must still be enforced to restrict usage of non-owners and

16

control extraction by potential cheaters in the case of a community-owned resource, the
costs associated with such enforcement will now to a large extent be borne by the owner
rather  than  the  regulator.  Since  the  resource  owner  likely  has  better  knowledge  about
local  enforcement  issues  than  a  regulator,  costs  may  also  be  lower.  To  some  extent
similar devolution of enforcement is expected to occur when a multi-year tradable quota
system is in place, with a multi-year quota amounting to just another form of property
right.  For  example,  when  it  is  agreed  that  the  aggregate  cap  or  total  harvest  in  any
particular  season  is  a  function  of  the  wild  stock,  then  it  is  in  the  interest  of  all  quota
holders to monitor each others behavior and make sure that others do not over-harvest.
Allowing  others  to  over-harvest  would  be  to  ones  own  detriment  as  this  lowers  next
seasons stock and quota.

C. Dynamic incentives: Economists generally like economic incentives because
they  provide  agents  with  an  incentive  to  adopt  technical  changes  that  lower  costs.
Consider  the  textbook  case  of  abating  emissions.  A  tax  or  tradable  emission  permit
system gives an incentive to develop and adopt new and clean technologies because such
technologies will enable firms to sell permits (or avoid buying them), or avoid paying the
tax. Further, market instruments provide incentives to change products, processes and so
on, as marginal costs and benefits change over time. Because firms are always trying to
avoid the tax or paying for emission rights, they tend to respond quickly to technological
change.

D. Economic instruments may raise revenues: As mentioned under B; regulating
firms  requires  monitoring  and  enforcement    costly  activities  for  the  regulator.  When
market instruments are used, some of these costs might be returned to the authority in the
form of revenue. Indeed, regulation can turn into a net revenue-raising activity, and there
is  ample  evidence  that  many  environmental  taxes  are  used  exactly  for  this  purpose  in
OECD countries. It is evident that a tax system raises revenues, but creation of property
rights  or  tradable  quota  may  have  a  similar  effect.  This  happens  when  rights  are
auctioned  off  rather  than  grandfathered  (provided  free  of  charge  to  agents  already
involved in the activity). However, grandfathering of rights has a certain political appeal
since the allocation mechanism can be used to make the trading system acceptable. For
example,  if  it  were  possible  to  identify  all  harvesters  of  a  certain  wildlife  species,
allocating them a certain number of harvest rights (and guaranteeing those) might cause
them to mend their ways, harvest only the allowable quota granted them, and, at the same
time, encourage them to aid in the protection of the species.

2.3 Relevance for the case of wildlife conservation

How important are these four arguments in favor of economic (market) incentives
for the particular context of wildlife conservation? First, consider the issue of least cost
harvesting. It has been demonstrated that extensive cost savings may occur in the context
of commercial fisheries management and pollution control (Weninger and Waters 2003,
Cropper  and  Oates  1992).  But  it  is  important  to  realize  that  commercial  fishers  and
polluting firms (possibly producing different goods) may constitute a much more diverse
or  heterogeneous  set  of  actors  than,  say,  those  harvesting  certain  wildlife  species  in  a
developing country.

17

When (i) harvesting techniques are low-tech, labor-intensive and capital-extensive,
and fairly uniform across all contributing agents, and (ii) the ecological conditions under
which the species lives, and their local densities, are rather similar across space, then the
efficiency  gains  in  terms  of  equating  marginal  harvesting  costs  across  agents  must  be
small.    In  other  words,  if  marginal  costs  across  harvesters  are  rather  similar,  the
efficiency gains from trade or EIs will be small.  How similar are marginal harvesting
cost functions for wildlife harvesters?  This should be assessed on a case-by case basis.
There  are  likely  cases  where  efficiency  gains  from  tradable  quota  or  taxes  are
considerable.  When harvesting technologies vary greatly (WWI rifles versus helicopters
and high precision rifles); when habitat is diverse (common lands versus private reserves,
game ranches); or when demand for wildlife harvesting originates from different markets
(e.g.  commodity  versus  trophy  markets,  nuisance  harvesting),  such  gains  can  be
considerable.    In  contrast,  when  a  homogenous  group  of  people  is  harvesting  a  single
species  for  a  common  market,  using  similar  techniques,  then  the  gains  are  small.  The
conclusion  is  that  efficiency  gains  are  context-dependent,  depending  on  conditions  of
heterogeneity.  They may be smaller for the management of many wildlife species than
have been observed in many other sectors, but this is not certain.

Next, the case for dynamic efficiency (i.e., the incentive to spur technical change) is
not  very  compelling  in  the  context  of  species  harvesting.  It  can  be  debated  whether
encouraging  harvesting  efficiency  is  to  be  applauded  in  this  context.  More  important,
however, is the following observation: perhaps economic incentives will have no impact
on  dynamic  efficiency  whatsoever.  The  important  textbook  insight  discussed  above
depends on the assumption that firms produce output and create pollution as a byproduct
(that  can  be  controlled  or  abated  at  some  cost).  It  does  not  spill  over  to  the  case  of
wildlife conservation where the separation between product and byproduct does not exist.
By inventing more efficient harvest techniques, firms cannot sell quota (in fact, they will
presumably buy more of them), nor can they save on their tax obligations.

This implies that the main advantages of market incentives will likely be the impact
on enforcement costs and the potential to raise revenues, and possibly (in certain cases)
standard  efficiency  gains  from  adopting  EIs.  The  former  is  clearly  important  for
conservation purposes, as emphasized above. The relevance of revenue raising is slightly
more dubious. Economists usually consider distributional issues (like transferring money
from private parties to the government) of secondary importance, but in the context of a
developing country facing difficulties in raising revenues to provide basic public goods,
this issue obviously becomes relevant as well (as already noted above). In addition, as
will  become  clear  in  section  3.2,  distributional  issues  may  be  of  importance  when  the
amount of habitat is endogenous, or chosen by local agents.

2.4 Summary

To achieve optimal use of resources typically involves regulation of users. Regulation is
necessary to internalize spillover effects and, when use or property rights are not secure,
to  account  for  the  inter-temporal  user  cost  associated  with  harvesting.  We  argue  that
defining  property  rights  in  physical  or  legal  space  is  an  important  first  step  towards
optimal  resource  management.  In  this  sense,  EIs  can  often  be  fruitfully  applied.  To

18

capture  spillover  benefits  (if  any)  the  regulator  can  choose  either  additional  economic
instruments, or command and control. It has been documented in other sectors such as
commercial fisheries that adopting EIs may result in substantial efficiency gains. In this
section we argue that the scope for such additional efficiency gains may be modest in the
case  of  wildlife  harvesting.    Whether  no  additional  regulation  is  preferable,  or
intervention through C&C or EIs instead, should be determined at the case study level.
The  costs  and  benefits  of  the  various  options  will  vary  greatly,  depending  on
characteristics of the species, the habitat and the parties involved in harvesting.

3. ECONOMIC INSTRUMENTS: WILDLIFE HARVESTING AND HABITAT

The  main  threats  to  wildlife  are  introduction  of  exotic  species  (invasives),
overexploitation  and  habitat  conversion.  Trade  arguably  affects  all  three  threats,  for
example, by shipping species from one location to another or by changing relative prices
of factors and commodities. For trade in threatened species and/or wildlife, that is CITES,
the  most  important  threats  are  overexploitation  and  habitat  conversion.  Economic
incentives may affect both the incentive to harvest species, and the incentive to convert
natural habitat for some competing purpose. We will return to these two threats in this
section.

3.1 Regulating harvesting

Under open-access no individual harvester has an economic incentive to conserve
the wildlife, and none can efficiently conserve the wildlife by delaying harvest. Doing so
will  only  enhance  the  harvest  opportunities  of  competitors.  New  harvesters  will  be
attracted to the activity, or existing ones will expand their efforts so long as they earn
more than the (opportunity) cost of their effort.  The consequence of ignoring user costs
by  individuals  is  that  all  rents  are  dissipated,  and  eventually  total  cost  equals  total
revenue.  Excessive  hunting  effort  and  too  small  resource  stocks  represent  the
fundamental problem of open access.  Various management instruments can be used to
combat  rent  dissipation  and  protect  wild  stocks.  It  will  become  clear  that  while  most
instruments  are  theoretically  able  to  protect  stocks,  only  some  will  actually  be  able  to
maximize resource rents.

Most textbooks on resource economics (e.g. Conrad and Clark, 1987) demonstrate
that management agencies or the CITES management authority can force harvesters to
recognize  user  costs  by  either  imposing  the  appropriate  tax  on  harvests  (reducing
revenues) or harvesting effort (raising costs by either a license fee or effort tax).   While
the resulting outcome is theoretically efficient and does not involve tedious monitoring of
effort, a few major problems remain. First and foremost is that taxes may be politically
infeasible as it transfers all of the economic rent to the government, and harvesters will
use their (political) power to prevent such a policy from being implemented. This is the
most important reason why tax policies are hardly implemented anywhere in the world to
regulate commercial fisheries (Brown 2000). Second, the authority may have difficulty in
computing  the  optimal  tax,  which  depends  on  factors  such  as  demand  for  wildlife

19

products  and  biological  processes.  Taxing  harvesting  effort  can  be  difficult  because
fishers have an incentive to substitute types of effort that are not taxed for types that are
taxed.  Finally, enforcement of a harvest tax and its collection may be difficult.

Much more common than tax schemes in actual renewable resource management
policies  are  quota  schemes.  In  the  case  of  wildlife,  an  annual  harvest  quota  can  be
determined  from  information  about  the  species  population  dynamics  and  minimum
viable population, and other (economic) factors, and then allocated in some fashion. At
the national level, quota can be distributed amongst individual hunters or communities, or
hunting can remain open until the national quota is reached.  While a quota system may
result  in  conservation  of  the  stock  and  optimal  harvesting  levels  (provided  that  the
authority has access to all the relevant data, and that monitoring and enforcement occur),
a quota system will not always result in efficient allocation of effort. For example, if the
hunting is opened up until the countrys quota is reached, it is possible to end up in a
situation  where  the  wrong  animals  (e.g.,  females  of  child  bearing  age)  are  taken  with
more effort than needed as hunters/communities rush to capture quota before others get
there  first.  Such  rushing  is  likely  to  dissipate  rents  as  the  situation  is  not  unlike
(controlled) open-access. The only difference is that wildlife stocks are protected from
over-exploitation by the quota.

Open-access  problems  can  be  overcome  if  property  rights  are  allocated  to
individuals or communities/groups. If a hunter has the right to harvest a certain quantity
in a specified time interval (say, per year), she will decide to use her effort so that harvest
costs are minimized if discounted prices are constant, for example, or that her supply is
concentrated in periods of high demand and high prices. Economic efficiency occurs at
the  firm  level,  but  from  societys  point  of  view  it  is  still  possible  to  improve  the
allocation of effort by allocating harvest to least-cost agents. This may be accomplished
by auctioning them off or by allowing trade in harvest rights.2 If either of these options is
implemented,  the  quota  scheme  is  both  efficient  (maximizes  resource  rents)  and
conserves the wild stock.

If  a  particular  wildlife  species  is  found  in  more  than  one  country  and  global
management is desired (as may be the case for elephant), an overall harvest quota can be
determined and allocated among the individual countries which would then allocate quota
internally.  Again  each  nations  harvest  rights  can  be  traded  domestically  or,  perhaps,
even internationally. The latter option enables society to earn further gains from trade by
exploiting international differences in harvesting cost. A condition for such a scheme to
maximize welfare, however, is that the conservation value of elephants is the same for
elephants in different countries, If this condition is violated, trading with an exchange
rate reflecting differences in spillover values may be introduced.

                                                     
2 Quota constitutes a property right that has value. The price of quota is the value of the in situ
resource,  which  is  simply  the  market  price  minus  the  marginal  harvesting  cost,  or  the  scarcity
rent. Of course, enforcement of quota rights is a necessary condition for quota prices to reflect
scarcity rent. Agents with low costs will bid more for quota; likewise, if quota is tradable, low
cost  firms  will  buy  quota  from  high  cost  ones,  thereby  making  everyone  better  off.  In
equilibrium, the price of transferable quota is equal to the resource rent (Anderson 1995).

20

The allocation of quota can be used as a policy tool. Quota can be auctioned each
year to the highest bidders, thereby earning rents that the government can use to monitor
and enforce the scheme and fund wildlife management and habitat protection programs.
Revenue can also be used to reduce tax distortions elsewhere, or finance the provision of
other public goods. Quota can also be allocated to local communities that can then sell
the  quota,  harvest  specimens  themselves  or  protect  them  from  harvest  (perhaps  to
enhance tourism). In this case, the local communities have a greater interest in wildlife
management than if they are left out of the system entirely.

To  sum  up,  when  backed  by  sufficient  enforcement  and  monitoring  effort,
economic  instruments  (and  C&C  measures  alike)  are  capable  to  contribute  to  the
conservation of wildlife by restricting harvest effort. In theory, an optimal or efficient
level  of  harvesting  effort  can  be  implemented  by  appropriate  choice  of  regulatory
stringency. However, only some economic instruments (notably taxes and tradable quota)
are able to maximize the resource rent associated with harvesting.

3.2 Case study: Commercial use of The Vicuna

The vicuna (Vicugna vicugna) is one of the South American camelids along with
the  guanaco  (Lama  guanicoe),  the  llama  (Lama  glama)  and  the  alpaca  (Lama  pacos).
While  vicuna  and  guanacos  are  wild,  the  llamas  and  alpacas  are  their  domesticated
counterpart, a process of selection that appears to have started between 7,000 and 6,000
years  ago.  The  vicuna  inhabits  the  Andean  highlands,  between  3,000  and  4,600  m.  Its
range currently extends over large  areas  of  Peru  (80,000),  north  of  Argentina  (23,000)
and Chile (25,000), and west of Bolivia (12,000).

Hunted  for  their  precious  wool,  which  is  the  one  of  the  finest  in  the  world,  the
vicuna was near to extinction by the late 1960s. With the European invasion, a trade in
fibre was developed, involving the killing of the animal. The few attempts to regulate the
use of vicunas up to this century failed and uncontrolled hunting continued until the species
reached near extinction, with just an estimated 10,000 individuals left in the 1950's.

Vicuna wool has been long praised for its softness and fineness. Its current scarcity
also adds to the high prices commanded by the few items traded internationally. Vicuna
wool (or rather fleece) is regarded as a luxury fibre along with Alpaca, Angora, Cashmere,
Camel hair, Mohair, Musk Ox and, Yak, which are noted for their fineness, scarcity, unique
appearance and status. It is a very exclusive market, with production of all luxury fibres
representing less than 3% of annual sheepwool production by weight. Vicuna is considered
the finest and rarest of all, and its softness and colour are highly valued, commanding the
highest  prices.  Archaeological  findings  and  ethnic  history  archives  indicate  three  distinct
phases  of  interaction  between  the  vicuna  and  human  populations.  In  a  first  stage,  in  the
Arcaic era of the Central Andes (7,0002,000 B.C.), human population in the highlands was
significant and the vicuna was popular prey of the highland hunters (Hurtado 1987).

In the second stage, from the late Arcaic area to the advent of agriculture, in parallel,
hunting and livestock rearing took place, with hunting being reduced in importance. Llamas
and alpacas, both domesticated species, provided food, wool and fuel, and the llama could

21

be used to carry loads. A more complex sociopolitical system emerged and the hunting of
vicuna was banned for religious reasons. Wool was still obtained, although this was done
through a management system imposed from political authorities. A live capture technique
called chaku was used because it allowed the shearing and release of the animal with little
impact  on  the  population.  These  practices  were  clearly  directed  to  the  conservation  and
sustainable use of resources, where the vicuna wool was only used for special robes for the
nobles and royals (Hurtado 1987).

The system, however, was affected by the European invasion, giving way to a third
phase where the planned chaku was gradually dismantled and hunting of vicunas increased,
coupled with a regional land struggle between native communities and the Europeans. The
few attempts to regulate the use of vicunas failed (Hurtado 1987) and uncontrolled hunting
continued until significant control measures were set in place in the 1950s by which time the
population was nearing extinction, with an estimated 10,000 individuals left (Torres 1992).

Conservation efforts to protect the vicuna started in Peru in 1969, with the creation
of  the  Pampa  Galeras  National  Reserve.  Subsequently,  range  states  have  coordinated
conservation  efforts  through  several  agreements.  In  1969  the  first  agreement  for  the
protection  of  the  vicuna  was  signed.  Peru  and  Bolivia  signed  in  1969,  with  Argentina
joining  in  1971  and  Chile  in  1972.  The  agreement  banned  all  international  and  internal
trade in vicuna products and prohibited the export of fertile individuals to third parties. The
vicuna was also listed in Appendix  I  of  CITES  in  1975,  ratified  by  all  range  states  and
banning all international trade in the species.

These  coordination  efforts  for  conservation  at  the  international  level  created  a
strong  base  for  cooperation  among  range  states.  As  a  result,  the  vicuna  experienced  an
impressive recovery during the last 30 years, particularly in Peru. From an estimated 6,000
over the four range countries in 1965, the vicuna reached 10,000 by 1970, 101,215 in 1983
and around 154,000  by  1992. Management areas have also  increased  from  248,000ha  in
1965 to more than 7,289,896 ha in 1982 to some 20,800,000 ha currently under protection
status.    Conservation  efforts  have  been  particularly  successful  in  Peru  and  Chile,  where
population  levels  increased  significantly  during  the  early  years.  However,  financial  and
physical requirements to effectively protect those areas have not grown at the same rate.

Although  vicunas  have  natural  predators  such  as  pumas  and  foxes,  the  most
important limiting factors appear to be poaching by humans and the availability of food, for
which they compete with other livestock, like llamas and alpacas. It is the first factor which
motivated  governments  to  protect  the  species  and  ban  all  use;  it  is  the  second,  however,
which has caused most social conflict as communities resent the competition of the vicuna
for the scarce bofedales in the highlands.  Studies in Chile suggest that the vicuna population
has  reached  the  carrying  capacity  of  the  habitat  (given  the  existing  livestock  densities),
which  would  account  for  the  oscillating  pattern  in  the  population  levels  registered  since
1990  (Torres  and  Nunez  1994).  Every  hundred  vicunas  in  the  highlands  eat  the  same
quantity of food as 75 alpacas, or 61 llamas or 72 sheep. The total stock of domesticated
livestock in the  management zones, is estimated to be the equivalent  of  51,864  heads  of
vicuna.  The  21,620.2ha  of  bofedal  available  in  the  management  areas  of  the  Parinacota
Province,  is  therefore  estimated  to  be  capable  of  supporting  25,969  vicunas  in  the

22

management areas of the Parinacota Province. However, in 1992 the vicuna population in
the  area  was  estimated  in  26,144,  indicating  that  it  is  at  carrying  capacity  and  is  in
competition with domestic livestock for food.

At  the  regional  level,  some  areas  show  significant  overstocking,  as  in  the  Lauca
National  Park.  As  populations  recovered,  the  competition  over  habitat  with  domestic
livestock (llamas and alpacas) increased, this being one of the factors behind the increase in
poaching. These factors made the involvement of the local communities essential for the
long  term  protection  of  the  species.  One  way  to  create  incentives  for  conservation  and
protection of the vicuna at the local level was to reopen trade in vicuna wool, which can be
extracted by shearing live vicunas with little impact on wild populations, and generating
revenue  for  local  communities.  This  was  the  philosophy  behind  the  second  vicuna
agreement in 1979. It provided a use-based rationale for the local communities to become
interested in the conservation of the vicuna.

In 1987, Vicuna populations in the Laguna Blanca Reserve (Catamarca province)
were examined to assess their potential contribution to the indigenous peasant economy.
This is primarily a subsistence economy, with a small but increasing involvement in the
market economy. The two main sources of income are from sheep and llama spun wool.
The potential harvest of the Vicuna population was estimated using simulation techniques,
calculating  the  maximum  sustainable  yield  and  the  carrying  capacity  of  the  area
(Rabinovich et al., 1991). If the Vicuna population were allowed to grow from its current
size of 5,000 animals to around 8,000, 15.2% of that population could be harvested each
year. The monetary value of each Vicuna is estimated at US$64: $19 for the wool, $10 for
the  meat  (assuming  a  20kg  animal  fetches  $0.50  per  kg)  and  $35  for  the  hide.  The
estimated total income that could be derived from sustainable management of the Vicuna is
US$94,464  per  year.  This  would  provide  an  annual  household  income  to  the  peasant
community of the Laguna Blanca Reserve of almost US$1,000 if equally distributed among
the 95 families. This would clearly provide an incentive for these peasant farmers to share
their lands with the wild vicuna.

To  sum  up,  strict  conservation  through  use  restrictions,  when  properly  enforced,
will  conserve  wildlife.  However,  in  the  long  run  strict  conservation  can  undermine  the
stated  objectives.  Vicunas  and  livestock  compete  for  forage,  and  use  restrictions  on  the
former  remove  the  incentives  of  peasant  farmers  to  share  their  land  with  Vicunas.
Establishing property rights in land and wildlife provides such an incentive and therefore
represents a major step towards sustainable development. Whether tradable quota (an EI) or
non-tradable  quota  (a  form  of  command  and  control)  are  implemented  to  regulate
management is of secondary importance. A main point of this study is that establishment of
property rights is important, and EIs or government regulation will contribute little more to
the protection of species.

3.3 Instruments and habitat conversion

The  problem  of  wildlife  conservation  is  intimately  related  to  the  protection  of
wildlife habitat, which implies that it is bound up in land use and land ownership. In the
previous section, we examined economic instruments and incentives related to the harvest

23

of wildlife. In this section, we consider wildlife habitat and land use. Of course, property
rights to wildlife, regulations concerning take and incentives to ensure that wildlife are
not over harvested affect the value of land. That is, any harvest and wildlife protection
policies that increase the value of wildlife might increase the value of land in habitat.

Economists  usually  consider  distributional  issues  of  secondary  importance.  The
focus is generally on maximizing social surplus, and whether that surplus accrues to the
regulator or private agents typically matters less. In this section, however, we argue that
distribution may be of the utmost importance for the case of wildlife conservation. The
reason  is  as  follows.  In  any  economy,  there  are  agents  (private  or  public)  that  decide
about land use. Supposedly such agents compare the present values of net returns from
alternative land uses  they compare the returns of habitat conservation and sustainable
resource management to those of agricultural conversion. When intervention lowers the
decision  makers  returns  to  habitat  conservation  and  resource  harvesting,  it  becomes
more likely that habitat will make place for other uses of the land.

Above we established that taxing, auctioned  quota,  subsidies  and  grandfathered
quota are equally efficient in restricting harvest effort. However, as mentioned, there is a
distributional  difference.  Taxing  and  auctions  imply  resource  rents  for  the  regulator,
whereas subsidies and grandfathered quota imply rents for the harvester.  This translates
into different incentives to conserve habitat.

Often landowners have little incentive to protect wildlife habitat because the value
of  land  in  habitat  for  agricultural  producers  and  foresters  may  be  very  small  or  non-
existent.  As  noted  earlier,  wildlife  and  wildlife  habitat  are  a  public  good  and  private
landowners have little if any incentive to protect wildlife habitat on their land. Indeed, as
the enactment of the Endangered Species Act in the United States has demonstrated and
as  we  argue  further  below,  landowners  may  have  every  incentive to  do  the  opposite  
convert  habitat  to  crops.  Therefore,  economic  instruments  are  required  to  encourage
landowners to protect wildlife habitat.

In many political jurisdictions, rural land continues to be largely publicly owned,
or,  if  not  owned  outright,  agricultural  and  other  users  of  rural  land  have  ill-defined  or
weak property rights. Peasants lack property rights to wildlife and often gain the right to
land  only  by  actively  farming  it.  Even  productive  forestland  might  be  sacrificed  and
wildlife habitat lost because peasants cannot demonstrate ownership of land unless they
develop it  that is, conduct cropping or grazing activities  and this inevitably results in
conflicts with wildlife. The appropriate assignment (and protection) of property rights to
undeveloped  land  that  also  serves  as  wildlife  habitat  might  encourage  peasants  not  to
develop  it;  peasant  landowners  might  earn  a  living  through  sustainable,  small-scale
forestry and/or harvest of non-timber forest products, including wildlife if they are given
a right to animals on their property.

However,  this  would  require  a  change  in  the  way  most  developing  countries
allocate  land  and  other  property  rights.  Moreover,  and  importantly,  the  earnings  from
habitat  and  wildlife  exploitation  must  exceed  that  of  agriculture.  While  government
policies related to wildlife (and forestry) can affect returns, it can be the case that such

24

activities  cannot  compete  with  cropping,  even  supposing  that  the  correct  institutions
were in place to enable landowners the rights to all the products produced on their land.
When the social benefits of habitat conversion exceed the social benefits of conservation
(including international positive external effects), economists recommend conversion of
natural lands into alternative uses.

The most interesting case exists where habitat conservation does not pay from a
private  perspective,  but  would  be  optimal  from  a  social  (global)  perspective.    In  other
words,  when  the  positive  external  effects  associated  with  conservation  of  habitat  and
wildlife are sufficiently great to topple the balance from conversion to conservation.  In
this  case  economic  instruments  can  be  used  to  encourage  private  landowners  or  land
users  to  take  into  account  the  negative  external  effects  of  their  land-use  decisions  on
wildlife. What instruments might be employed that directly affect land management?

Regulation

Regulations  specify  what  landowners  can  and  cannot  do  on  their  land.  The
Endangered Species Act is an example of regulation in that it prohibits destruction of the
habitat  of  wildlife  on  private  land.  Regulatory  approaches  often  entail  expensive
monitoring and enforcement, and can still be ineffective if social norms and formal rules
do not coincide (Ostrom 1990; Nielson 2003). In fact, it is possible that regulations may
lead to perverse incentives that discourage conservation (shoot, shovel, and shut up) if
restrictions on established property right owners are onerous (Polasky 2001).

Taxes and subsidies

Tax  incentives  can  be  designed  to  give  farmers  an  incentive  to  protect  wildlife
habitat  on  farmland.  However,  evidence  from  developing  countries  indicates  that  tax
policies are not, by themselves, capable of compensating rural landowners for providing a
public  good  (wildlife  habitat)  at  private  expense.  As  evidence  has  accumulated  that
preferential  tax  assessments  do  more  to  subsidize  farmland  owners  than  to  conserve
farmland,  governments  have  increasingly  initiated  programs  to  purchase  development
rights  and  conservation  easements  (Wiebe  et  al.  1996).  These  programs  involve
separating and purchasing some but not all of an owners rights to a property: separated
rights might include, for example, the right to build residential or commercial buildings,
to drain sloughs, to burn associated uplands, or to remove endangered species of trees. In
the  United  States,  most  purchases  have  been  in  the  form  of  agricultural  conservation
easements  that  restrict  residential,  commercial  or  industrial  uses,  but  that  allow  active
farming (Hardie et al. 2004).

Subsidies  are  perhaps  better  than  tax  incentives  for  protecting  nature  on
agricultural  lands.  In  developed  countries,  subsidies  are  used  to  take  land  out  of
production, keep extant wetlands or other critical wildlife habitat from being converted to
agriculture,  or  establish  wildlife  habitat  through  tree  planting,  plant  of  dense  nesting
cover  for  migratory  waterfowl,  et  cetera.  Similar  programs  can  be  used  in  developing

25

countries,  although  financing  such  programs  will  pose  a  greater  challenge  and  likely
prevent them from being implemented.

The  subsidy  approach  most-often  mentioned  in  the  literature  is  that  of
compensating  farmers  for  losses  from  wildlife  depredation.  While  not  providing
incentives  to  prevent  legal  and  illegal  taking  of  wildlife,  compensation  may  at  least
reduce  the  incentives  of  local  peasants  to  go  out  and  destroy  wildlife  to  prevent  the
agricultural damage that they may cause. On the other hand, wildlife damage programs
may encourage additional conversion of habitat into cropland as they essentially amount
to a subsidy to agriculture (Rondeau and Bulte 2003).

Finally,  one  way  to  arrive  at  a  globally  optimal  level  of  habitat  conversion  is
through  subsidies  at  the  international  level.    Fair  compensation  for  positive  external
effects of conservation implies a transfer flow from North to South.  While some of this
could  presumably  be  arranged  through  NGO  involvement  (see  below)  and  current
opportunities  provided  by  the  Global  Environmental  Facility  (GEF),  it  is  an  open
question whether this is enough to safeguard sufficiently large areas of nature in the long
run.  The public good characteristics of nature conservation, and the implied incentives to
free  ride  on  others  efforts,  could  mean  additional,  cooperative  efforts,  should  be
undertaken.  One can think of large-scale programs to finance the provision of ecological
services (such as now pioneered in Costa Rica), funded through taxation in the North.

Transfer of development rights

Transferable  development  rights  and  wildlife  habitat  banking  constitute  cases
where  separation  of  development  rights  can  be  integrated  with  land  use  planning.
Wildlife habitat banking (WHB) allows landowners to develop wildlife habitat on their
property if they have sufficient credits from investment in the completed rehabilitation of
a WHB site. Land use planning enters this program through the designation of the WHB
sites (see Fernandez and Karp 1998). Sites can be chosen that provide large high-quality
habitats with superior potential to sustain desired ecosystems. Given good choices, the
investments  in  the  WHB  can  provide  greater  community-wide  environmental  benefits
than  equivalent  investments  in  the  maintenance  of  habitat  on  sites  that  are  being
developed. Good planning is crucial to obtain higher benefits, because WHB is a no net
loss program that links area restored to wildlife habitat area removed by conversion of
habitat to agriculture (Hardie et al. 2004).

An  important  difference  between  preferential  tax  assessments  and  purchase  of
development  rights  is  the  potential  role  of  planning.  Preferential  tax  assessments  are
typically extended to all eligible landowners regardless of the location of their property.
However, purchases can be targeted to sites where the social or environmental benefits
are deemed to be particularly high, such as along a wildlife corridor or within a region
under particular agricultural pressure. While the potential for targeting exists, it generally
is  not  realized  (see  Hardie  et  al.  2004).  Zoning-based  transferable  development  right
(TDR)  programs  are  initiated  by  dividing  an  area  that  is  being  opened  for  agricultural
conversion,  or  one  that  has  already  been  converted,  into  a  zone  where  agricultural
development  is  permitted  and  one  where  agriculture  is  limited  or  prohibited  entirely,

26

thereby protecting crucial habitat. The government partially takes private property rights
in down-zoned area in order to protect an environmental amenity  wildlife habitat (see
Johnston  and  Madison  1997;  Hardie  et  al.  2004).  When  the  down-zoning  occurs,
landowners  in  the  affected  (source)  areas  are  granted  the  option  to  sell  the  separated
development  rights  to  landowners  in  designated  agricultural  development  (up-zoned)
areas  or  sinks.  It  is  the  owners  of  property  in  the  up-zoned  or  target  areas  that  must
purchase  the  transferable  development  rights  in  order  to  be  able  to  farm  their  land.
Landowners who lose property rights are compensated in a development rights market,
but at rates driven by the opportunity costs created by zoning instead of by willingness to
pay for cropland. Of course, governments incur costs of planning and administration of
such a TDR program, and the TDR system is only meant to make the separated zoning
politically  palatable.  It  is  unlikely  that  this  type  of  instrument  will  work  to  protect
wildlife  habitat  in  developing  countries  unless  property  rights  of  all  kinds  are  made
stronger (see section 4).

One variant that might work in areas where forest concessionaires are active is to
require the forest companies to purchase TDRs from landowners who have been down
zoned. That is, a forest concessionaire would be required to purchase a certain number of
TDRs that protect wildlife habitat in exchange for the right to harvest a certain volume of
timber.

Direct  purchase  of  conservation  easements  to  protect  wildlife  habitat  also
constitutes a form of property rights purchase. In this case, the state simply purchases the
right to develop land for agriculture from the landowner. Since this might be too costly
for  many  developing  countries,  one  alternative  is  to  permit  NGOs  (or  even  foreign
governments) to purchase these rights, as indicated above. Like the case of TDRs, this
option  requires  that  economic  institutions  exist  so  that  development  rights  can  be
separated  from  ownership  of  land  (and  that  ownership  of  land  is  well  defined  and
protected by the courts  see section 4 below). There may also be opposition to the idea
of selling development rights to foreigners, whether foreign governments or NGOs.

The problem is that there is no guarantee that earnings from (perhaps marginal)
agricultural land are sufficient to enable compensation to take place. If this is the case,
illegal conversion of all land capable of producing crops will still occur. It is not a simple
matter to construct a land protection scheme that includes restrictions on land use with
transferable  development  rights  to  compensate  losers  (see  van  Kooten  1993).  In
developing countries, the obstacles standing in the way of implementing such a scheme
may again be too large to surmount.

Transferring income through NGO involvement

The  private  sector  might  also  be  relied  upon  to  a  greater  extent  than  currently.
Environmental NGOs are perhaps the best means for transferring wildlife conservation
funds  from  rich  to  poor  countries.  Nonprofit  private  land  trusts,  such  as  the  Nature
Conservancy, The Conservation Fund and the Trust for Public Land have become active
in the conservation of open space and wildlands in the United States (see Hardie et al.
2004).  These  organizations  purchase  properties  or  easements  on  lands  that  provide

27

environmental benefits (such as wildlife habitat) and seek to protect land slated for urban
development. Purchased land may be turned over to state and/or local governments, but
might  be  managed  by  the  NGOs  in  order  to  guarantee  that  contributors  in  developed
countries  receive  the  non-market  amenity  values  purchased  in  developing  countries
where the record of government management of public lands is perhaps not as good. Of
course, for this option to work, it is important that property rights are clearly delineated
and protected by the courts in the developing countries. NGOs are unlikely to purchase
property or wildlife easements on land if these property rights are non-enforceable.

Kontoleon  and  Swanson  (2003)  have  shown  that,  in the  context  of  giant  panda
preservation (in the Wolong reserve, China), the non-use values associated with panda
conservation  in  the  wild  are  sufficiently  large  to  warrant  setting  aside  extensive
stretches of land as a reserve  such that not only the flagship panda, but many other
species as  well  can  be  supported.  However,  when  such  elusive  non-use  values  are  not
backed up by true transfer flows, it will be in the interest of local people to allocate the
land  to  other  uses.  Capturing  and  channeling  non-use  values  through  international
transfer payments, perhaps actual purchase or lease of land by environmental NGOs, may
be one good means to protect species.

3.4 Summary

In this section we, again, demonstrate that defining property rights and benefit-sharing
programs are vital in promoting conservation of wildlife. We show that EIs are in theory
capable  of  maximizing  resource  rents,  but  argue  that  their  main  role  could  be  in
promoting habitat conservation. There are various EIs that can be used to make sure that
habitat  conservation  occurs  at  the  lowest  cost  (tradable  development  rights,  habitat
conversion taxes). Equally important, to our opinion, will be the use of international EIs
that  capture  and  channel  nonuse  values  from  North  to  South,  and  to  promote  habitat
conservation through transfers and subsidies.

4. IMPLEMENTING ECONOMIC INSTRUMENTS TO PROTECT WILDLIFE

What  is  the  scope  for  adopting  EIs  in  developing  countries  to  promote
conservation  of  wildlife  and  enable  a  transition  towards  sustainable  development?  We
argue that the perspective is mixed.  EIs are not a panacea, and it is an open question
whether they can be effectively employed in all contexts.  Institutions and social capital
are  important  if  economic  incentives  are  to  be  used  to  manage  and  protect  wildlife
populations. For example, in their review of emissions trading, Tietenberg et al. (1998)
indicate  that  it  is  impossible  to  institute  any  system  of  emissions  trading  unless  the
requisite  legal  and  other  institutions  are  in  place  for  monitoring,  measuring,  certifying
and  enforcing  trades,  and  that  lack  of  appropriate  institutions  is  probably  the  most
important obstacle to the use of market incentives for addressing climate change.  For a
democratic  market  economy  to  function  properly,  or  for  market-oriented  economic
policies to have effect, three criteria or factors other than markets and private property are

28

required (Fukuyama 2002). These criteria relate to economic institutions, the role of the
state, and culture.

While a full-fledged analysis of these issues is far beyond the scope of the current
study, we would like to note that it is by no means guaranteed that the current state of
economic institutions (be it formal or informal) and governments in many resource-rich
countries is sufficient to exploit the gains from employing EIs.  This can be illustrated for
the  case  of  elephant  harvesting  and  ivory  trade.    In  Table  3  we  summarize  key
institutional indicators for (i) OECD countries, (ii) Asian consuming states, and (iii) main
ivory  producers.    An  examination  of  the  Table  suggests  that  the  prospects  of
implementing EIs in producer states are not promising.  By all measures, range states are
the least capable of preventing illegal harvests and sales of ivory. They lack the required
economic institutions (courts, rule of law, government effectiveness) and social capital
(control  of  corruption)  for  enforcing  and  policing  ivory  trade.    Establishing  the
infrastructure to guide successful implementation of EIs comes at a cost that is unknown.

Table 3: Measures of the Effectiveness of Economic Institutions and Levels of Social
Capital in Industrial Countries, Ivory Importing States and Elephant Range States,
2000-2001
Measure

Eight Industrialized
Countries

Five Major Asian
Buyer States

30 Range States
(Africa & Asia)

Voice & Accountability

Political Stability

Government
Effectiveness

Regulatory Quality

Rule of Law

Control of Corruption

Source: World Bank (2002) and calculation

1.453

1.275

1.586

1.165

1.628

1.878

0.106

0.971

1.048

0.899

1.073

0.946

-0.563

-0.801

-0.625

-0.337

-0.516

-0.524

5. CONCLUSIONS AND POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS

Economic instruments have great potential to address spillovers associated with wildlife
management.  Economic incentives appear particularly useful for the following reasons.
First, they are theoretically able to achieve objectives at the lowest cost. They encourage
efficient use of resources and therefore have the smallest impact on economic growth and
development. The flexibility, efficiency and cost-effectiveness associated with the use of

29

EIs  is  presumably  nowhere  more  important  than  in  developing  countries.  Second,
instruments  such  as  auctioned  tradable  quota  and  taxes  are  capable  of  generating
government revenues, enabling the government to provide a variety of public goods. In
countries where the scope for raising revenues is small because of limited administrative
capacity,  this  effect  could  be  important.  The  administrative  requirements  of  EIs  are
different  for example, raising revenues through auctioning off trophy quotas is much
easier than raising funds through taxing households involved in harvesting of a species.
Third, compared to command and control measures, the information requirements of EIs
are modest. C&C requires the planner to make decisions that allocate resources across
activities.  In  contrast,  by  simply  providing  a setting  or  context,  the  market  will  take
care of an efficient allocation of resources when EIs are used. EIs have lower institutional
and human resource requirements than C&C  an important advantage in an information-
sparse environment.

In spite of these advantages, EIs are not a panacea that can be straightforwardly
implemented across the board.  The following critical comments are a useful reminder of
the  key  restrictions.    First  off,  and  perhaps  obviously,  EIs  are  not  a  substitute  for
monitoring  and  enforcement.  Conservation  of  wildlife  will  critically  depend  on  these
activities, regardless of whether C&C or EIs are used to allocate resources. (However, as
argued in section 2, public authorities may be able to shift the burden of enforcement and
monitoring  onto  private  agents  if  property  rights  to  resources  are  defined  in  either  a
physical  or  legal  sense.)  Without  effective  monitoring  and  enforcement,  economic
incentives  cannot  work    prices  paid  for  tradable  quota  will  be  too  low  and  could
approach zero (as harvesting without quota is also feasible) and tax evasion will occur on
a large scale. One potential advantage of some EIs is that they can generate the resources
that  are  required  to  support  the  enforcement  effort  that  is  needed  to  enable  the  EIs  to
work. However, there may be circumstances where adequate enforcement and monitoring
is too costly. In that case, it may be optimal to opt for the private optimum rather than the
social  one;  that  is,  establish  property  rights  to  wildlife  and  ignore  spillover  benefits
associated with conservation. While harvest levels will be too large in the short run,
such  that  species  stocks  will  be  too  low  eventually,  the  costs  associated  with  this
imperfection may be small compared to the costs of achieving the first best outcome.

Next, a key obstacle to the implementation of EIs is the availability of economic
institutions and social capital in many wildlife-rich countries.  As of yet it is unclear what
minimum  level  of  institutional  infrastructure  is  necessary  to  successfully  implement
EIs,  and  how  this  minimum  level  compares  to  actual  scores  in  key  countries.
Nevertheless, it seems plausible to argue that many countries are currently not up to the
task to implement and guide a full-fledged tradable quota or tax scheme to regulate the
use of wildlife species.

This is not to say that nothing can be done to greatly improve the efficiency and
sustainability  of  wildlife  harvesting.    While  full-fledged  implementation  of  EIs  is
cumbersome  and  expensive,  it  is  often  possible  to  make  substantial  improvement  by
making small steps forward.  Specifically, by defining and protecting property rights to
land and wildlife (be it at the level of the individual  or  a  well-defined  group  of  users,
depending on the context), resource harvesters will be able to reach the privately optimal

30

level of resource harvesting and conservation.  While inferior to the socially optimal level
of harvesting and conservation, it arguably represents a significant improvement over the
unregulated open access outcome that eventuates when property rights do not exist.  To
complement  the  management  scheme,  other  instruments  can  be  applied  after  property
rights  have  been  established.    This  would  internalize  any  external  effects.    However,
whether  making  this  additional  step  is  warranted  from  a  cost-benefit  perspective  is
something that has to be assessed on a case-by case level.

We believe, but have not analyzed, that the scope for using complementary EIs in
regulating harvest levels may be modest (but there clearly will be cases where this is not
true and where the gains from implementing EIs to regulate harvesting are large).  The
efficiency gains from EIs may be modest, for example, because harvesting technologies
are  sometimes  fairly  homogenous,  suggesting  little  scope  for  gains  from  trade.    The
greatest  perspective  for  implementing  EIs,  we  believe,  is  with  respect  to  land  use  and
habitat  conversion.    Specifically,  it  seems  advisable  to  closely  consider  the  scope  of
implementing  an  international  transfer  system  from  North  to  South  to  compensate  for
transboundary spillover benefits from conservation.  Current transfer systems are rather
ad hoc, and certainly incomplete.  Whether the political will exists in the North to fund
such an effort, and whether the institutional capacity exists in the South to manage the
subsidy flows, are relevant matters that must be faced.

To reiterate our caveat from the introduction: the current study has been written
under  great  time  pressure,  and  is  therefore  certainly  incomplete,  possibly  even  in  key
respects.    We  would  therefore  like  to  suggest  some  useful  directions  for  follow-up
research, aimed at closing the gap between what is known today and what needs to be
known before EIs can be usefully implemented.

1. Gains from implementing EIs: what are the potential efficiency gains from tax
or  tradable  quota  systems?    How  much  heterogeneity  exists  among  harvesters  for  key
wildlife species (say: crocodiles)?  How do the gains from complementary instruments
compare to the gains from securing property rights?

2.  Costs  of  implementing  EIs:  What  are  minimum  institutional  requirements  to
successfully implement EIs?  Do many countries currently have the ability in terms of
social  capital  and  institutions  to  do  so  (and  if  not,  what  are  the  associated  costs  of
establishing such an institutional infrastructure)?

3. Costs and benefits: how do the costs and benefits of implementing a system of

EIs compare for key wildlife species?  Are there general lessons to be drawn?

4. What are the prospects for using EIs in global trade in species?  How does a
wildlife  quota  system  work  across  countries?  What  institutions  are  required  and  how
many  countries  satisfy  institutional  requirements  for  implementing  EIs?  How  do
dynamics affect the usual "optimal tariff" or "optimal quota" result?

5. How important are international positive effects of wildlife conservation at the
margin (compared to domestic benefits of sustainable wildlife management)?  What is the

31

scope for capturing such benefits to promote habitat conservation in the South, and how
should this be organized?

6. Operational issues: how can one define and allocate property rights, and how
can one implement a tax or tradable quota scheme?  How high should the tax be (or how
large the total allowable catch) in light of many real-life uncertainties?  Are there many
parallels with ITQ experiences in fisheries in developed countries, and if so: how can we
exploit them?  How much income should be allocated to wildlife management?  Is there a
role for eco-labeling?

6. REFERENCES

Anderson, L.G. 1995. Privatizing Open-access Fisheries: Individual Transferable Quotas.
Chap. 20 in The Handbook of Environmental Economics (pp. 45374) edited by
D. W. Bromley. Cambridge MA: Basil Blackwell.

Barichello,  R.R.,  R.M.  Porter  and  G.C.  van  Kooten.  1995.  Institutions,  Economic
Incentives  and  Sustainable  Rural  Land  Use  in  British  Columbia.  Managing
Natural Resources in British Columbia. A. Scott, J. Robinson and D. Cohen, eds.,
pp.7-53. Vancouver: UBC Press.

Bernstein,  Steven,  2001.  The  Compromise  of  Liberal  Environmentalism.  New  York:

Columbia University Press.

Borregaard, Nicola, Beatriz Bustos and Matthew Stilwell,2003. The Role of Economic
Instruments  in  the  Context  of  Biodiversity  Related  Multilateral  Environmental
Agreements. Discussion paper commissioned by UNEP. September. 97pp.

Bovenberg,  A.L.  and  L.H.  Goulder,  1996.  Optimal  Environmental  Taxation  in  the
Presence  of  Other  Taxes:  General-Equilibrium  Analysis,  American  Economic
Review 86(4): 985-1000.

Bromley,  D.W.  1999.  Sustaining  development:  Environmental  resources  in  developing

countries. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.

Brown,  G.M.,  2000.  Renewable  Natural  Resource  Management  and  Use  Without

Markets, Journal of Economic Literature 38: 875-914

Bulte, E.H., D.P. van Soest, G.C. van Kooten and R. Schipper, 2002. Forest Conservation
in  Costa  Rica:  Optimal  Forest  Stocks  under  Uncertainty  and  Rising  Nonuse
Benefits, Am. J. of Agric. Econ. 84(February): 150-60.

Clark, Colin W. 1990. Mathematical Bioeconomics. 2nd edition. New York: Wiley.

Conrad, Jon M. 1995. Bioeconomic Models of the Fishery. Chapter 18 in The Handbook
of  Environmental  Economics  edited  by  D.  W.  Bromley.  Cambridge,  MA:  Basil
Blackwell. .

32

Conrad,  Jon  M.  and  Colin  W.  Clark.  1987.  Natural  Resource  Economics:  Notes  and

Problems. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

CPB  (Netherlands  Bureau  for  Economic  Policy  Analysis),  1997.  Challenging
Neighbours.  Rethinking  German  and  Dutch  Economic  Institutions.  Berlin:
Springer.

Dasgupta,  Partha.  2000.  Economic  Progress  and  the  Idea  of  Social  Capital.  Social
Capital. A Multifaceted Perspective. P. Dasgupta and I. Serageldin, eds., pp. 325-
424. Washington: The World Bank.

Dasgupta, P. and I. Serageldin (Eds.), 2000. Social Capital. A Multifaceted Perspective.

Washington, DC: The World Bank.

Easterly, William. 2001. The Elusive Quest for Growth. Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.

Ekins, P. and T. Barker, 2001. Carbon Taxes and Carbon Emissions Trading, Journal of

Economic Surveys 15(3): 325-52.

Fernandez,  Linda  and  Larry  Karp,  1998.  Restoring  Wetlands  Through  Wetlands
Mitigation  Banks,  Environmental  and  Resource  Economics  12(October):  323-
344.

Field,  Barry  and  Nancy  Olewiler,  2002.  Environmental  Economics.  2nd  Canadian

Edition. Toronto: McGraw-Hill Ryerson.

Fisher,  Anthony  C.,  1981.  Resource  and  Environmental  Economics.  Cambridge,  UK:

Cambridge University Press.

Fukuyama, Francis, 1995. Trust. The Social Virtues and the Creation of Prosperity. New

York: The Free Press.

Fukuyama, Francis, 1999. The Great Disruption. Human Nature and the Reconstitution

of Social Order. New York: The Free Press.

Fukuyama, Francis, 2002. Social Capital and Development: The Coming Agenda, SAIS

Review 22(Winter-Spring): 23-37.

Gelauff,  G.M.M.  2003.  Sociaal  kapitaal  in  de  economie,  Economisch  Statistische

Berichten Vol. 88, Nr. 4398, March 27, pp.3-5.

Hardie, I.W., P.J. Parks and G.C. van Kooten, 2004. The Economics of Land Use at the
Intensive and Extensive Margins. In International Yearbook of Environmental &
Resource  Economics,  2003/2004  edited  by  H.  Folmer  and  T.  Tietenberg.
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar. In press.

33

Harrison,  David  Jr.,  2002.  Tradable  Permits  for  Air  Quality  and  Climate  Change.  In
International  Yearbook  of  Environmental  &  Resource  Economics,  2002/2003
edited by T. Tietenberg and H. Folmer. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar: 311-372.

Hutton, J., P. Ross and G. Webb, 2001. Using the Market to Create Incentives for the
Conservation  of  Crocodilians:  A  Review,  Report  for  the  IUCN/SSC  Crocodile
Specialist Group

Johnston,  Robert  A.  and  Mary  E.  Madison,  1997.  From  Landmarks  to  Landscapes:  A
Review of Current practices in Transfer of Development Rights, Journal of the
American Planning Association 63(3): 365-378.

Kinyua,  Patrick  I.D.,  1998.  Game  Ranching  in  Machakos  District,  Kenya:  An
Application  of  Mathematical  Programming  to  the  Study  of  Wildlife  Policy.
Unpublished  Ph.D.  Dissertation,  Department  of  Forest  Resources  Management,
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

Knack, Stephen and Philip Keefer, 1997. Does Social Capital have an Economic Payoff?
A Cross-Country Investigation, Quarterly Journal of Economics 112: 1251-1288.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer and R. W. Vishny. 1997. Trust in Large

Organizations, American Economic Review 87(May): 333-38.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer and R. W.Vishny. 1999. The Quality of the

Government, Journal of Law, Economics & Organization 15(April): 222 279.

Loasby, B.J., 1999. Knowledge, Institutions and Evolution in Economics. London, UK:

Routledge.

McKitrick, Ross and Randall M. Wigle, 2002. The Kyoto Protocol: Canadas Risky Rush
to  Judgment.  C.D.  Howe  Institute  Commentary  No.  169.  Toronto:  C.D.  Howe
Institute. October.

Menon,  Vivek,  2002.  Tusker.  The  Story  of  the  Asian  Elephant.  New  Delhi:  Penguin

Books India.

Menard, C. 1995. Markets as Institutions versus Organizations as Markets? Disentangling
Some  Fundamental  Concepts,  Journal  of  Economic  Behavior  &  Organization
28(October): 161-182.

Murty, M.N., 1994. Management of Common Property Resources: Limits to Voluntary

Action, Environmental and Resource Economics 4: 581-94.

Neher,  Philip  A.,  1990.  Natural  Resource  Economics:  Conservation  and  Exploitation.

Cambridge UK: Cambridge University Press.

Nielsen, J.R. 2003. An analytical framework for studying compliance and legitimacy in

fisheries management, Marine Policy 27: 425-432.

34

Newell,  Richard  G.  and  William  A.  Pizer,  2003.  Discounting  the  Distant  Future:  How
Much  do  Uncertain  Rates  Increase  Valuations?  Journal  of  Environmental
Economics and Management 46: 52-71.

North,  D.C.  1990.  Institutions,  institutional  change  and  economic  performance.

Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.

North, Douglass C. 1984. Transaction Costs, Institutions, and Economic History, Journal

of Institutional and Theoretical Economics 140(1984): 7-17.

Olson, M. Jr. 1996. Distinguished Lecture on Economics in Government: Big Bills Left
on  the  Sidewalk:  Why  Some  Nations  are  Rich,  and  Others  Poor,  Journal  of
Economic Perspectives 10(Spring): 3-24.

Ostrom, Elinor, 2000. Social capital: A Fad or a Fundamental Concept? Social Capital. A
Multifaceted  Perspective.  P.  Dasgupta  and  I.  Serageldin,  eds.,  pp.  172-214.
Washington: The World Bank.

Ostrom,  Elinor,  1998.  A  Behavioral  Approach  to  the  Rational-Choice  Theory  of

Collective Action, American Political Science Review 92(March): 1-22.

Ostrom,  Elinor.  1990.  Governing  the  Commons:  The  Evolution  of  Collective  Action.

Cambridge University Press.

Parry,  I.,  R.C.  Williams  III  and  L.H.  Goulder,  1999.  When  Can  Carbon  Abatement
Policies  Increase  Welfare?  The  Fundamental  Role  of  Distorted  Factor  Markets,
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 37: 52-84.

Pizer,  W.A.,  1997.  Prices  vs.  Quantities  Revisited:  The  Case  of  Climate  Change.

Resources for the Future Discussion Paper 98-02, Washington, October. 52pp.

Prins, H., J. Grootenhuis and T. Dolan 2002. Wildlife Conservation by Sustainable Use.

Dordrecht: Kluwer Academic Publishers

Polasky,  Stephen.  2001.  Investment,  information  collection,  and  endangered  species
conservation  on  private  land.  In  Protecting  Endangered  Species  in  the  United
States:  Biological  Needs,  Political  Realities,  and  Economic  Choices  edited  by
Jason Shogren and John Tschirhart. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Putnam, R.D. 1993, March 21. The prosperous community: Social capital and public life.

The American Prospect 4(13), 35-42.

Richards,  Kenneth  R.,  2000.  Framing  Environmental  Policy  Instrument  Choice,  Duke

Environmental Law & Policy Forum 10(2): 221-285.

35

Segerson,  K.  and  N.Li,  1999.  Voluntary  Approaches  to  Environmental  Protection.
Chapter  7  in  The  International  Yearbook  of  Environmental  and  Resource
Economics  1999/2000  (pp.273-306)  edited  by  H.  Folmer  and  T.  Tietenberg.
Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.

Shleifer, A. and R.W. Vishny. 1998. The Grabbing Hand: Government Pathologies and

their Cures. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Stavins,  Robert  N.,  2002.  Lessons  from  the  American  Experience  with  Market-Based
Environmental Policies. In Harnessing the Hurricane: The Challenge of Market-
Based Governance edited by J.D. Donahue and J.S. Nye Jr. New York: Brookings
Institution Press.

Stavins, Robert N. and Scott Barrett, 2002. Increasing Participation and Compliance in
International  Climate  Change  Agreements.  FEEM  Working  Paper  No.
94.2002/Kennedy  School  of  Government  Working  Paper  No.  RWP02-031.
http://www.feem.it/web/activ/ _wp.html 35pp.

Tahvonen, O. and J. Kuuluvainen. 1995. The Economics of Natural Resource Utilization.
In Principles of Environmental and Resource Economics: A Guide for Students
and  Decision  Makers  edited  by  H.  Folmer,  H.  L.  Gabel  and  H.  Opschoor.
Aldershot: Edward Elgar.

Tietenberg,  Tom,  Michael  Grubb,  Axel  Michaelowa,  Byron  Swift  and  ZhongXiang
Zhang,  1998.  International  Rules  for  Greenhouse  Gas  Emissions  Trading:
Defining  the  Principles,  Modalities,  Rules  and  Guidelines  for  Verification,
Publication
Reporting 
UNCTAD/GDS/GFSB/Misc.6.  As 
2003 
at:
http://r0.unctad.org/ghg/publications/intl_rules.pdf.  123pp.  No  original  date  or
city of publication provided.

Nations 
July 

Accountability. 

and 

United 

viewed 

on 

10, 

van  Kooten,  G.C.,  2002.  Economic  Analysis  of  the  Canada-United  States  Softwood

Lumber Dispute: Playing the Quota Game, Forest Science 48: 712-721.

van  Kooten,  G.C,  1993.  Land  Resource  Economics  and  Sustainable  Development:

Economic Policies and the Common Good. Vancouver: UBC Press.

van  Kooten,  G.C.  and  E.H.  Bulte,  2000.  The  Economics  of  Nature.  Oxford,  UK:

Blackwell.

Wiebe,  K.,  A.  Tegene  and  B.  Kuhn,  1996.  Partial  Interests  in  Land:  Policy  Tools  for
Resource  Use  and  Conservation.  Agricultural  Economic  Report  Number  744,
Economic  Research  Service,  United  States  Department  of  Agriculture,
Washington DC. 58pp.

Weitzman,  M.L.,  1974.  Prices  vs  Quantities,  The  Review  of  Economic  Studies

41(October): 477-91.

36

Weitzman,  M.L.,  2002.  Land  Fees  vs  Harvest  Quotas  with  Uncertain  Fish  Stocks,

Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 43: 325-38.

Williamson, O.E. 1996. The Mechanisms of Governance. New York: Oxford University

Press.

Williamson, O.E. 1998. Transaction Cost Economics: How it Works; Where it is Headed

De Economist 146: 23-58.

Woerdman, Edwin., 2002. Implementing the Kyoto Mechanisms: Political Barriers and
Path Dependency. Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Groningen, The Netherlands.
620pp. As viewed on 30 July at: http://www.ub.rug.nl/eldoc/dis/jur/e.woerdman.

Woolcock,  M.  1997.  Social  capital  and  economic  development:  Toward  a  theoretical

synthesis and policy framework. Theory and Society 27: 151-208.

World Bank. 2002. Data Profiles & Country at  a  Glance  Tables.  As  found  July  25  at:

http://www.worldbank.org/data/countrydata/countrydata.html.

37

