Climate Change 
Evidence & Causes

An overview from the Royal Society and the 
US National Academy of Sciences

Foreword

2

Climate Changen summaryCLIMATE CHANGE IS ONE OF THE DEFINING ISSUES OF OUR TIME. It is now more certain than ever,  based on many lines of evidence, that humans are changing Earths climate. The atmosphere and oceans have warmed, accompanied by sea-level rise, a strong decline in Arctic sea ice, and other climate-related changes.The evidence is clear. However, due to the nature of science, not every single detail is ever totally settled or completely certain. Nor has every pertinent question yet been answered. Scientific evidence continues to be gathered around the world, and assumptions and findings about climate change are continually analysed and tested. Some areas of active debate and ongoing research include the link between ocean heat content and the rate of warming, estimates of how much warming to expect in the future, and the connections between climate change and extreme weather events. The Royal Society and the US National Academy of Sciences, with their similar missions to promote the use of science to benefit society and to inform critical policy debates, offer this new publication as a key reference document for decision makers, policy makers, educators, and other individuals seeking authoritative answers about the current state of climate-change science. The publication makes clear what is well established, where consensus is growing, and where there is still uncertainty. It is written and reviewed by a UK-US team of leading climate scientists. It echoes and builds upon the long history of climate-related work from both national science academies, as well as the newest climate-change assessment from the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.Scientific information is a vital component of the evidence required for societies to make sensible policy decisions. Climate-change science will continue to help society make informed decisions about how to reduce the magnitude of climate change and to adapt to its impacts. The Royal Society and the US National Academy of Sciences will continue to support the use of robust science toward these critical goals.In 2008 Raymond and Beverly Sackler established the USA-UK Scientific Forum to help the scientists of the United Kingdom and the United States forge an enduring partnership on topics of worldwide scientific concern. As Presidents of the Royal Society and National Academy of Sciences, we are pleased to introduce the latest piece of work supported by the Sacklers inspired generosity.Dr. Ralph J. Cicerone President, National Academy of SciencesSir Paul Nurse President, Royal Societycontents

E v idence & C auses 

1

Summary  ........................................................................................................................................................ 2Climate Change Q&A1 Is the climate warming?  ........................................................................................................................... 32 How do scientists know that recent climate change is largely caused by human activities?  ............. 53 CO2 is already in the atmosphere naturally, so why are emissions from  human activity significant?  ...................................................................................................................... 64 What role has the Sun played in climate change in recent decades?  ................................................... 75 What do changes in the vertical structure of atmospheric temperaturefrom the  surface up to the stratospheretell us about the causes of recent climate change?  ........................ 86 Climate is always changing.  Why is climate change of concern now?  ................................................. 97 Is the current level of atmospheric CO2 concentration unprecedented in Earths history?  ................ 98 Is there a point at which adding more CO2 will not cause further warming?  .................................... 109 Does the rate of warming vary from one decade to another?  ............................................................. 1110 Does the recent slowdown of warming mean that climate change is no longer happening?  ........... 1211 If the world is warming, why are some winters and summers still very cold?  .................................... 1312 Why is Arctic sea ice decreasing while Antarctic sea ice is not?  ......................................................... 1413 How does climate change affect the strength and frequency  of floods, droughts, hurricanes, and tornadoes?  ................................................................................. 1514 How fast is sea level rising?  .................................................................................................................. 1615 What is ocean acidification and why does it matter?  ........................................................................... 1716 How confident are scientists that Earth will warm further over the coming century?  ...................... 1817 Are climate changes of a few degrees a cause for concern?  ............................................................... 1918 What are scientists doing to address key uncertainties  in our understanding of the climate system?  ...................................................................................... 1919 Are disaster scenarios about tipping points like turning off the Gulf Stream  and release of methane from the Arctic a cause for concern?  ............................................................ 2120 If emissions of greenhouse gases were stopped, would the climate return  to the conditions of 200 years ago?  ..................................................................................................... 22The Basics of Climate Change  ............................................................................................. B1B8Conclusion  ............................................................................................................................................... 23Acknowledgements  ............................................................................................................................ 24For Further Reading  ......................................................................................................................... C3Summary

GREENHOUSE GASES such as carbon dioxide (CO2) absorb heat (infrared radiation) 
emitted from Earths surface. Increases in the atmospheric concentrations of these 
gases cause Earth to warm by trapping more of this heat. Human activitiesespecially 
the burning of fossil fuels since the start of the Industrial Revolutionhave increased 
atmospheric CO2 concentrations by about 40%, with more than half the increase 
occurring since 1970. Since 1900, the global average surface temperature has increased by 
about 0.8 C (1.4 F). This has been accompanied by warming of the ocean, a rise in sea 
level, a strong decline in Arctic sea ice, and many other associated climate effects. Much 
of this warming has occurred in the last four decades. Detailed analyses have shown 
that the warming during this period is mainly a result of the increased concentrations of 
CO2 and other greenhouse gases. Continued emissions of these gases will cause further 
climate change, including substantial increases in global average surface temperature and 
important changes in regional climate. The magnitude and timing of these changes will 
depend on many factors, and slowdowns and accelerations in warming lasting a decade 
or more will continue to occur. However, long-term climate change over many decades 
will depend mainly on the total amount of CO2 and other greenhouse gases emitted as a 
result of human activities.

2

Climate ChangeQ&A

1

Is the climate warming?

Yes. Earths average surface air temperature has increased by about 0.8 C (1.4 F) 
since 1900, with much of this increase taking place since the mid-1970s (figure 1a).  
A wide range of other observations (such as reduced Arctic sea ice extent and increased 
ocean heat content) and indications from the natural world (such as poleward shifts 
of temperature-sensitive species of fish, mammals, insects, etc.) together provide 
incontrovertible evidence of planetary-scale warming. 

The clearest evidence for surface warming comes from widespread thermometer records. In some places, 
these records extend back to the late 19th century. Today, temperatures are monitored at many thousands 
of locations, over both the land and ocean surface. Indirect estimates of temperature change from such 
sources as tree rings and ice cores help to place recent temperature changes in the context of the past. In 
terms of the average surface temperature of Earth, these indirect estimates show that 1983 to 2012 was 
probably the warmest 30-year period in more than 800 years. 

A wide range of other observations provides a more comprehensive picture of warming throughout the 
climate system. For example, the lower atmosphere and the upper layers of the ocean have also warmed, 
snow and ice cover are decreasing in the Northern Hemisphere, the Greenland ice sheet is shrinking, and 
sea level is rising [Figure 1b]. These measurements are made with a variety of monitoring systems, which 
gives added confidence in the reality that Earths climate is warming.

Figure 1a. Earths global average 
surface temperature has risen as 
shown in this plot of combined 
land and ocean measurements 
from 1850 to 2012, derived from 
three independent analyses of the 
available data sets. The temperature 
changes are relative to the global 
average surface temperature of 
19611990. Source: IPCC AR5, data from 
the HadCRUT4 dataset (black), UK Met 
Office Hadley Centre, the NCDC MLOST 
dataset (orange), US National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration, and the 
NASA GISS dataset (blue), US National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration.

0
9
9
1

1
6
9
1
 
o
t
 
e
v
i
t
a
l
e
r
 
)
C

(
 
y
l
a
m
o
n
A

3

Evidence & Causes Figure 1b. A large amount of 
observational evidence besides 
the temperature records shows 
that Earths climate is changing. 
For example, additional evidence 
of a warming trend can be found 
in the dramatic decrease in the 
extent of Arctic sea ice at its 
summer minimum (which occurs 
in September), decrease in spring 
snow cover in the Northern 
Hemisphere, increases in the global 
average upper ocean (upper 700 m 
or 2300 feet) heat content (shown 
relative to the 19552006 average), 
and in sea-level rise.  
Source: NOAA climate.gov

4

Climate Changen Q&A2

How do scientists know that recent 
climate change is largely caused by 
human activities?

Scientists know that recent climate change is largely caused by human activities from an 
understanding of basic physics, comparing observations with models, and fingerprinting 
the detailed patterns of climate change caused by different human and natural influences. 

Since the mid-1800s, scientists have known that CO2 is one of the main greenhouse gases of importance to 
Earths energy balance. Direct measurements of CO2 in the atmosphere and in air trapped in ice show that 
atmospheric CO2 increased by about 40% from 1800 to 2012. Measurements of different forms of carbon 
(isotopes, see Question 3) reveal that this increase is due to human activities. Other greenhouse gases 
(notably methane and nitrous oxide) are also increasing as a consequence of human activities. The observed 
global surface temperature rise since 1900 is consistent with detailed calculations of the impacts of the 
observed increase in atmospheric CO2 (and other human-induced changes) on Earths energy balance.

Different influences on climate have different signatures in climate records. These unique fingerprints are 
easier to see by probing beyond a single number (such as the average temperature of Earths surface), and 
looking instead at the geographical and seasonal patterns of climate change. The observed patterns of 
surface warming, temperature changes through the atmosphere, increases in ocean heat content, increases 
in atmospheric moisture, sea level rise, and increased melting of land and sea ice also match the patterns 
scientists expect to see due to rising levels of CO2 and other human-induced changes (see Question 5). 

The expected changes in climate are based on our understanding of how greenhouse gases trap heat. 
Both this fundamental understanding of the physics of greenhouse gases and fingerprint studies show 
that natural causes alone are inadequate to explain the recent observed changes in climate. Natural causes 
include variations in the Suns output and in Earths orbit around the Sun, volcanic eruptions, and internal 
fluctuations in the climate system (such as El Nino and La Nina). Calculations using climate models (see 
infobox, p.20) have been used to simulate what would have happened to global temperatures if only 
natural factors were influencing the climate system. These simulations yield little warming, or even a slight 
cooling, over the 20th century. Only when models include human influences on the composition of the 
atmosphere are the resulting temperature changes consistent with observed changes.

5

Evidence & Causes Q&A n3

CO2 is already in the atmosphere 
naturally, so why are emissions from 
human activity significant?

Human activities have significantly disturbed the natural carbon cycle by extracting long-
buried fossil fuels and burning them for energy, thus releasing CO2 to the atmosphere.

In nature, CO2 is exchanged continually between the atmosphere, plants and animals through 
photosynthesis, respiration, and decomposition, and between the atmosphere and ocean through gas 
exchange. A very small amount of CO2 (roughly 1% of the emission rate from fossil fuel combustion) is 
also emitted in volcanic eruptions. This is balanced by an equivalent amount that is removed by chemical 
weathering of rocks. 

The CO2 level in 2012 was about 40% higher than it was in the nineteenth century. Most of this CO2 
increase has taken place since 1970, about the time when global energy consumption accelerated. 
Measured decreases in the fraction of other forms of carbon (the isotopes 14C and 13C) and a small 
decrease in atmospheric oxygen concentration (observations of which have been available since 1990) 
show that the rise in CO2 is largely from combustion of fossil fuels (which have low 13C fractions and no 
14C). Deforestation and other land use changes have also released carbon from the biosphere (living 
world) where it normally resides for decades to centuries. The additional CO2 from fossil fuel burning and 
deforestation has disturbed the balance of the carbon cycle, because the natural processes that could 
restore the balance are too slow compared to the rates at which human activities are adding CO2 to the 
atmosphere. As a result, a substantial fraction of the CO2 emitted from human activities accumulates 
in the atmosphere, where some of it will remain not just for decades or centuries, but for thousands of 
years. Comparison with the CO2 levels measured in air extracted from ice cores indicates that the current 
concentrations are higher than they have been in at least 800,000 years (see Question 6).

6

Climate Changen Q&A4

What role has the Sun played in 
climate change in recent decades?

The Sun provides the primary source of energy driving Earths climate system, but its 
variations have played very little role in the climate changes observed in recent decades. 
Direct satellite measurements since the late 1970s show no net increase in the Suns out-
put, while at the same time global surface temperatures have increased [Figure 2]. 

For earlier periods, solar changes are less certain because they are inferred from indirect 
sources  including the number of sunspots and the abundance of certain forms (isotopes) of carbon 
or beryllium atoms, whose production rates in Earths atmosphere are influenced by variations in the 
Sun. There is evidence that the 11 year solar cycle, during which the Suns energy output varies by roughly 
0.1%, can influence ozone concentrations, temperatures, and winds in the stratosphere (the layer in the 
atmosphere above the troposphere, typically from 12 to 50 km, depending on latitude and season). These 
stratospheric changes may have a small effect on surface climate over the 11 year cycle. However, the 
available evidence does not indicate pronounced long-term changes in the Suns output over the past 
century, during which time human-induced increases in CO2 concentrations have been the dominant 
influence on the long-term global surface temperature increase. Further evidence that current warming 
is not a result of solar changes can be found in the temperature trends at different altitudes in the 
atmosphere (see Question 5). 

Figure 2. Measurements of the 
Suns energy incident on Earth 
show no net increase in solar 
forcing during the past 30 years, 
and therefore this cannot be 
responsible for warming during 
that period. The data show only 
small periodic amplitude variations 
associated with the Suns 11-year 
cycle. Figure by Keith Shine. 
Source: TSI data from Physikalisch-
Meteorologisches Observatorium 
Davos, Switzerland, adjusted down 
by 4.46 W m-2 to agree with the 2008 
solar minimum data from Kopp and 
Lean, 2011; temperature data from the 
HadCRUT4 dataset, UK Met Office, 
Hadley Centre

7

Evidence & Causes Q&A n5

What do changes in the vertical 
structure of atmospheric temperature 
  from the surface up to the 
stratosphere  tell us about the  
causes of recent climate change? 

The observed warming in the lower atmosphere and cooling in the upper atmosphere 
provide us with key insights into the underlying causes of climate change and reveal that 
natural factors alone cannot explain the observed changes.

In the early 1960s, results from mathematical/physical models of the climate system first showed that 
human-induced increases in CO2 would be expected to lead to gradual warming of the lower atmosphere 
(the troposphere) and cooling of higher levels of the atmosphere (the stratosphere). In contrast, increases 
in the Suns output would warm both the troposphere and the full vertical extent of the stratosphere. At 
that time, there was insufficient observational data to test this prediction, but temperature measurements 
from weather balloons and satellites have since confirmed these early forecasts. It is now known that the 
observed pattern of tropospheric warming and stratospheric cooling over the past 30 to 40 years is broadly 
consistent with computer model simulations that include increases in CO2 and decreases in stratospheric 
ozone, each caused by human activities. The observed pattern is not consistent with purely natural changes 
in the Suns energy output, volcanic activity, or natural climate variations such as El Nino and La Nina. 

Despite this agreement between the global-scale patterns of modelled and observed atmospheric tem-
perature change, there are still some differences. The most noticeable differences are in the tropical tropo-
sphere, where models currently show more warming than has been observed, and in the Arctic, where the 
observed warming of the troposphere is greater than in most models.

8

Climate Changen Q&A6

Climate is always changing. Why is 
climate change of concern now? 

All major climate changes, including natural ones, are disruptive. Past climate changes led 
to extinction of many species, population migrations, and pronounced changes in the land 
surface and ocean circulation. The speed of the current climate change is faster than most of 
the past events, making it more difficult for human societies and the natural world to adapt. 

The largest global-scale climate variations in Earths recent geological past are the ice age cycles (see 
infobox, p.B4), which are cold glacial periods followed by shorter warm periods [Figure 3]. The last few 
of these natural cycles have recurred roughly every 100,000 years. They are mainly paced by slow changes 
in Earths orbit which alter the way the Suns energy is distributed with latitude and by season on Earth. 
These changes alone are not sufficient to cause the observed magnitude of change in temperature, nor to 
act on the whole Earth. Instead they lead to changes in the extent of ice sheets and in the abundance of 
CO2 and other greenhouse gases which amplify the initial temperature change and complete the global 
transition from warm to cold or vice versa. 

Recent estimates of the increase in global average temperature since the end of the last ice age are 4 to 5 
C (7 to 9 F). That change occurred over a period of about 7,000 years, starting 18,000 years ago. CO2 has 
risen by 40% in just the past 200 years, contributing to human alteration of the planets energy budget 
that has so far warmed Earth by about 0.8 C (1.4 F). If the rise in CO2 continues unchecked, warming 
of the same magnitude as the increase out of the ice age can be expected by the end of this century or 
soon after. This speed of warming is more than ten times that at the end of an ice age, the fastest known 
natural sustained change on a global scale.

7

 
Is the current level of atmospheric 
CO2 concentration unprecedented 
in Earths history? 

The present level of atmospheric CO2 concentration is almost certainly unprecedented 
in the past million years, during which time modern humans evolved and societies 
developed. The atmospheric CO2 concentration was however higher in Earths more 
distant past (many millions of years ago), at which time palaeoclimatic and geological 
data indicate that temperatures and sea levels were also higher than they are today. 

Measurements of air in ice cores show that for the past 800,000 years up until the 20th century, the 
atmospheric CO2 concentration stayed within the range 170 to 300 parts per million (ppm), making the recent 
rapid rise to nearly 400 ppm over 200 years particularly remarkable [figure 3]. During the glacial cycles of 
the past 800,000 years both CO2 and methane have acted as important amplifiers of the climate changes 
triggered by variations in Earths orbit around the Sun. As Earth warmed from the last ice age, temperature 

continued

9

Evidence & Causes Q&A nand CO2 started to rise at approximately the same time and continued to rise in tandem from about 18,000 to 
11,000 years ago. Changes in ocean temperature, circulation, chemistry and biology caused CO2 to be released 
to the atmosphere, which combined with other feedbacks to push Earth into an even warmer state. 

For earlier geological times, CO2 concentrations and temperatures have been inferred from less direct 
methods. Those suggest that the concentration of CO2 last approached 400 ppm about 3 to 5 million 
years ago, a period when global average surface temperature is estimated to have been about 2 to 3.5C 
higher than in the pre-industrial period. At 50 million years ago, CO2 may have reached 1000 ppm, and 
global average temperature was probably about 10C warmer than today. Under those conditions, Earth 
had little ice, and sea level was at least 60 metres higher than current levels. 

Figure 3. Data from ice cores have 
been used to reconstruct Antarctic 
temperatures and atmospheric 
CO2 concentrations over the past 
800,000 years. Temperature is 
based on measurements of the 
isotopic content of water in the 
Dome C ice core. CO2 is measured 
in air trapped in ice, and is a 
composite of the Dome C and 
Vostok ice core. The current CO2 
concentration (blue star) is from 
atmospheric measurements. The 
cyclical pattern of temperature 
variations constitutes the ice 
age/ interglacial cycles. During 
these cycles, changes in CO2 
concentrations (in blue) track 
closely with changes in temperature 
(in red). As the record shows, the 
recent increase in atmospheric CO2 
concentration is unprecedented 
in the past 800,000 years. Source: 
Figure by Jeremy Shakun, data from 
Luthi et al., 2008 and Jouzel et al., 2007.

8

Is there a point at which adding more 
CO2 will not cause further warming? 
No. Adding more CO2 to the atmosphere will cause surface temperatures to continue to 
increase. As the atmospheric concentrations of CO2 increase, the addition of extra CO2 
becomes progressively less effective at trapping Earths energy, but surface temperature 
will still rise. 

Our understanding of the physics by which CO2 affects Earths energy balance is confirmed by laboratory 
measurements, as well as by detailed satellite and surface observations of the emission and absorption 
of infrared energy by the atmosphere. Greenhouse gases absorb some of the infrared energy that Earth 
emits in so-called bands of stronger absorption that occur at certain wavelengths. Different gases absorb 
energy at different wavelengths. CO2 has its strongest heat-trapping band centred at a wavelength of 15 
micrometres (millionths of a metre), with wings that spread out a few micrometres on either side. There 
are also many weaker absorption bands. As CO2 concentrations increase, the absorption at the centre of 
the strong band is already so intense that it plays little role in causing additional warming. However, more 
energy is absorbed in the weaker bands and in the wings of the strong band, causing the surface and 
lower atmosphere to warm further. 

10

Climate Changen Q&A9

Figure 4. As the climate system 
varies naturally from year to year 
and from decade to decade, reliable 
inferences about human-induced 
climate change must be made with 
a longer view, using multi-decadal 
and longer records. Calculating a 
running average over these longer 
timescales allows one to more easily 
see long-term trends. For the global 
average temperature for the period 
1850-2012 (using the data from 
the UK Met Office Hadley Centre 
relative to the 1961-90 average) the 
plots show: (top) the average and 
range of uncertainty for annually 
averaged data; (2nd plot) the 
temperature given for any date is 
the average for the ten years about 
that date; (3rd plot) the equivalent 
picture for 30-year; and (4th plot) 
the 60-year averages. Source: Met 
Office, based on the HadCRUT4 dataset 
from the Met Office and Climatic 
Research Unit (Morice et al., 2012).

Does the rate of warming vary from 
one decade to another? 

Yes. The observed warming rate has varied from year to year, decade to decade, and place 
to place, as is expected from our understanding of the climate system. These shorter-
term variations are mostly due to natural causes, and do not contradict our fundamental 
understanding that the long-term warming trend is primarily due to human-induced 
changes in the atmospheric levels of CO2 and other greenhouse gases.

Even as CO2 is rising steadily in the atmosphere, leading to gradual warming of Earths surface, many natural 
factors are modulating this long-term warming. Large volcanic eruptions increase the number of small 
particles in the stratosphere that reflect sunlight, leading to short-term surface cooling lasting typically two 
to three years, followed by a slow recovery. Ocean circulation and mixing vary naturally on many time scales, 
causing variations in sea surface temperatures as well as changes in the rate at which heat is transported to 
greater depths. For example, the tropical Pacific swings between warm El Nino and cooler La Nina events 
on timescales of two to seven years. Scientists know of and study many different types of climate variations, 
such as those on decadal and multi-decadal timescales in the Pacific and North Atlantic Oceans, each with 
its own unique characteristics. These oceanic variations are associated with significant regional and global 
shifts in temperature and rainfall patterns that are evident in the observations. 

Warming from decade to decade can also be affected by human factors such as variations in the emissions, 
from coal-fired power plants and other pollution sources, of greenhouse gases and of aerosols (airborne 
particles that can have both warming and cooling effects). 

These variations in the temperature trend are clearly evident in the observed temperature record [Figure 
4]. Short-term natural climate variations could also affect the long-term human-induced climate change 
signal and vice-versa, because climate variations on different space and timescales can interact with 
one another. It is partly for this reason that climate change projections are made using climate models 
(see infobox, p.20) that can account for many different types of climate variations and their interactions. 
Reliable inferences about human-induced climate change must be made with a longer view, using records 
that cover many decades.

 

 

e
g
n
a
h
c
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
T

e
g
a
r
e
v
a
0
9
9
1

1
6
9
1
e
h
t
 
o
t
 
e
v
i
t
a
e
r
(

l

 

Annual average

0.5C

0C

0.5C

0.5C

0C

30-year average

0.5C

10-year average

60-year average

0.5C

0C

0.5C

0.5C

0C

0.5C

 

l

(
r
e
a
t
i
v
e
 
t
o
 
t
h
e
1
9
6
1

1
9
9
0
a
v
e
r
a
g
e

 

T
e
m
p
e
r
a
t
u
r
e
c
h
a
n
g
e

 

1850

1900

1950

2000

11

Evidence & Causes Q&A n10

Does the recent slowdown of 
warming mean that climate change 
is no longer happening? 

No. Since the very warm year 1998 that followed the strong 1997-98 El Nino, the 
increase in average surface temperature has slowed relative to the previous decade 
of rapid temperature increases. Despite the slower rate of warming the 2000s were 
warmer than the 1990s. A short-term slowdown in the warming of Earths surface does 
not invalidate our understanding of long-term changes in global temperature arising 
from human-induced changes in greenhouse gases. 

Decades of slow warming as well as decades of accelerated warming occur naturally in the climate system. 
Decades that are cold or warm compared to the long-term trend are seen in the observations of the past 
150 years and also captured by climate models. Because the atmosphere stores very little heat, surface 
temperatures can be rapidly affected by heat uptake elsewhere in the climate system and by changes in 
external influences on climate (such as particles formed from material lofted high into the atmosphere 
from volcanic eruptions). More than 90% of the heat added to Earth is absorbed by the oceans and 
penetrates only slowly into deep water. A faster rate of heat penetration into the deeper ocean will slow the 
warming seen at the surface and in the atmosphere, but by itself will not change the long-term warming 
that will occur from a given amount of CO2. For example, recent studies show that some heat comes out 
of the ocean into the atmosphere during warm El Nino events, and more heat penetrates to ocean depths 
in cold La Ninas. Such changes occur repeatedly over timescales of decades and longer. An example is the 
major El Nino event in 199798 when the globally averaged air temperature soared to the highest level in 
the 20th century as the ocean lost heat to the atmosphere, mainly by evaporation. 

Recent studies have also pointed to a number of other small cooling influences over the past decade or so. 
These include a relatively quiet period of solar activity and a measured increase in the amount of aerosols 
(reflective particles) in the atmosphere due to the cumulative effects of a succession of small volcanic 
eruptions. The combination of these factors, both the interaction between the ocean and the atmosphere 
and the forcing from the Sun and aerosols, is thought likely to be responsible for the recent slowdown in 
surface warming. 

Despite the decadal slowdown in the rise of average surface temperature, a longer-term warming trend 
is still evident (see Figure 4). Each of the last three decades was warmer than any other decade since 
widespread thermometer measurements were introduced in the 1850s. Record heatwaves have occurred 
in Australia (January 2013), USA (July 2012), in Russia (summer 2010), and in Europe (summer 2003). The 
continuing effects of the warming climate are also seen in the increasing trends in ocean heat content and 
sea level, as well as in the continued melting of Arctic sea ice, glaciers and the Greenland ice sheet. 

12

Climate Changen Q&A11

If the world is warming, why are some 
winters and summers still very cold? 

Global warming is a long-term trend, but that does not mean that every year will be 
warmer than the previous one. Day to day and year to year changes in weather patterns 
will continue to produce some unusually cold days and nights, and winters and summers, 
even as the climate warms. 

Climate change means not only changes in globally averaged surface temperature, but also changes in 
atmospheric circulation, in the size and patterns of natural climate variations, and in local weather. La 
Nina events shift weather patterns so that some regions are made wetter, and wet summers are generally 
cooler. Stronger winds from polar regions can contribute to an occasional colder winter. In a similar way, 
the persistence of one phase of an atmospheric circulation pattern known as the North Atlantic Oscilla-
tion has contributed to several recent cold winters in Europe, eastern North America, and northern Asia.

Atmospheric and ocean circulation patterns will evolve as Earth warms and will influence storm tracks 
and many other aspects of the weather. Global warming tilts the odds in favour of more warm days and 
seasons and fewer cold days and seasons. For example, across the continental United States in the 1960s 
there were more daily record low temperatures than record highs, but in the 2000s there were more than 
twice as many record highs as record lows. Another important example of tilting the odds is that over 
recent decades heatwaves have increased in frequency in large parts of Europe, Asia and Australia. 
 

13

Evidence & Causes Q&A nWhy is Arctic sea ice decreasing 
while Antarctic sea ice is not? 

Sea ice extent is affected by winds and ocean currents as well as temperature. Sea ice 
in the partly-enclosed Arctic Ocean seems to be responding directly to warming, while 
changes in winds and in the ocean seem to be dominating the patterns of climate and sea 
ice change in the ocean around Antarctica. 

Sea ice in the Arctic has decreased dramatically since the late 1970s, particularly in summer and autumn. 
Since the satellite record began in 1978 (providing for the first time a complete and continuous areal 
coverage of the Arctic), the yearly minimum Arctic sea ice extent (which occurs in early to mid-September) 
has decreased by more than 40% [Figure 5]. Ice cover expands again each Arctic winter but the ice is 
thinner than it used to be. Estimates of past sea ice extent suggest that this decline may be unprecedented 
in at least the past 1,450 years. The total volume of ice, the product of ice thickness and area, has 
decreased faster than ice extent over the past decades. Because sea ice is highly reflective, warming is 
amplified as the ice decreases and more sunshine is absorbed by the darker underlying ocean surface.

Sea ice in the Antarctic has shown a slight increase in extent since 1979 overall, although some areas, 
such as that to the west of the Antarctic Peninsula, have experienced a decrease. Changes in surface 
wind patterns around the continent have contributed to the Antarctic pattern of sea ice change while 
ocean factors such as the addition of cool fresh water from melting ice shelves may also have played a 
role. The wind changes include a recent strengthening of westerly winds, which reduces the amount of 
warm air from low latitudes penetrating into the southern high latitudes and alters the way in which ice 
moves away from the continent. The change in winds may result in part from the effects of stratospheric 
ozone depletion over Antarctica (i.e., the ozone hole, a phenomenon that is distinct from the human-
driven changes in long-lived 
greenhouse gases discussed in 
this document). However, short-
term trends in the Southern 
Ocean, such as those observed, 
can readily occur from natural 
variability of the atmosphere, 
ocean and sea ice system.

12

Figure 5. The Arctic summer 
sea ice extent in 2012, (measured 
in September) was a record low, 
shown (in white) compared to the 
median summer sea ice extent for 
1979 to 2000 (in orange outline). In 
2013, Arctic summer sea ice extent 
rebounded somewhat, but was still 
the sixth smallest extent on record.  
Source: National Snow and Ice Data 
Center

14

Climate Changen Q&A13

How does climate change affect the 
strength and frequency of floods, 
droughts, hurricanes, and tornadoes? 

Earths lower atmosphere is becoming warmer and moister as a result of human-emitted 
greenhouse gases. This gives the potential for more energy for storms and certain severe 
weather events. Consistent with theoretical expectations, heavy rainfall and snowfall events 
(which increase the risk of flooding) and heatwaves are generally becoming more frequent. 
Trends in extreme rainfall vary from region to region: the most pronounced changes are 
evident in North America and parts of Europe, especially in winter. 

Attributing extreme weather events to climate change is challenging because these events are by definition 
rare and therefore hard to evaluate reliably, and are affected by patterns of natural climate variability. For 
instance, the biggest cause of droughts and floods around the world is the shifting of climate patterns 
between El Nino and La Nina events. On land, El Nino events favour drought in many tropical and subtropical 
areas, while La Nina events promote wetter conditions in many places, as has happened in recent years. 
These short-term and regional variations are expected to become more extreme in a warming climate.

There is considerable uncertainty about how hurricanes are changing because of the large natural variability 
and the incomplete observational record. The impact of climate change on hurricane frequency remains 
a subject of ongoing studies. While changes in hurricane frequency remain uncertain, basic physical 
understanding and model results suggest that the strongest hurricanes (when they occur) are likely 
to become more intense and possibly larger in a warmer, moister atmosphere over the oceans. This is 
supported by available observational evidence in the North Atlantic. Some conditions favourable for strong 
thunderstorms that spawn tornadoes are expected to increase with warming, but uncertainty exists in other 
factors that affect tornado formation, such as changes in the vertical and horizontal variations of winds.

15

Evidence & Causes Q&A n14

How fast is sea level rising? 

Long-term measurements of tide gauges and recent satellite data show that global sea 
level is rising, with best estimates of the global-average rise over the last two decades 
centred on 3.2 mm per year (0.12 inches per year). The overall observed rise since 1901 is 
about 20 cm (8 inches) [Figure 6]. 

This sea-level rise has been driven by (in order of importance): expansion of water volume as the ocean 
warms, melting of mountain glaciers in most regions of the world, and losses from the Greenland and 
Antarctic ice sheets. All of these result from a warming climate. Fluctuations in sea level also occur due to 
changes in the amounts of water stored on land. The amount of sea level change experienced at any given 
location also depends on a variety of other factors, including whether regional geological processes and 
rebound of the land weighted down by previous ice sheets are causing the land itself to rise or sink, and 
whether changes in winds and currents are piling ocean water against some coasts or moving water away.

The effects of rising sea level are felt most acutely in the increased frequency and intensity of occasional 
storm surges. If CO2 and other greenhouse gases continue to increase on their current trajectories, it is 
projected that sea level may rise by a further 0.5 to 1 m (1.5 to 3 feet) by 2100. But rising sea levels will 
not stop in 2100; sea levels will be much higher in the following centuries as the sea continues to take up 
heat and glaciers continue to retreat. It remains difficult to predict the details of how the Greenland and 
Antarctic Ice Sheets will respond to continued warming, but it is thought that Greenland and perhaps West 
Antarctica will continue to lose mass, whereas the colder parts of Antarctica could start to gain mass as 
they receive more snowfall from warmer air that contains more moisture. Sea level in the last interglacial 
(warm) period around 125,000 years ago peaked at probably 5 to 10 m above the present level. During this 
period, the polar regions were warmer than they are today. This suggests that, over millennia, long periods 
of increased warmth will lead to very significant loss of parts of the Greenland and Antarctic Ice Sheets and 
to consequent sea level rise. 

Figure 6. Observations show that 
the global average sea level has 
risen by about 20 cm (8 inches) 
since the late 19th century. Sea level 
is rising faster in recent decades; 
measurements from tide gauges 
(blue) and satellites (red) indicate 
that the best estimate for the 
average sea level rise over the last 
two decades is centred on 3.2 mm 
per year (0.12 inches per year). The 
shaded area represents the sea level 
uncertainty, which has decreased as 
the number of gauge sites used in 
the global averages and the number 
of data points have increased. 
Source: Shum and Kuo (2011)

16

Climate Changen Q&A15

What is ocean acidification and why 
does it matter? 

Direct observations of ocean chemistry have shown that the chemical balance of seawater 
has shifted to a more acidic state (lower pH) [Figure 7]. Some marine organisms (such 
as corals and some shellfish) have shells composed of calcium carbonate which dissolves 
more readily in acid. As the acidity of sea water increases, it becomes more difficult for 
them to form or maintain their shells. 

CO2 dissolves in water to form a weak acid, and the oceans have absorbed about a third of the CO2 resulting 
from human activities, leading to a steady decrease in ocean pH levels. With increasing atmospheric CO2, 
the chemical balance will change even more during the next century. Laboratory and other experiments 
show that under high CO2 and in more acidic waters, some marine species have misshapen shells and 
lower growth rates, although the effect varies among species. Acidification also alters the cycling of 
nutrients and many other elements and compounds in the ocean, and it is likely to shift the competitive 
advantage among species, with as-yet-to-be-determined impacts on marine ecosystems and the food web. 

Atmospheric CO2 concentration (ppm)
Surface Ocean pCO2, Bermuda (atm)
Surface Ocean pCO2, Hawaii (atm)

figure 7. As CO2 in the air has 
increased, there has been an 
increase in the CO2 content of the 
surface ocean (upper box), and a 
decrease in the seawater pH (lower 
box). Source: adapted from Dore et al. 
(2009) and Bates et al. (2012).

 
n
o
i
t
a
r
t
n
e
c
n
o
c
 
 
2

O
C

 
r
o
 
2

O
C
p

400

390

380

370

360

350

340

330

320

8.11

8.10

8.09

H
p

8.08

8.07

8.06

Surface Ocean pH
Bermuda
Hawaii

1990

1995

2000

Year

2005

2010

17

Evidence & Causes Q&A n16

How confident are scientists that 
Earth will warm further over the 
coming century? 

Very confident. If emissions continue on their present trajectory, without either technologi-
cal or regulatory abatement, then warming of 2.6 to 4.8 C (4.7 to 8.6 F) in addition to that 
which has already occurred would be expected by the end of the 21st century. 

Warming due to the addition of large amounts of greenhouse gases to the atmosphere can be understood in 
terms of very basic properties of greenhouse gases. It will in turn lead to many changes in natural climate pro-
cesses, with a net effect of amplifying the warming. The size of the warming that will be experienced depends 
largely on the amount of greenhouse gases accumulating in the atmosphere and hence on the trajectory 
of emissions [Figure 8]. If the total cumulative emissions since 1870 are kept below about 1 trillion (million 
million) tonnes of carbon, then there is a two-thirds chance of keeping the rise in global average temperature 
since the pre-industrial period below 2 C (3.6 oF). However, over half this amount has already been emitted.

Based just on the established physics of the amount of heat CO2 absorbs and emits, a doubling of 
atmospheric CO2 concentration from pre-industrial levels (up to about 560 ppm) would by itself, without 
amplification by any other effects, cause a global average temperature increase of about 1 C (1.8 F). 
However, the total amount of warming from a given amount of emissions depends on chains of effects 
(feedbacks) that can individually either amplify or diminish the initial warming. 

The most important amplifying feedback is caused by water vapour, which is a potent greenhouse gas in the 
atmosphere as warmer air can hold more moisture. Also, as Arctic sea ice and glaciers melt, more sunlight 
is absorbed into the darker underlying land and ocean surfaces causing further warming and further melting 
of ice and snow. The biggest uncertain factor in our knowledge of feedbacks is in how the properties of 
clouds will change in response to climate change. Other feedbacks involve the carbon cycle. Currently the 
land and oceans together absorb about half of the CO2 emitted from human activities, but the capacities of 
land and ocean to store additional carbon are expected to decrease with additional warming, leading to faster 
increases in atmospheric CO2 and faster warming. Models vary in their projections of how much additional 
warming to expect, but all such models agree that the overall net effect of feedbacks is to amplify the 
CO2-only warming by a factor of 1.5 to 4.5. 

figure 8. If emissions continue 
on their present trajectory, without 
either technological or regulatory 
abatement, then the best estimate 
is that global average temperature 
will warm a further 2.6 to 4.8 C 
(4.7 to 8.6 F) by the end of the 
century (right). The figure on left 
shows projected warming with very 
aggressive emissions reductions. 
The figures represent multi-model 
estimates of temperature averages 
for 2081-2100 compared to 
19862005. Source: IPCC AR5

18

Climate Changen Q&A17

Are climate changes of a few degrees 
a cause for concern? 

Yes. Even though an increase of a few degrees in global average temperature does not 
sound like much, global average temperature during the last ice age was only about 4 to 
5 C (7 to 9 F) colder than now. Global warming of just a few degrees will be associated 
with widespread changes in regional and local temperature and precipitation as well as 
with increases in some types of extreme weather events. These and other changes (such 
as sea level rise and storm surge) will have serious impacts on human societies and the 
natural world.

Both theory and direct observations have confirmed that global warming is associated with greater warming 
over land than oceans, moistening of the atmosphere, shifts in regional precipitation patterns and increases in 
extreme weather events, ocean acidification, melting glaciers, and rising sea levels (which increases the risk of 
coastal inundation and storm surge). Already, record high temperatures are on average significantly outpacing 
record low temperatures, wet areas are becoming wetter as dry areas are becoming drier, heavy rainstorms 
have become heavier, and snowpacks (an important source of freshwater for many regions) are decreasing. 

These impacts are expected to increase with greater warming and will threaten food production, 
freshwater supplies, coastal infrastructure, and especially the welfare of the huge population currently 
living in low-lying areas. Even though certain regions may realise some local benefit from the warming, the 
long-term consequences overall will be disruptive. 

18

What are scientists doing to 
address key uncertainties in our 
understanding of the climate system? 

Science is a continual process of observation, understanding, modelling, testing and 
prediction. The prediction of a long-term trend in global warming from increasing 
greenhouse gases is robust and has been confirmed by a growing body of evidence. 
Nevertheless, understanding (for example, of cloud dynamics, and of climate variations 
on centennial and decadal timescales and on regional-to-local spatial scales) remains 
incomplete. All of these are areas of active research. 

Comparisons of model predictions with observations identify what is well-understood and, at the same 
time, reveal uncertainties or gaps in our understanding. This helps to set priorities for new research. 
Vigilant monitoring of the entire climate systemthe atmosphere, oceans, land, and iceis therefore 
critical, as the climate system may be full of surprises. 

continued

19

Evidence & Causes Q&A nTogether, field and laboratory data and theoretical understanding are used to advance models of Earths climate 
system and to improve representation of key processes in them, especially those associated with clouds, 
aerosols, and transport of heat into the oceans. This is critical for accurately simulating climate change and 
associated changes in severe weather, especially at the regional and local scales important for policy decisions. 

Simulating how clouds will change with warming and in turn may themselves affect warming, remains 
one of the major challenges for global climate models, in part because many cloud processes occur on 
scales smaller than the current models can resolve. Greater computer power may enable some of these 
processes to be resolved in future-generation models. 

Dozens of groups and research institutions work on climate models, and scientists are now able to analyse 
results from essentially all of the worlds major Earth-System Models and compare them with each other and 
with observations. Such opportunities are of tremendous benefit in bringing out the strengths and weak-
nesses of various models and diagnosing the causes of differences among models, so that research can focus 
on the relevant processes. The differences among models allow estimates to be made of the uncertainties in 
projections of future climate change, and in understanding which aspects of these projections are robust. 

Studying how climate responded to major changes in the past is another way of checking that we understand 
how different processes work and that models are capable of performing under a wide range of conditions. 

Why are computer models used to study climate change?
The future evolution of Earths climate as it responds to 
the present rapid rate of increasing atmospheric CO2 has 
no precise analogues in the past, nor can it be properly 
understood through laboratory experiments. As we are also 
unable to carry out deliberate controlled experiments on Earth 
itself, computer models are among the most important tools 
used to study Earths climate system.

Climate models are based 
on mathematical equations 
that represent the best 
understanding of the basic 
laws of physics, chemistry, 
and biology that govern the 
behaviour of the atmosphere, 
ocean, land surface, ice, and 
other parts of the climate 
system, as well as the 

20

interactions among them. The most comprehensive climate 
models, Earth-System Models, are designed to simulate 
Earths climate system with as much detail as is permitted by 
our understanding and by available supercomputers. 

The capability of climate models has improved steadily since 
the 1960s. Using physics-based equations, the models can 
be tested and are successful in simulating a broad range of 
weather and climate variations, for example from individual 
storms, jet stream meanders, El Nino events, and the climate 
of the last century. Their projections of the most prominent 
features of the long-term human-induced climate change signal 
have remained robust, as generations of increasingly complex 
models yield richer details of the change. They are also used 
to perform experiments to isolate specific causes of climate 
change and to explore the consequences of different scenarios 
of future greenhouse gas emissions and other influences on 
climate. 

Climate Changen Q&A19

Are disaster scenarios about tipping 
points like turning off the Gulf 
Stream and release of methane from 
the Arctic a cause for concern? 

Results from the best available climate models do not predict abrupt changes in such 
systems (often referred to as tipping points) in the near future. However, as warming 
increases, the possibilities of major abrupt change cannot be ruled out. 

The composition of the atmosphere is changing towards conditions that have not been experienced for 
millions of years, so we are headed for unknown territory, and uncertainty is large. The climate system 
involves many competing processes that could switch the climate into a different state once a threshold 
has been exceeded. 

A well-known example is the south-north ocean overturning circulation, which is maintained by cold salty 
water sinking in the North Atlantic and which involves the transport of extra heat to the North Atlantic via 
the Gulf Stream. During the last ice age, pulses of freshwater from the ice sheet over North America led to 
slowing down of this overturning circulation and to widespread changes in climate around the Northern 
Hemisphere. Freshening of the North Atlantic from the melting of the Greenland ice sheet is however, 
much less intense and hence is not expected to cause abrupt changes. As another example, Arctic 
warming could destabilise methane (a greenhouse gas) trapped in ocean sediments and permafrost, 
potentially leading to a rapid release of a large amount of methane. If such a rapid release occurred, then 
major, fast climate changes would ensue. 

Such high-risk changes are considered unlikely in this century, but are by definition hard to predict. 
Scientists are therefore continuing to study the possibility of such tipping points beyond which we risk 
large and abrupt changes. 

21

Evidence & Causes Q&A n20

If emissions of greenhouse gases were 
stopped, would the climate return 
to the conditions of 200 years ago? 

No. Even if emissions of greenhouse gases were to suddenly stop, Earths surface temperature 
would not cool and return to the level in the pre-industrial era for thousands of years. 

If emissions of CO2 stopped altogether, it would take many thousands of years for atmospheric CO2 to 
return to pre-industrial levels due to its very slow transfer to the deep ocean and ultimate burial in ocean 
sediments. Surface temperatures would stay elevated for at least a thousand years, implying extremely 
long-term commitment to a warmer planet due to past and current emissions, and sea level would likely 
continue to rise for many centuries even after temperature stopped increasing [Figure 9]. Significant 
cooling would be required to reverse melting of glaciers and the Greenland ice sheet, which formed 
during past cold climates. The current CO2-induced warming of Earth is therefore essentially irreversible 
on human timescales. The amount and rate of further warming will depend almost entirely on how much 
more CO2 humankind emits. 

figure 9. If global emissions 
were to suddenly stop, it would 
take a long time for surface air 
temperatures and the ocean to 
begin to cool, because the excess 
CO2 in the atmosphere would 
remain there for a long time and 
would continue to exert a warming 
effect. Model projections show how 
atmospheric CO2 concentration 
(a), surface air temperature (b), 
and ocean thermal expansion (c) 
would respond following a scenario 
of business-as-usual emissions 
ceasing in 2300 (red), a scenario 
of aggressive emission reductions, 
falling close to zero 50 years from 
now (orange), and two intermediate 
emissions scenarios (green and 
blue). The small downward tick 
in temperature at 2300 is caused 
by the elimination of emissions 
of short-lived greenhouse gases, 
including methane. Source: Zickfeld 
et al., 2013

22

Climate Changen Q&AThe Basics of 
Climate Change

Greenhouse gases affect Earths energy balance and climate
The Sun serves as the primary energy source for Earths climate. Some of the incoming 
sunlight is reflected directly back into space, especially by bright surfaces such as ice and 
clouds, and the rest is absorbed by the surface and the atmosphere. Much of this absorbed 
solar energy is re-emitted as heat (longwave or infrared radiation). The atmosphere in turn 
absorbs and re-radiates heat, some of which escapes to space. Any disturbance to this 
balance of incoming and outgoing energy will affect the climate. For example, small changes 
in the output of energy from the Sun will affect this balance directly. 

If all heat energy emitted from the surface passed through the atmosphere directly into 
space, Earths average surface temperature would be tens of degrees colder than today. 
Greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, including water vapour, carbon dioxide, methane, 
and nitrous oxide, act to make the surface much warmer than this, because they absorb and 
emit heat energy in all directions (including downwards), keeping Earths surface and lower 
atmosphere warm [Figure B1]. Without this greenhouse effect, life as we know it could not 
have evolved on our planet. Adding more greenhouse gases to the atmosphere makes it 
even more effective at preventing heat from escaping into space. When the energy leaving is 
less than the energy entering, Earth warms until a new balance is established. 

THE GREENHOUSE EFFECT

Some solar radiation 
is reflected by
Earth and the
atmosphere

Some  of the infrared radiation 
passes through the atmosphere. 
Some is absorbed by greenhouse 
gases and re-emitted in all directions 
by the atmosphere. The effect of 
this is to warm Earths
surface and the
 lower atmosphere.

Atmosphere

Earths Surface

Some radiation 
is absorbed 
by Earths 
surface and
warms it

Infrared radiation 
is emitted by 
Earths surface

figure b1.  Greenhouse gases 
in the atmosphere, including 
water vapour, carbon dioxide, 
methane, and nitrous oxide, absorb 
heat energy and emit it in all 
directions (including downwards), 
keeping Earths surface and 
lower atmosphere warm. Adding 
more greenhouse gases to the 
atmosphere enhances the effect, 
making Earths surface and lower 
atmosphere even warmer. Image 
based on a figure from US EPA.

Evidence & Causes Q&A nB1Figure B2. Measurements of 
atmospheric CO2 since 1958 from 
the Mauna Loa Observatory in 
Hawaii (black) and from the South 
Pole (red) show a steady annual 
increase in atmospheric CO2 
concentration. (The measurements 
are made at remote places like 
those because they are not greatly 
influenced by local processes, so 
therefore are representative of the 
background atmosphere.) The small 
up and down saw-tooth pattern 
reflects seasonal changes in the 
release and uptake of CO2 by plants. 
Source: Scripps CO2 Program

m
p
p
 
/
 

O
C

2

Year

B2Climate Changebasics of climate changeGreenhouse gases emitted by human activities alter Earths energy balance and thus its climate. Humans also affect climate by changing the nature of the land surfaces (for example by clearing forests for farming) and through the emission of pollutants that affect the amount and type of particles in the atmosphere.Scientists have determined that, when all human and natural factors are considered, Earths climate balance has been altered towards warming, with the biggest contributor being increases in CO2. Human activities have added greenhouse gases to the atmosphereThe atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide have increased significantly since the Industrial Revolution began. In the case of carbon dioxide, the average concentration measured at the Mauna Loa Observatory in Hawaii has risen from 316 parts per million (ppm)1 in 1959 (the first full year of data available) to 396 ppm in 2013 [Figure B2]. The same rates of increase have since been recorded at numerous other stations worldwide. Since pre-industrial times, the atmospheric concentration of CO2 has increased by 40%, methane has increased by about 150%, and nitrous oxide has increased by roughly 20%. More than half of the increase in CO2 has occurred since 1970. Increases in all three gases contribute to warming of Earth, with the increase in CO2 playing the largest role. See page B3 to learn about the sources of human emitted greenhouse gases. Scientists have examined greenhouse gases in the context of the past. Analysis of air trapped inside ice that has been accumulating over time in Antarctica shows that the CO2 1  that is, for every million molecules in the air, 316 of them were CO2Figure B3. CO2 variations during 
the past 1,000 years, obtained 
from analysis of air trapped in an 
ice core extracted from Antarctica 
(red squares), show a sharp rise in 
atmospheric CO2 starting in the late 
19th century. Modern atmospheric 
measurements from Mauna Loa are 
superimposed in blue. Source: figure 
by Eric Wolff, data from Etheridge et al., 
1996; MacFarling Meure et al., 2006.

Learn about the sources of human-emitted greenhouse gases

 Carbon dioxide (CO2) has both 
natural and human sources, but 
CO2 levels are increasing primarily 
because of the combustion of fossil 
fuels, cement production, defor-
estation (which reduces the CO2 
taken up by trees and increases the 
CO2 released by decomposition of 
the detritus), and other land use 
changes. Increases in CO2 are the 
single largest contributor to global 
warming.

 Methane (CH4) has both human 

and natural sources, and levels 
have risen significantly since 
pre-industrial times due to human 
activities such as raising livestock, 
growing paddy rice, filling landfills, 
and using natural gas (which is 
mostly CH4, some of which may 
be released when it is extracted, 
transported, and used).

 Nitrous oxide (N2O) concentra-
tions have risen primarily because 
of agricultural activities such as the 
use of nitrogen-based fertilisers and 
land use changes.

 Halocarbons, including chloro-
fluorocarbons (CFCs), are chem-
icals used as refrigerants and fire 
retardants. In addition to being 
potent greenhouse gases, CFCs 
also damage the ozone layer. The 
production of most CFCs has now 
been banned, so their impact is 
starting to decline. However, many 
CFC replacements are also potent 
greenhouse gases and their concen-
trations and the concentrations 
of other halocarbons continue to 
increase.

B3Evidence & Causes basics of climate changeconcentration began to increase significantly in the 19th century [Figure B3], after staying in the range of 260 to 280 ppm for the previous 10,000 years. Ice core records extending back 800,000 years show that during that time, CO2 concentrations remained within the range of 170 to 300 ppm throughout many ice age cycles  see page B4 to learn about the ice ages  and no concentration above 300 ppm is seen in ice core records until the past 200 years.250300350400100012001400160018002000Atmospheric measurements (ML)Law DomeYearCO2 / ppmLearn about the ice ages

Detailed analyses of ocean sediments, 
ice cores, and other data show that for at 
least the last 2.6 million years, Earth has 
gone through extended periods when 
temperatures were much lower than 
today and thick blankets of ice covered 
large areas of the Northern Hemisphere. 
These long cold spells, lasting in the 
most recent cycles for around 100,000 
years, were interrupted by shorter warm 
interglacial periods, including the past 
10,000 years.

Through a combination of theory, 
observations, and modelling, scientists 
have deduced that the ice ages* are 
triggered by recurring variations in 
Earths orbit that primarily alter the 
regional and seasonal distribution of 
solar energy reaching Earth. These 
relatively small changes in solar energy 
are reinforced over thousands of years by 
gradual changes in Earths ice cover (the 
cryosphere), especially over the Northern 
Hemisphere, and in atmospheric 
composition, eventually leading to large 

changes in global temperature. 
The average global temperature change 
during an ice-age cycle is estimated as 5 
C  1 C (9 F  2 F).

*Note that in geological terms Earth has 
been in an ice age ever since the Antarctic 
Ice Sheet last formed about 36 million 
years ago. However, in this document we 
have used the term in its more colloquial 
usage indicating the regular occurrence of 
extensive ice sheets over North America 
and northern Eurasia.

B4Climate Changebasics of climate changeMeasurements of the forms (isotopes) of carbon in the modern atmosphere show a clear fingerprint of the addition of old carbon (depleted in natural radioactive 14C) coming from the combustion of fossil fuels (as opposed to newer carbon coming from living systems). In addition, it is known that human activities (excluding land-use changes) currently emit an estimated 10 billion tonnes of carbon each year, mostly by burning fossil fuels, which is more than enough to explain the observed increase in concentration. These and other lines of evidence point conclusively to the fact that the elevated CO2 concentration in our atmosphere is the result of human activities. Climate records show a warming trendEstimating global average surface air temperature increase requires careful analysis of millions of measurements from around the world, including from land stations, ships, and satellites. Despite the many complications of synthesising such data, multiple independent teams have concluded separately and unanimously that global average surface air temperature has risen by about 0.8 C (1.4 F) since 1900 [Figure B4]. Although the record shows several pauses and accelerations in the increasing trend, each of the last three decades has been warmer than any other decade in the instrumental record since 1850. Going further back in time before accurate thermometers were widely available, temperatures can be reconstructed using climate-sensitive indicators (proxies) Figure B4. Earths global average 
surface temperature has risen as 
shown in this plot of combined 
land and ocean measurements 
from 1850 to 2012, derived from 
three independent analyses of 
the available data sets. The top 
panel shows annual average values 
from the three analyses, and the 
bottom panel shows decadal 
average values, including the 
uncertainty range (grey bars) for 
the black (HadCRUT4) dataset. 
The temperature changes are 
relative to the global average 
surface temperature, averaged from 
19611990. Source: IPCC AR5, data from 
the HadCRUT4 dataset (black), UK Met 
Office Hadley Centre, the NCDC MLOST 
dataset (orange), US National Oceanic 
and Atmospheric Administration, and the 
NASA GISS dataset (blue), US National 
Aeronautics and Space Administration.

B5Evidence & Causes basics of climate changein materials such as tree rings, ice cores, and marine sediments. Comparisons of the thermometer record with these proxy measurements suggest that the time since the early 1980s has been the warmest 30-year period in at least eight centuries, and that global temperature is rising towards peak temperatures last seen 5,000 to 10,000 years ago in the warmest part of our current interglacial period. Many other impacts associated with the warming trend have become evident in recent years. Arctic summer sea ice cover has shrunk dramatically. The heat content of the ocean has increased. Global average sea level has risen by approximately 20 cm (8 inches) since 1901, due both to the expansion of warmer ocean water and to the addition of melt waters from glaciers and ice sheets on land. Warming and precipitation changes are altering the geographical ranges of many plant and animal species and the timing of their life cycles. In addition to the effects on climate, some of the excess CO2 in the atmosphere is being taken up by the ocean, changing its chemical composition (causing ocean acidification).B6Climate Changebasics of climate changeMany complex processes shape our climate Based just on the physics of the amount of energy that CO2 absorbs and emits, a doubling of atmospheric CO2 concentration from pre-industrial levels (up to about 560 ppm) would, by itself, cause a global average temperature increase of about 1 C (1.8 F). In the overall climate system, however, things are more complex; warming leads to further effects (feedbacks) that either amplify or diminish the initial warming. The most important feedbacks involve various forms of water. A warmer atmosphere generally contains more water vapour. Water vapour is a potent greenhouse gas, thus causing more warming; its short lifetime in the atmosphere keeps its increase largely in step with warming. Thus, water vapour is treated as an amplifier, and not a driver, of climate change. Higher temperatures in the polar regions melt sea ice and reduce seasonal snow cover, exposing a darker ocean and land surface that can absorb more heat, causing further warming. Another important but uncertain feedback concerns changes in clouds. Warming and increases in water vapour together may cause cloud cover to increase or decrease which can either amplify or dampen temperature change depending on the changes in the horizontal extent, altitude, and properties of clouds. The latest assessment of the science indicates that the overall net global effect of cloud changes is likely to be to amplify warming.The ocean moderates climate change. The ocean is a huge heat reservoir, but it is difficult to heat its full depth because warm water tends to stay near the surface. The rate at which heat is transferred to the deep ocean is therefore slow; it varies from year to year and from decade to decade, and helps to determine the pace of warming at the surface. Observations of the sub-surface ocean are limited prior to about 1970, but since then, warming of the upper 700 m (2,300 feet) is readily apparent. There is also evidence of deeper warming.Surface temperatures and rainfall in most regions vary greatly from the global average because of geographical location, in particular latitude and continental position. Both the average values of temperature, rainfall, and their extremes (which generally have the largest impacts on natural systems and human infrastructure), are also strongly affected by local patterns of winds. Estimating the effects of feedback processes, the pace of the warming, and regional climate change requires the use of mathematical models of the atmosphere, ocean, land, and ice (the cryosphere) built upon established laws of physics and the latest understanding of the physical, chemical and biological processes affecting climate, and run on powerful computers. Models vary in their projections of how much additional warming to expect (depending on the type of model and on assumptions used in simulating certain climate processes, particularly cloud formation and ocean mixing), but all such models agree that the overall net effect of feedbacks is to amplify warming.Human activities are changing the climate
Rigorous analysis of all data and lines of evidence shows that most of the observed global 
warming over the past 50 years or so cannot be explained by natural causes and instead 
requires a significant role for the influence of human activities. 

In order to discern the human influence on climate, scientists must consider many natural 
variations that affect temperature, precipitation, and other aspects of climate from local to 
global scale, on timescales from days to decades and longer. One natural variation is the El 
Nino Southern Oscillation (ENSO), an irregular alternation between warming and cooling 
(lasting about two to seven years) in the equatorial Pacific Ocean that causes significant 
year-to-year regional and global shifts in temperature and rainfall patterns. Volcanic 
eruptions also alter climate, in part increasing the amount of small (aerosol) particles in the 
stratosphere that reflect or absorb sunlight, leading to a short-term surface cooling lasting 
typically about two to three years. Over hundreds of thousands of years, slow, recurring 
variations in Earths orbit around the Sun, which alter the distribution of solar energy 
received by Earth, have been enough to trigger the ice age cycles of the past 800,000 years. 

Fingerprinting is a powerful way of studying the causes of climate change. Different influences 
on climate lead to different patterns seen in climate records. This becomes obvious when 
scientists probe beyond changes in the average temperature of the planet and look more 
closely at geographical and temporal patterns of climate change. For example, an increase 
in the Suns energy output will lead to a very different pattern of temperature change (across 
Earths surface and vertically in the atmosphere) compared to that induced by an increase in 
CO2 concentration. Observed atmospheric temperature changes show a fingerprint much 

Learn more about other human causes of climate change 

In addition to emitting greenhouse 
gases, human activities have also 
altered Earths energy balance through, 
for example:

 Changes in land use. Changes in the 
way people use land  for example, 
for forests, farms, or cities  can 
lead to both warming and cooling 

effects locally by changing the 
reflectivity of Earths surfaces 

(affecting how much sunlight is sent 
back into space) and by changing 
how wet a region is. 

 Emissions of pollutants (other than 
greenhouse gases). Some industrial 
and agricultural processes emit 
pollutants that produce aerosols 
(small droplets or particles 
suspended in the atmosphere). 
Most aerosols cool Earth by 

reflecting sunlight back to 
space. Some aerosols also affect 
the formation of clouds, which 
can have a warming or cooling 
effect depending on their type and 
location. Black carbon particles (or 
soot) produced when fossil fuels 
or vegetation are burned, generally 
have a warming effect because they 
absorb incoming solar radiation. 

B7Evidence & Causes basics of climate changeFigure B5. The amount and 
rate of warming expected for the 
21st century depends on the total 
amount of greenhouse gases 
that humankind emits. Models 
project the temperature increase 
for a business-as-usual emissions 
scenario (in red) and aggressive 
emission reductions, falling 
close to zero 50 years from now 
(in blue). Black is the modelled 
estimate of past warming. Each 
solid line represents the average 
of different model runs using the 
same emissions scenario, and the 
shaded areas provide a measure of 
the spread (one standard deviation) 
between the temperature changes 
projected by the different models. 
All data are relative to a reference 
period (set to zero) of 1986-2005. 
Source: IPCC AR5

B8Climate Changebasics of climate changecloser to that of a long-term CO2 increase than to that of a fluctuating Sun alone. Scientists routinely test whether purely natural changes in the Sun, volcanic activity, or internal climate variability could plausibly explain the patterns of change they have observed in many different aspects of the climate system. These analyses have shown that the observed climate changes of the past several decades cannot be explained just by natural factors. How will climate change in the future?Scientists have made major advances in the observations, theory, and modelling of Earths climate system; and these advances have enabled them to project future climate change with increasing confidence. Nevertheless, several major issues make it impossible to give precise estimates of how global or regional temperature trends will evolve decade by decade into the future. Firstly, we cannot predict how much CO2 human activities will emit, as this depends on factors such as how the global economy develops and how societys production and consumption of energy changes in the coming decades. Secondly, with current understanding of the complexities of how climate feedbacks operate, there is a range of possible outcomes, even for a particular scenario of CO2 emissions. Finally, over timescales of a decade or so, natural variability can modulate the effects of an underlying trend in temperature. Taken together, all model projections indicate that Earth will continue to warm considerably more over the next few decades to centuries. If there were no technological or policy changes to reduce emission trends from their current trajectory, then further warming of 2.6 to 4.8 C (4.7 to 8.6 F) in addition to that which has already occurred would be expected during the 21st century [Figure B5]. Projecting what those ranges will mean for the climate experienced at any particular location is a challenging scientific problem, but estimates are continuing to improve as regional and local-scale models advance. 6.04.02.02.00.0(oC)Global average surface temperature change1950200020502100HistoricalAggressive emissions reductionsBusiness as usual emissionsConclusion

This document explains that there are well-understood physical mechanisms by which 
changes in the amounts of greenhouse gases cause climate changes. It discusses the 
evidence that the concentrations of these gases in the atmosphere have increased and 
are still increasing rapidly, that climate change is occurring, and that most of the recent 
change is almost certainly due to emissions of greenhouse gases caused by human 
activities. Further climate change is inevitable; if emissions of greenhouse gases continue 
unabated, future changes will substantially exceed those that have occurred so far. There 
remains a range of estimates of the magnitude and regional expression of future change, 
but increases in the extremes of climate that can adversely affect natural ecosystems and 
human activities and infrastructure are expected. 

Citizens and governments can choose among several options (or a mixture of those 
options) in response to this information: they can change their pattern of energy 
production and usage in order to limit emissions of greenhouse gases and hence the 
magnitude of climate changes; they can wait for changes to occur and accept the losses, 
damage and suffering that arise; they can adapt to actual and expected changes as much 
as possible; or they can seek as yet unproven geoengineering solutions to counteract 
some of the climate changes that would otherwise occur. Each of these options has 
risks, attractions and costs, and what is actually done may be a mixture of these different 
options. Different nations and communities will vary in their vulnerability and their 
capacity to adapt. There is an important debate to be had about choices among these 
options, to decide what is best for each group or nation, and most importantly for the 
global population as a whole. The options have to be discussed at a global scale, because 
in many cases those communities that are most vulnerable control few of the emissions, 
either past or future. Our description of the science of climate change, with both its facts 
and its uncertainties, is offered as a basis to inform that policy debate.

B9

Evidence & Causes n ack now ledgem en ts

Acknowledgements 

The following individuals served as the primary writing team for this document:

 Eric Wolff FRS (UK lead), University of 

  John Shepherd FRS, University of 

Cambridge 

Southampton

 Inez Fung (NAS, US lead), University of 

 Keith Shine FRS, University of Reading   

California, Berkeley

 Susan Solomon (NAS), Massachusetts 

 Brian Hoskins FRS, Imperial College London 

Institute of Technology       

and University of Reading

 Kevin Trenberth, National Center for 

 John Mitchell FRS, UK Met Office

Atmospheric Research

 Tim Palmer FRS, University of Oxford

  John Walsh, University of Alaska, Fairbanks

 Benjamin Santer (NAS), Lawrence Livermore 

 Don Wuebbles, University of Illinois 

National Laboratory 

This document was reviewed in draft form by individuals chosen for their diverse perspectives and 
technical expertise, in accordance with procedures approved by the Royal Society and the National 
Academy of Sciences. The reviewers provided comments and suggestions, but were not asked to endorse 
the views of the writing team, nor did they see the final draft before its release. We wish to thank the 
following individuals for their review of this report:   

 Richard Alley (NAS), Department of 

 Jerry Meehl, National Center for Atmospheric 

Geosciences, Pennsylvania State University

Research

 Alec Broers FRS, Diamond Light Source and Bio 
Nano Consulting (Former President of the Royal 
Academy of Engineering )

 John Pendry FRS, Imperial College London

 John Pyle FRS, Department of Chemistry, 

University of Cambridge

 Harry Elderfield FRS, Department of Earth 

Sciences, University of Cambridge

 Joanna Haigh FRS, Imperial College London

 Isaac Held (NAS), NOAA Geophysical Fluid 

Dynamics Laboratory

 John Kutzbach (NAS), Center for Climatic 

Research, University of Wisconsin

 Gavin Schmidt, NASA Goddard Space Flight 

Center   

 Emily Shuckburgh, British Antarctic Survey

 Gabrielle Walker, Journalist

 Andrew Watson FRS, University of Exeter

Oversight of the review process was provided by representatives of the Royal Society Council 
(John Pethica FRS) and the NAS Council (Jeremiah Ostriker, NAS). Staff assistance was provided by 
Nancy F. Huddleston, Laurie Geller, Sally Tyldesley and Tracey Elliott.

Sincere thanks to the Raymond and Beverly Sackler US-UK Scientific Forum for support of this activity. 

B10

Climate ChangeFor further reading 

For more detailed discussion of the topics addressed 
in this document (including references to the 
underlying original research), see: 

 IPCC 2013, Climate change 2013: The physical 
science basis. Fifth Assessment Report (AR5) 
Working Group 1.  
visit site

 NRC 2010, Americas climate choices:  

Advancing the Science of Climate Change.  
visit site

Much of the original data underlying the scientific 
findings discussed here are available at: 

 metoffice.gov.uk/hadobs

 www.cru.uea.ac.uk

 cdp.ucar.edu

 climatedataguide.ucar.edu

 iridl.ldeo.columbia.edu

 cdiac.ornl.gov

 NRC 2011, Climate stabilization targets: Emissions, 

 ncdc.noaa.gov

Concentrations, and Impacts over Decades to 
Millennia.  
visit site

 esrl.noaa.gov/gmd/ccgg/trends

 scrippsco2.ucsd.edu

 NRC 2013, Abrupt impacts of climate change: 

 hahana.soest.hawaii.edu/hot

Anticipating Surprises.  
visit site

 Royal Society 2010, Climate Change: A Summary 

of the Science.   
visit site

THE NATIONAL ACADEMY OF SCIENCES (NAS) was established to advise the United 
States on scientific and technical issues when President Lincoln signed a Congressional 
charter in 1863. The National Research Council, the operating arm of the National Academy 
of Sciences and the National Academy of Engineering, has issued numerous reports on the 
causes of and potential responses to climate change. Climate change resources from the 
National Research Council are available at nas-sites.org/americasclimatechoices.

THE ROYAL SOCIETY is a self-governing Fellowship of many of the worlds most 
distinguished scientists. Its members are drawn from all areas of science, engineering, 
and medicine. It is the national academy of science in the UK. The Societys fundamental 
purpose, reflected in its founding Charters of the 1660s, is to recognise, promote, and 
support excellence in science, and to encourage the development and use of science 
for the benefit of humanity. More information on the Societys climate change work is 
available at royalsociety.org/policy/climate-change

3

Evidence & Causes 