 

 

When your child is diagnosed with a hearing loss, it may be very 
overwhelming.  This may be a difficult time for you and your family.  
However, gaining a greater knowledge in this area is crucial in helping 
with your childs needs.  This handbook is aimed at helping parents 
and families to understand better various types and causes of hearing 
loss. 
 
 
ABOUT HEARING LOSS  
 
Our ears contain many parts, all of which need to work properly for us 
to hear sounds.  
 
 

 

 
 
The type of hearing loss that occurs depends on what part of the ear is 
not working properly.  For example, if there is something not working 
in the 
 

 
 

ear canal 
eardrum 

 

  middle ear bones or 
  middle ear space (e.g. fluid) 

 
                                                 COMMON CAUSES OF HEARING LOSS   1
 
 

                           FOR PARENTS & FAMILIES 

 

it may result in a conductive hearing loss (sometimes called  
mechanical hearing loss).  If, on the other hand, something is not 
working in the 
 

cochlea  
auditory nerve or 

 
 
  brain  

Temporary Hearing Loss 
  More common 
  Mostly conductive  

 
it more commonly results in a sensorineural hearing loss (also called 
nerve hearing loss). When someone has both sensorineural and 
conductive hearing losses, it is called a mixed hearing loss.  
 
DURATION OF HEARING LOSS 
 
Depending on the cause, hearing loss may be temporary or permanent.  
Temporary hearing losses are almost always conductive and are far 
more common than permanent hearing losses.  Permanent hearing 
losses are usually sensorineural, but may also be conductive.  A chart 
below demonstrates this relationship and outlines the causes. 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                               
                                    
 2  COMMON CAUSES OF HEARING LOSS    
      FOR PARENTS & FAMILIES 

  Less common 
  Mostly sensorineural 

Permanent Hearing Loss 

HEARING LOSS

                       

 Structural 
 Problems 

Infections

  Drug 
Related 

Physical 
Traumas

Genetic

Middle Ear Fluid & 

Other Causes 

 
 
 
 

 
WWHHAATT  CCAAUUSSEESS  TTEEMMPPOORRAARRYY  HHEEAARRIINNGG  LLOOSSSS??  
 
 
There are several causes of temporary hearing loss.  The most common 
cause is fluid in the middle ear (i.e. due to ear infections).  Other 
causes may include:    
 

  Eardrum perforation (when there is a hole in the eardrum from 

a bad ear infection, or ear trauma) 

  Narrowing of the ear canal due to surgery or disease 
  Excessive ear wax that plugs the ear canal 

DID YOU KNOW? 
 
Poking objects too deeply into the ear canal (Q-tips, 
pencils, food, buttons, pins, etc) can cause hearing loss.  
It is the most common ear injury in toddlers. 

 
 
 
 
 
WWHHAATT  CCAAUUSSEESS  PPEERRMMAANNEENNTT  HHEEAARRIINNGG  LLOOSSSS??  
 
 
Permanent hearing losses are less common than temporary hearing 
losses. There are many causes of permanent hearing losses.  These 
include genetic, infectious, drug-related, physical trauma and structural 
causes.  A rough distribution of these is seen below: 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Drug-
Related 

Un

known

Infections

Structural 
Problems

Physical 
Traumas

 
 
                                                 COMMON CAUSES OF HEARING LOSS   3
 
 

                           FOR PARENTS & FAMILIES 

Genetics

 

Genetics  
 
Although there are many reasons why permanent hearing loss may 
occur, genetics is the most common.  It accounts for over half of all 
cases of hearing loss in infants.  Saying that hearing loss is genetic 
means that there is a change in a gene.  
 

  We have the same set of genes in every cell of our body 
  Genes tell our cells how to function  
  When a change in a gene occurs it is called a mutation 
  A mutation can stop the gene from working properly 
 
 
 
 
 
 

DID YOU KNOW? 
 
While there are some families that have hearing loss 
in many generations, most people with genetic 
hearing loss do not have family members with 
hearing loss.  

 

Syndromic vs. Non-syndromic Hearing Loss  

There are two types of hearing loss caused by genetics.  About 30% of 
people with a genetic type of hearing loss have what is called a 
syndromic hearing loss.  Syndromic hearing loss means that there are 
other health problems in addition to hearing loss.  Some examples 
include: 

NAME OF SYNDROME 
Alport 
Pendred 
Usher 
Jervell and Lange-Nielsen 

 

OTHER FEATURES (Besides Hearing Loss) 
Kidney problems 
Thyroid gland enlargement 
Vision impairment  
Heart problems 

The other 70% of genetic hearing loss is called non syndromic 
hearing loss.  In this case, the person only has hearing loss. 
 
                                                           
 4  COMMON CAUSES OF HEARING LOSS    
      FOR PARENTS & FAMILIES 

Genetic testing may help determine if the hearing loss is genetic.  This 
information may allow better treatment and management of the hearing 
loss, and predict the chances that future children will have hearing loss.  
To learn more about genetic causes of hearing loss, you may download 
a free booklet at http://hearing.harvard.edu.  
 
 
Infections 
 
New vaccines have prevented some hearing loss caused by infections.  
However, other infectious causes still exist.  Some examples include:   
 
During Pregnancy 
 

 

Infections caused by viruses (Cytomegalovirus [CMV], herpes, 
rubella)  
  Syphilis 
  Toxoplasmosis (may be associated with consumption of food 

or water contaminated with animal feces, or of raw or 
undercooked meat) 

 
 

Infections caused by bacteria (bacterial meningitis, syphilis) 
Infections caused by viruses (measles, mumps) 

 
 
Drugs  
 
Drugs and other chemicals can also cause hearing loss.  Some drugs 
can affect the fetus, while others are harmful after birth. Some of these 
include: 
 
During Pregnancy 

 

  Alcohol 
  Medications (e.g. Accutane, Dilantin, chemotherapy)  
 

                                                 COMMON CAUSES OF HEARING LOSS   5
 
 

                           FOR PARENTS & FAMILIES 

 
After Birth 
 

 

 

After Birth 

  Ototoxic drugs (e.g. aminoglycoside antibiotics, diuretics, 

cisplatin)  

 
 
Physical Trauma  
 
The ear is a delicate structure and can be easily damaged in a number 
of ways, such as: 

  Head injuries (skull fractures or concussions) 
  Exposure to loud noise (either a single blast or many 

 

exposures to loud noises) 

  
 
Structural Problems of the Ear 
 
A person can be born with an ear that is not formed normally.  This 
could affect the outer, middle or the inner ear. Examples include:  

  Stenosis (narrowing of the ear canal) 
  Absence or malformation of the outer ear, ear canal, ear drum, 

ear bones 
Inner ear malformations (e.g. enlarged vestibular aqueduct) 

 
 

Unknown Causes  
 
Sometimes the cause of hearing loss cannot be identified.  This may be 
because there are no available tests to find the cause.  For instance, 
there are no tests for many genetic causes of hearing loss.   
 
In addition, there are other causes of hearing loss that we do not yet 
understand. For example, a higher incidence of hearing loss has been 
seen in newborn babies with many different risk factors such as.: 
  Lengthy stay in the Neonatal Intensive Care Unit (NICU) 
  Very premature birth 
  High levels of bilirubin 
  Low oxygen levels  
                              

              
 6  COMMON CAUSES OF HEARING LOSS    
      FOR PARENTS & FAMILIES 

               

                              
The relationship between many of these risk factors and hearing loss is 
 
unclear. 
 
 
IN SUMMARY  
 
Finding the cause of hearing loss is often not an easy task.  Making an 
accurate diagnosis and finding a way to manage the hearing loss 
requires a combination of  
 

a physical exam   
family history  
clinical tests (such as genetic tests, MRI, EKG, CT scans, etc.)  

 
 
 
  ongoing hearing tests with an audiologist  

 
Sometimes, even with all exams, the cause of hearing loss may remain 
unknown. However, it is best if hearing loss is identified early.  It is 
also important that help for the hearing loss begin as early as possible.  
Help can include communication therapy, parent support and hearing 
devices such as hearing aids and cochlear implants.  For help your 
child should be enrolled in an early intervention program.  This is true 
even if the cause is still being examined.  This gives a child with 
hearing loss the best chance at language development, social 
interactions and education. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
                                                 COMMON CAUSES OF HEARING LOSS   7
 
 

                           FOR PARENTS & FAMILIES 

 

 


 

ADDITIONAL RESOURCES 
 


  American Academy of Otolaryngology Head and Neck Surgery
 
Click on Public and Parents, and then on ENT Health Info to view 
information on ear infections, ear function, plastic surgery of the ear, 
cochlear implants and other links.  
www.entnet.org 

  Boys Town National Research Hospital
 

Information on newborn hearing screen
ing, hearing testing, high risk 
factors for hearing loss, genetic information on hearing loss and heari
aids. Includes www.babyhearing.org. 
www.boystownhospital.org 
 

ng 

  Harvard Medical School Center for Hereditary Deafness
 
 and a gene 
  Information on genetic forms of hearing loss, genetic testing,

mutation database. 
http://hearing.har

 
 
 Laboratory for Molecular Medicine at HPCGG  

vard.edu

 

A clinical laboratory offering the most comprehensive genetic testing for 
hearing loss. The lab is located within the Harvard Medical School-
Partners Healthcare System Center for Genetics and Genomics. 
http://www.hpcgg.org/lmm
 

  National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders 
Information on disorders associated with hearing loss, cochlear implants, 
ear infections, hearing aids, American Sign Language, noise-induced 
hearing loss, tinnitus, and resources for educators. 
http://www.nidcd.nih.gov 

 
    Parents Guide to Hearing Loss  

A booklet with information on communication with your child, hearing 
tests, hearing devices, as well as programs for children with hearing loss.  
http://medhome.med.utah.edu/file.cfm?file_id=190& 
 

  Raising Deaf Kids 
 

Information on learning and communicating with hearing loss, general 
information on hearing loss and other links.  
www.raisingdeafkids.org 

 
FOR ADDITIONAL RESOURCES PLEASE VISIT OUR WEBSITE:  
http://hearing.harvard.edu/resources.htm 
                                                           
 8  COMMON CAUSES OF HEARING LOSS    
      FOR PARENTS & FAMILIES 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Copyright  2004 by Harvard Medical School Center for Hereditary Deafness 

All rights reserved. This booklet is protected by copyright.      

 

