Copyright Basics for Business Owners

What is a copyright?
A copyright is a property right in any original expression 
of an idea that is fixed in a tangible form. Examples of 
copyrightable works include: websites, commercials, 
jingles, product brochures, software, works of architecture, 
and advertisements.

It is important to remember that ideas and facts are not 
copyrightable. Rather, it is the particular expression of an 
idea that is protected under copyright law. For instance, if 
you create a documentary, you are entitled to protect the 
expression of the films subject matter. You cannot prevent 
someone else from creating a documentary on the same 
topic.

Copyright law does not protect something that is 
solely functional. However, if your work contains both 
functional and expressive components, the expressive 
features may be copyrightable. 

Do I own my copyright?
If you create a copyrightable work, you typically are the 
owner. However, there are exceptions to this rule. 

If an employee creates a copyrightable work within the 
scope of his or her employment, the employer typically 
owns the work. This is called a work made for hire. 
Conversely, if an independent contractor creates a 
copyrightable work, the contractor generally owns the 
work instead of the company or person who hires the 
contractor. Under certain circumstances, material that a 
person or company specially orders or commissions from 
a non-employee may be considered a work made for 
hire if the person or company and the contractor signed 
an agreement to this effect. 

In the business world, independent contractors often 
include advertising agencies, photographers and website 
and software developers. Business owners should always 
try to have contractors sign a written agreement assigning 
their rights to works to the business. 

If multiple authors contribute to the creation of a work, 
then they may be considered co-owners. To be co-owners, 

By Michael Doctrow and Kelly Horein, 
McNees Intellectual Property Attorneys

each author has to contribute expression to a work that is 
copyrightable on its own.

If you create a new, sufficiently original work that is 
based on or derived from an existing work, you have 
a copyright interest only in your contribution to the 
creation of your new work. An example of a copyrightable 
derivative work is a revision of a website or published 
book. Similarly, if you create a compilation by collecting 
and arranging preexisting works, such as a book of other 
peoples photographs, you own a copyright only in your 
assembly of these materials, rather than in the underlying 
works themselves. 

What rights do I have as a copyright owner?
As a copyright owner, you have the exclusive right to do 
the following:

  Make copies of your work;
  Adapt or modify your work;
  Publicly distribute copies of your work; 
  Display your work; and 
  Perform your work publicly.

What is the duration of my copyright?
Copyright protection begins at the moment a work is 
created and fixed in a tangible form. 

Generally, copyright law automatically protects 
copyrightable material for the duration of the authors life 
plus 70 years. However, the term of a copyright depends 
on a variety of factors, including when the copyrighted 
work was created, the type of work, and the authors 
identity. You should consult an intellectual property 
attorney to determine how long your work will be 
protected under copyright law. 

Why should I register my copyright?
There are many benefits to registering your copyright at 
the U.S. Copyright Office, including:

  The ability to sue someone for infringing on your 

rights; 

  The right to recover damages without proof of 

financial loss;

fees; and

  The right in certain circumstances to recover attorneys 

  The right to prevent continued infringing conduct. 

If your copyright is registered and a third party infringes 
on your rights, you can collect up to $30,000 for 
unintentional infringement, and up to $150,000 if the 
infringing acts were willful. 

How do I register my copyright?
The copyright registration process is fairly simple and 
inexpensive. Typically, you are required to fill out an 
application, pay a registration fee, and send a copy, or 
copies, of your work to the Copyright Office.

The Copyright Offices website www.copyright.gov 
provides applications specific to different types of 
works. These applications are accompanied by detailed 
instructions. You can complete these forms with the 
assistance of an intellectual property attorney or on your 
own. You may call the Copyright Office with questions 
about filling out your application at its toll-free number, 
1-877-476-0778. 

Filing for copyright protection electronically costs, at 
a minimum, $35 for a single work created by a single 
author, and $55 for all other filings. Higher fees are 
required for paper filings. 

After you file for copyright registration, the Copyright 
Office will examine your application. Typically, if your 
work is considered sufficiently original and you have 
properly completed your application, the Copyright 
Office will formally register your copyright. If your 
application is not acceptable, the Copyright Office will 
notify you in writing and permit you to correct it. 

Why should I use a copyright notice with my work?
Although it is not required, you should always display a 
copyright notice on your work. Such notice makes others 

www.mwn.com

aware that your work is protected. Using a copyright 
notice may make it easier to collect enhanced damages 
for willful infringement. Your copyright notice should 
contain the following elements:

, COPR., OR COPYRIGHT + [year work was first 
published] + [name of copyright owner]

Example:  2014 ABC Company

How do I know if someone is infringing on my rights?
A third party may be infringing on your copyright if they 
exercise one or more of your exclusive rights without your 
permission. For instance, if someone makes a copy of 
your work without asking for your authorization, then it 
is possible that he or she has violated your rights. 

To establish that someone has infringed on your 
copyright, you must be able to show that:

  You own the copyright; 
  The third party had access to your copyrighted work; 

and

  The material shares at least one substantially similar 

element with your work. 

The third party does not have to intend to copy your 
work. He or she could be liable even if copying your work 
was accidental or subconscious. 

Under certain circumstances, a third partys use of your 
work may not be considered copyright infringement. If 
a third party exercises one of your exclusive rights for use 
in research, news reporting, comment and criticism, or 
other beneficial purposes, that use could constitute fair 
use. There is no clear definition of fair use, so you 
should talk to an intellectual property attorney if you 
believe someone is infringing on your rights (or if you are 
concerned that you might be infringing on someone elses 
copyright). 

Michael Doctrow 
mdoctrow@mwn.com / 717.237.5311 
 
Kelly Horein 
khorein@mwn.com / 717.237.5458

 McNees Wallace & Nurick LLC 2014

