    Court of Justice of the European Union  
PRESS RELEASE No 70/14 
Luxembourg, 13 May 2014 

Press and Information 

Judgment in Case C-131/12 
Google Spain SL, Google Inc. v Agencia Espanola de Proteccion de Datos, 
Mario Costeja Gonzalez 
 

An internet search engine operator is responsible for the processing that it carries 

out of personal data which appear on web pages published by third parties 

Thus, if, following a search made on the basis of a persons name, the list of results displays a link 

to a web page which contains information on the person in question, that data subject may 

approach the operator directly and, where the operator does not grant his request, bring the matter 

before the competent authorities in order to obtain, under certain conditions, the removal of that 

link from the list of results 

An  EU  directive1  has  the  objective  of  protecting  the  fundamental  rights  and  freedoms  of  natural 
persons  (in  particular  the  right  to  privacy)  when  personal  data  are  processed,  while  removing 
obstacles to the free flow of such data. 

In  2010  Mario  Costeja  Gonzalez,  a  Spanish  national,  lodged  with  the  Agencia  Espanola  de 
Proteccion  de  Datos  (Spanish  Data  Protection  Agency,  the  AEPD)  a  complaint  against  La 
Vanguardia Ediciones SL  (the  publisher of a daily newspaper  with a large circulation in Spain, in 
particular in Catalonia) and against Google Spain and Google Inc. Mr Costeja Gonzalez contended 
that,  when an internet user entered  his name in the search engine of the Google group (Google 
Search),  the  list  of  results  would  display  links  to  two  pages  of  La  Vanguardias  newspaper,  of 
January and March 1998. Those pages in particular contained an announcement for a real-estate 
auction organised following attachment proceedings for the recovery of social security debts owed 
by Mr Costeja Gonzalez.  

With that complaint, Mr Costeja Gonzalez requested, first, that La Vanguardia be required either to 
remove  or  alter  the  pages  in  question  (so  that  the  personal  data  relating  to  him  no  longer 
appeared)  or  to  use  certain  tools  made  available  by  search  engines  in  order  to  protect  the  data. 
Second,  he  requested  that  Google  Spain  or  Google  Inc.  be  required  to  remove  or  conceal  the 
personal data relating to him so that the data no longer appeared in the search results and in the 
links  to  La  Vanguardia.  In  this  context,  Mr  Costeja  Gonzalez  stated  that  the  attachment 
proceedings concerning him had been fully resolved for a number of years and that reference to 
them was now entirely irrelevant. 

The  AEPD  rejected  the  complaint  against  La  Vanguardia,  taking  the  view  that  the  information  in 
question  had  been  lawfully  published  by  it.  On  the  other  hand,  the  complaint  was  upheld  as 
regards  Google  Spain  and  Google  Inc.  The  AEPD  requested  those  two  companies  to  take  the 
necessary  measures  to  withdraw  the  data  from  their  index  and  to  render  access  to  the  data 
impossible in the future. Google Spain and Google Inc. brought  two actions before the Audiencia 
Nacional (National High Court, Spain), claiming that the AEPDs decision should be annulled. It is 
in this context that the Spanish court referred a series of questions to the Court of Justice. 

In  todays  judgment,  the  Court  of  Justice  finds,  first  of  all,  that  by  searching  automatically, 
constantly  and  systematically  for  information  published  on  the  internet,  the  operator  of  a  search 
engine  collects  data  within  the  meaning  of  the  directive.  The  Court  considers,  furthermore,  that 
the operator, within the framework of its indexing programmes, retrieves, records and organises 

                                                 
1 Directive 95/46/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 October 1995 on the protection of individuals 
with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data (OJ 1995 L 281, p. 31). 

www.curia.europa.eu 

the data in question, which it then stores on its servers and, as the case may be, discloses and 
makes available to its users in the form of lists of results. Those operations, which are referred to 
expressly and unconditionally in the directive, must be classified as processing, regardless of the 
fact  that  the  operator  of  the  search  engine  carries  them  out  without  distinction  in  respect  of 
information other than the personal data. The Court also points out that the operations referred to 
by the directive must be classified as processing even where they exclusively concern material that 
has already been published as it stands in the media. A general derogation from the application of 
the  directive  in  such  a  case  would  have  the  consequence  of  largely  depriving  the  directive  of  its 
effect. 

The Court further holds that the operator of the search engine is the controller in respect of that 
processing, within the meaning of the directive, given that it is the operator which  determines the 
purposes and means of the processing. The Court  observes in this regard that, inasmuch as the 
activity  of  a  search  engine  is  additional  to  that  of  publishers  of  websites  and  is  liable  to  affect 
significantly the fundamental rights to privacy and to the protection of personal data, the operator of 
the  search  engine  must  ensure,  within  the  framework  of  its  responsibilities,  powers  and 
capabilities, that its activity complies with the directives requirements. This is the only way that the 
guarantees laid down by the directive will be able to have full effect and that effective and complete 
protection of data subjects (in particular of their privacy) may actually be achieved. 

As regards the directives territorial scope, the Court observes that Google Spain is a subsidiary of 
Google  Inc.  on  Spanish  territory  and,  therefore,  an  establishment  within  the  meaning  of  the 
directive. The Court rejects the argument that the processing of personal data by Google Search is 
not carried out in the context of the activities of that establishment in Spain. The Court holds, in this 
regard, that where such data are processed for the purposes of a search engine operated by an 
undertaking  which,  although  it  has  its  seat  in  a  non-member  State,  has  an  establishment  in  a 
Member State, the processing is carried out in the context of the activities of that establishment, 
within  the  meaning  of  the  directive,  if  the  establishment  is  intended  to  promote  and  sell,  in  the 
Member  State  in  question,  advertising  space  offered  by  the  search  engine  in  order  to  make  the 
service offered by the engine profitable. 

So far as concerns, next, the extent of the responsibility of the operator of the search engine, the 
Court  holds  that  the  operator  is,  in  certain  circumstances,  obliged  to  remove  links  to  web  pages 
that  are  published  by  third  parties  and  contain  information  relating  to  a  person  from  the  list  of 
results displayed following a search made on the basis of that persons name. The Court makes it 
clear that such an obligation may also exist in a case where that name or information is not erased 
beforehand  or  simultaneously  from  those  web  pages,  and  even,  as  the  case  may  be,  when  its 
publication in itself on those pages is lawful. 

The  Court  points  out  in  this  context  that  processing  of  personal  data  carried  out  by  such  an 
operator enables any internet user, when he makes a search on the basis of an individuals name, 
to  obtain,  through  the  list  of  results,  a  structured  overview  of  the  information  relating  to  that 
individual  on  the  internet.  The  Court  observes,  furthermore,  that  this  information  potentially 
concerns  a  vast  number  of  aspects  of  his  private  life  and  that,  without  the  search  engine,  the 
information  could  not  have  been  interconnected  or  could  have  been  only  with  great  difficulty. 
Internet users may thereby establish a more or less detailed profile of the person searched against. 
Furthermore, the effect of the interference with the persons rights is heightened on account of the 
important  role  played  by  the  internet  and  search  engines  in  modern  society,  which  render  the 
information  contained  in  such  lists  of  results  ubiquitous.  In  the  light  of  its  potential  seriousness, 
such  interference  cannot,  according  to  the  Court,  be  justified  by  merely  the  economic  interest 
which the operator of the engine has in the data processing. 

However,  inasmuch  as  the  removal  of  links  from  the  list  of  results  could,  depending  on  the 
information at issue, have effects upon the legitimate interest of internet users potentially interested 
in  having  access  to  that  information,  the  Court  holds  that  a  fair  balance  should  be  sought  in 
particular between that interest and the data subjects fundamental rights, in particular the right to 
privacy and the right to protection of personal data. The Court observes in this regard that, whilst it 
is true that the data subjects rights also override, as a general rule, that interest of internet users, 

www.curia.europa.eu 

this balance may however depend, in specific cases, on the nature of the information in question 
and its sensitivity for the data subjects private life and on the interest of the public in having that 
information,  an  interest  which  may  vary,  in  particular,  according  to  the  role  played  by  the  data 
subject in public life. 

Finally, in response to the question whether the directive enables the data subject to request that 
links  to  web  pages  be  removed  from  such  a  list  of  results  on  the  grounds  that  he  wishes  the 
information  appearing  on  those  pages  relating  to  him  personally  to  be  forgotten  after  a  certain 
time, the Court holds that, if it is found, following a request by the data subject, that the inclusion of 
those  links  in  the  list  is,  at  this  point  in  time,  incompatible  with  the  directive,  the  links  and 
information in the list of results must be erased. The Court observes in this regard that even initially 
lawful  processing  of  accurate  data  may,  in  the  course  of  time,  become  incompatible  with  the 
directive  where,  having  regard  to  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case,  the  data  appear  to  be 
inadequate, irrelevant or no longer relevant, or excessive in relation to the purposes for which they 
were processed and in the light of the time that has elapsed. The Court adds that, when appraising 
such  a  request  made  by  the  data  subject  in  order  to  oppose  the  processing  carried  out  by  the 
operator  of  a  search  engine,  it  should  in  particular  be  examined  whether  the  data  subject  has  a 
right  that  the  information  in  question  relating  to  him  personally  should,  at  this  point  in  time,  no 
longer be linked to his name by a list of results  that is displayed following a search made on the 
basis of his name.  If that is the case, the links to web pages containing that information must be 
removed from that list of results, unless there are particular reasons, such as the role played by the 
data  subject  in  public  life,  justifying  a  preponderant  interest  of  the  public  in  having  access  to  the 
information when such a search is made. 

The Court points out that the data subject may address such a request directly to the operator of 
the  search  engine  (the  controller)  which  must  then  duly  examine  its  merits. Where  the  controller 
does not grant the request, the data subject may bring the matter before the supervisory authority 
or the judicial authority so that it carries out the necessary checks and orders the controller to take 
specific measures accordingly. 

 
NOTE: A reference for a preliminary ruling allows the courts and tribunals of the Member States, in disputes 
which have been brought  before them, to refer questions to the Court of Justice about the  interpretation of 
European  Union  law  or  the  validity  of  a  European  Union  act.  The  Court  of  Justice  does  not  decide  the 
dispute  itself.  It  is  for  the  national  court  or  tribunal  to  dispose  of  the  case  in  accordance  with  the  Courts 
decision, which is similarly binding on other national courts or tribunals before which a similar issue is raised. 
 

Unofficial document for media use, not binding on the Court of Justice. 

The full text of the judgment is published on the CURIA website on the day of delivery.  

Press contact: Christopher Fretwell  (+352) 4303 3355 

Pictures of the delivery of the judgment are available from "Europe by Satellite"  (+32) 2 2964106 

 

www.curia.europa.eu 

