Aliens Cause Global Warming 

By Michael Crichton 

http://www.sepp.org/NewSEPP/GW-Aliens-Crichton.htm 

 

Caltech Michelin Lecture 

January 17, 2003 

 
My topic today sounds humorous but unfortunately I am serious. I am going to argue that 
extraterrestrials lie behind global warming. Or to speak more precisely, I will argue that a belief 
in extraterrestrials has paved the way, in a progression of steps, to a belief in global warming. 
Charting this progression of belief will be my task today. 
 
Let me say at once that I have no desire to discourage anyone from believing in either 
extraterrestrials or global warming. That would be quite impossible to do. Rather, I want to 
discuss the history of several widely-publicized beliefs and to point to what I consider an 
emerging crisis in the whole enterprise of sciencenamely the increasingly uneasy relationship 
between hard science and public policy. 
 
I have a special interest in this because of my own upbringing. I was born in the midst of World 
War II, and passed my formative years at the height of the Cold War. In school drills, I dutifully 
crawled under my desk in preparation for a nuclear attack. 
 
It was a time of widespread fear and uncertainty, but even as a child I believed that science 
represented the best and greatest hope for mankind. Even to a child, the contrast was clear 
between the world of politicsa world of hate and danger, of irrational beliefs and fears, of mass 
manipulation and disgraceful blots on human history. In contrast, science held different values
international in scope, forging friendships and working relationships across national boundaries 
and political systems, encouraging a dispassionate habit of thought, and ultimately leading to 
fresh knowledge and technology that would benefit all mankind. The world might not be a very 
good place, but science would make it better. And it did. In my lifetime, science has largely 
fulfilled its promise. Science has been the great intellectual adventure of our age, and a great 
hope for our troubled and restless world. But I did not expect science merely to extend lifespan, 
feed the hungry, cure disease, and shrink the world with jets and cell phones. I also expected 
science to banish the evils of human thoughtprejudice and superstition, irrational beliefs and 
false fears. I expected science to be, in Carl Sagans memorable phrase, a candle in a demon 
haunted world. And here, I am not so pleased with the impact of science. Rather than serving as 
a cleansing force, science has in some instances been seduced by the more ancient lures of 
politics and publicity. Some of the demons that haunt our world in recent years are invented by 
scientists. The world has not benefited from permitting these demons to escape free. 
 
But lets look at how it came to pass. 
 
Cast your minds back to 1960. John F. Kennedy is president, commercial jet airplanes are just 
appearing, the biggest university mainframes have 12K of memory. And in Green Bank, West 
Virginia at the new National Radio Astronomy Observatory, a young astrophysicist named Frank 
Drake runs a two-week project called Ozma, to search for extraterrestrial signals. A signal is 

received, to great excitement. It turns out to be false, but the excitement remains. In 1960, Drake 
organizes the first SETI conference, and came up with the now-famous Drake equation: 
 

N=N*fp ne fl fi fc fL 

 
[where N is the number of stars in the Milky Way galaxy; fp is the fraction with planets; ne is the 
number of planets per star capable of supporting life; fl is the fraction of planets where life 
evolves; fi is the fraction where intelligent life evolves; and fc is the fraction that communicates; 
and fL is the fraction of the planets life during which the communicating civilizations live.] 
 
This serious-looking equation gave SETI a serious footing as a legitimate intellectual inquiry. 
The problem, of course, is that none of the terms can be known, and most cannot even be 
estimated. The only way to work the equation is to fill in with guesses. And guessesjust so 
were clearare merely expressions of prejudice. Nor can there be informed guesses. If you 
need to state how many planets with life choose to communicate, there is simply no way to make 
an informed guess. Its simply prejudice. 
 
As a result, the Drake equation can have any value from billions and billions to zero. An 
expression that can mean anything means nothing. Speaking precisely, the Drake equation is 
literally meaningless, and has nothing to do with science. I take the hard view that science 
involves the creation of testable hypotheses. The Drake equation cannot be tested and therefore 
SETI is not science. SETI is unquestionably a religion. Faith is defined as the firm belief in 
something for which there is no proof. The belief that the Koran is the word of God is a matter of 
faith. The belief that God created the universe in seven days is a matter of faith. The belief that 
there are other life forms in the universe is a matter of faith. There is not a single shred of 
evidence for any other life forms, and in forty years of searching, none has been discovered. 
There is absolutely no evidentiary reason to maintain this belief. SETI is a religion. 
 
One way to chart the cooling of enthusiasm is to review popular works on the subject. In 1964, at 
the height of SETI enthusiasm, Walter Sullivan of the NY Times wrote an exciting book about 
life in the universe entitled WE ARE NOT ALONE. By 1995, when Paul Davis wrote a book on 
the same subject, he titled it ARE WE ALONE? ( Since 1981, there have in fact been four books 
titled ARE WE ALONE.) More recently we have seen the rise of the so-called Rare Earth 
theory which suggests that we may, in fact, be all alone. Again, there is no evidence either way. 
 
Back in the sixties, SETI had its critics, although not among astrophysicists and astronomers. 
The biologists and paleontologists were harshest. George Gaylord Simpson of Harvard sneered 
that SETI was a study without a subject, and it remains so to the present day. But scientists in 
general have been indulgent toward SETI, viewing it either with bemused tolerance, or with 
indifference. After all, whats the big deal? Its kind of fun. If people want to look, let them. 
Only a curmudgeon would speak harshly of SETI. It wasnt worth the bother. 
 
And of course, it is true that untestable theories may have heuristic value. Of course, 
extraterrestrials are a good way to teach science to kids. But that does not relieve us of the 
obligation to see the Drake equation clearly for what it ispure speculation in quasi-scientific 
trappings. 

 
The fact that the Drake equation was not greeted with screams of outragesimilar to the 
screams of outrage that greet each Creationist new claim, for examplemeant that now there 
was a crack in the door, a loosening of the definition of what constituted legitimate scientific 
procedure. And soon enough, pernicious garbage began to squeeze through the cracks. 
 
Now lets jump ahead a decade to the 1970s, and Nuclear Winter. 
 
In 1975, the National Academy of Sciences reported on Long-Term Worldwide Effects of 
Multiple Nuclear Weapons Detonations but the report estimated the effect of dust from nuclear 
blasts to be relatively minor. In 1979, the Office of Technology Assessment issued a report on 
The Effects of Nuclear War and stated that nuclear war could perhaps produce irreversible 
adverse consequences on the environment. However, because the scientific processes involved 
were poorly understood, the report stated it was not possible to estimate the probable magnitude 
of such damage. 
 
Three years later, in 1982, the Swedish Academy of Sciences commissioned a report entitled 
The Atmosphere after a Nuclear War: Twilight at Noon, which attempted to quantify the effect 
of smoke from burning forests and cities. The authors speculated that there would be so much 
smoke that a large cloud over the northern hemisphere would reduce incoming sunlight below 
the level required for photosynthesis, and that this would last for weeks or even longer. 
 
The following year, five scientists including Richard Turco and Carl Sagan published a paper in 
Science called Nuclear Winter: Global Consequences of Multiple Nuclear Explosions. This 
was the so-called TTAPS report, which attempted to quantify more rigorously the atmospheric 
effects, with the added credibility to be gained from an actual computer model of climate. 
 
At the heart of the TTAPS undertaking was another equation, never specifically expressed, but 
one that could be paraphrased as follows:  
 

Ds = Wn Ws Wh Tf Tb Pt Pr Pe etc 

 
(The amount of tropospheric dust = # warheads  size warheads  warhead detonation height  
flammability of targets  Target burn duration  Particles entering the Troposphere  Particle 
reflectivity  Particle endurance, and so on.)  
 
The similarity to the Drake equation is striking. As with the Drake equation, none of the 
variables can be determined. None at all. The TTAPS study addressed this problem in part by 
mapping out different wartime scenarios and assigning numbers to some of the variables, but 
even so, the remaining variables wereand aresimply unknowable. Nobody knows how much 
smoke will be generated when cities burn, creating particles of what kind, and for how long. No 
one knows the effect of local weather conditions on the amount of particles that will be injected 
into the troposphere. No one knows how long the particles will remain in the troposphere. And 
so on.  
 

And remember, this is only four years after the OTA study concluded that the underlying 
scientific processes were so poorly known that no estimates could be reliably made. 
Nevertheless, the TTAPS study not only made those estimates, but concluded they were 
catastrophic. 
 
According to Sagan and his coworkers, even a limited 5,000 megaton nuclear exchange would 
cause a global temperature drop of more than 35 degrees Centigrade, and this change would last 
for three months. The greatest volcanic eruptions that we know of changed world temperatures 
somewhere between 0.5 and 2 degrees Centigrade. Ice ages changed global temperatures by 10 
degrees. Here we have an estimated change three times greater than any ice age. One might 
expect it to be the subject of some dispute. 
 
But Sagan and his coworkers were prepared, for nuclear winter was from the outset the subject 
of a well-orchestrated media campaign. The first announcement of nuclear winter appeared in an 
article by Sagan in the Sunday supplement, Parade. The very next day, a highly-publicized, 
high-profile conference on the long-term consequences of nuclear war was held in Washington, 
chaired by Carl Sagan and Paul Ehrlich, the most famous and media-savvy scientists of their 
generation. Sagan appeared on the Johnny Carson show 40 times. Ehrlich was on 25 times. 
Following the conference, there were press conferences, meetings with congressmen, and so on. 
The formal papers in Science came months later. 
 
This is not the way science is done, it is the way products are sold. 
 
The real nature of the conference is indicated by these artists renderings of the effect of nuclear 
winter. 
 
I cannot help but quote the caption for figure 5: Shown here is a tranquil scene in the north 
woods. A beaver has just completed its dam, two black bears forage for food, a swallow-tailed 
butterfly flutters in the foreground, a loon swims quietly by, and a kingfisher searches for a tasty 
fish. Hard science if ever there was. 
 
At the conference in Washington, during the question period, Ehrlich was reminded that after 
Hiroshima and Nagasaki, scientists were quoted as saying nothing would grow there for 75 
years, but in fact melons were growing the next year. So, he was asked, how accurate were these 
findings now? 
 
Ehrlich answered by saying I think they are extremely robust. Scientists may have made 
statements like that, although I cannot imagine what their basis would have been, even with the 
state of science at that time, but scientists are always making absurd statements, individually, in 
various places. What we are doing here, however, is presenting a consensus of a very large group 
of scientists. 
 
I want to pause here and talk about this notion of consensus, and the rise of what has been called 
consensus science. I regard consensus science as an extremely pernicious development that 
ought to be stopped cold in its tracks. Historically, the claim of consensus has been the first 
refuge of scoundrels; it is a way to avoid debate by claiming that the matter is already settled. 

Whenever you hear the consensus of scientists agrees on something or other, reach for your 
wallet, because youre being had. 
 
Lets be clear: the work of science has nothing whatever to do with consensus. Consensus is the 
business of politics. Science, on the contrary, requires only one investigator who happens to be 
right, which means that he or she has results that are verifiable by reference to the real world. In 
science consensus is irrelevant. What is relevant is reproducible results. The greatest scientists in 
history are great precisely because they broke with the consensus. 
 
There is no such thing as consensus science. If its consensus, it isnt science. If its science, it 
isnt consensus. Period. 
 
In addition, let me remind you that the track record of the consensus is nothing to be proud of. 
Lets review a few cases. 
 
In past centuries, the greatest killer of women was fever following childbirth . One woman in six 
died of this fever. In 1795, Alexander Gordon of Aberdeen suggested that the fevers were 
infectious processes, and he was able to cure them. The consensus said no. In 1843, Oliver 
Wendell Holmes claimed puerperal fever was contagious, and presented compelling evidence. 
The consensus said no. In 1849, Semmelweiss demonstrated that sanitary techniques virtually 
eliminated puerperal fever in hospitals under his management. The consensus said he was a Jew, 
ignored him, and dismissed him from his post. There was in fact no agreement on puerperal fever 
until the start of the twentieth century. Thus the consensus took one hundred and twenty five 
years to arrive at the right conclusion despite the efforts of the prominent skeptics around the 
world, skeptics who were demeaned and ignored. And despite the constant ongoing deaths of 
women. 
 
There is no shortage of other examples. In the 1920s in America, tens of thousands of people, 
mostly poor, were dying of a disease called pellagra. The consensus of scientists said it was 
infectious, and what was necessary was to find the pellagra germ. The US government asked a 
brilliant young investigator, Dr. Joseph Goldberger, to find the cause. Goldberger concluded that 
diet was the crucial factor. The consensus remained wedded to the germ theory. Goldberger 
demonstrated that he could induce the disease through diet. He demonstrated that the disease was 
not infectious by injecting the blood of a pellagra patient into himself, and his assistant. They and 
other volunteers swabbed their noses with swabs from pellagra patients, and swallowed capsules 
containing scabs from pellagra rashes in what were called Goldbergers filth parties. Nobody 
contracted pellagra. The consensus continued to disagree with him. There was, in addition, a 
social factorsouthern States disliked the idea of poor diet as the cause, because it meant that 
social reform was required. They continued to deny it until the 1920s. Resultdespite a 
twentieth century epidemic, the consensus took years to see the light. 
 
Probably every schoolchild notices that South America and Africa seem to fit together rather 
snugly, and Alfred Wegener proposed, in 1912, that the continents had in fact drifted apart. The 
consensus sneered at continental drift for fifty years. The theory was most vigorously denied by 
the great names of geologyuntil 1961, when it began to seem as if the sea floors were 

spreading. The result: it took the consensus fifty years to acknowledge what any schoolchild 
sees. 
 
And shall we go on? The examples can be multiplied endlessly. Jenner and smallpox, Pasteur 
and germ theory. Saccharine, margarine, repressed memory, fiber and colon cancer, hormone 
replacement therapy. The list of consensus errors goes on and on. 
 
Finally, I would remind you to notice where the claim of consensus is invoked. Consensus is 
invoked only in situations where the science is not solid enough. Nobody says the consensus of 
scientists agrees that E=mc2. Nobody says the consensus is that the sun is 93 million miles away. 
It would never occur to anyone to speak that way. 
 
But back to our main subject. 
 
What I have been suggesting to you is that nuclear winter was a meaningless formula, tricked out 
with bad science, for policy ends. It was political from the beginning, promoted in a well-
orchestrated media campaign that had to be planned weeks or months in advance. 
 
Further evidence of the political nature of the whole project can be found in the response to 
criticism. Although Richard Feynman was characteristically blunt, saying, I really dont think 
these guys know what theyre talking about, other prominent scientists were noticeably reticent. 
Freeman Dyson was quoted as saying Its an absolutely atrocious piece of science but who 
wants to be accused of being in favor of nuclear war? And Victor Weisskopf said, The science 
is terrible butperhaps the psychology is good. The nuclear winter team followed up the 
publication of such comments with letters to the editors denying that these statements were ever 
made, though the scientists since then have subsequently confirmed their views. 
 
At the time, there was a concerted desire on the part of lots of people to avoid nuclear war. If 
nuclear winter looked awful, why investigate too closely? Who wanted to disagree? Only people 
like Edward Teller, the father of the H bomb. 
 
Teller said, While it is generally recognized that details are still uncertain and deserve much 
more study, Dr. Sagan nevertheless has taken the position that the whole scenario is so robust 
that there can be little doubt about its main conclusions. Yet for most people, the fact that 
nuclear winter was a scenario riddled with uncertainties did not seem to be relevant. 
 
I say it is hugely relevant. Once you abandon strict adherence to what science tells us, once you 
start arranging the truth in a press conference, then anything is possible. In one context, maybe 
you will get some mobilization against nuclear war. But in another context, you get Lysenkoism. 
In another, you get Nazi euthanasia. The danger is always there, if you subvert science to 
political ends. 
 
That is why it is so important for the future of science that the line between what science can say 
with certainty, and what it cannot, be drawn clearlyand defended. 
 

What happened to Nuclear Winter? As the media glare faded, its robust scenario appeared less 
persuasive; John Maddox, editor of Nature, repeatedly criticized its claims; within a year, 
Stephen Schneider, one of the leading figures in the climate model, began to speak of nuclear 
autumn. It just didnt have the same ring. 
 
A final media embarrassment came in 1991, when Carl Sagan predicted on Nightline that 
Kuwaiti oil fires would produce a nuclear winter effect, causing a year without a summer, and 
endangering crops around the world. Sagan stressed this outcome was so likely that it should 
affect the war plans. None of it happened. 
 
What, then, can we say were the lessons of Nuclear Winter? I believe the lesson was that with a 
catchy name, a strong policy position and an aggressive media campaign, nobody will dare to 
criticize the science, and in short order, a terminally weak thesis will be established as fact. After 
that, any criticism becomes beside the point. The war is already over without a shot being fired. 
That was the lesson, and we had a textbook application soon afterward, with second hand smoke. 
 
In 1993, the EPA announced that second-hand smoke was responsible for approximately 3,000 
lung cancer deaths each year in nonsmoking adults, and that it impairs the respiratory health of 
hundreds of thousands of people. In a 1994 pamphlet the EPA said that the eleven studies it 
based its decision on were not by themselves conclusive, and that they collectively assigned 
second-hand smoke a risk factor of 1.19. (For reference, a risk factor below 3.0 is too small for 
action by the EPA. or for publication in the New England Journal of Medicine, for example.) 
Furthermore, since there was no statistical association at the 95% confidence limits, the EPA 
lowered the limit to 90%. They then classified second-hand smoke as a Group-A Carcinogen. 
 
This was openly fraudulent science, but it formed the basis for bans on smoking in restaurants, 
offices, and airports. California banned public smoking in 1995. Soon, no claim was too extreme. 
By 1998, the Christian Science Monitor was saying that Second-hand smoke is the nations 
third-leading preventable cause of death. The American Cancer Society announced that 53,000 
people died each year of second-hand smoke. The evidence for this claim is nonexistent. 
 
In 1998, a Federal judge held that the EPA had acted improperly, had committed to a 
conclusion before research had begun, and had disregarded information and made findings on 
selective information. The reaction of Carol Browner, head of the EPA was: We stand by our 
science; theres wide agreement. The American people certainly recognize that exposure to 
second hand smoke brings a whole host of health problems. Again, note how the claim of 
consensus trumps science. In this case, it isnt even a consensus of scientists that Browner 
evokes! Its the consensus of the American people. 
 
Meanwhile, ever-larger studies failed to confirm any association. A large, seven-country WHO 
study in 1998 found no association. Nor have well-controlled subsequent studies, to my 
knowledge. Yet we now read, for example, that second-hand smoke is a cause of breast cancer. 
At this point you can say pretty much anything you want about second-hand smoke. 
 
As with nuclear winter, bad science is used to promote what most people would consider good 
policy. I certainly think it is. I dont want people smoking around me. So who will speak out 

against banning second-hand smoke? Nobody, and if you do, youll be branded a shill of RJ 
Reynolds. A big tobacco flunky. But the truth is that we now have a social policy supported by 
the grossest of superstitions. And weve given the EPA a bad lesson in how to behave in the 
future. Weve told them that cheating is the way to succeed. 
 
As the twentieth century drew to a close, the connection between hard scientific fact and public 
policy became increasingly elastic. In part this was possible because of the complacency of the 
scientific profession; in part because of the lack of good science education among the public; in 
part, because of the rise of specialized advocacy groups which have been enormously effective in 
getting publicity and shaping policy; and in great part because of the decline of the media as an 
independent assessor of fact. The deterioration of the American media is dire loss for our 
country. When distinguished institutions like the New York Times can no longer differentiate 
between factual content and editorial opinion, but rather mix both freely on their front page, then 
who will hold anyone to a higher standard? 
 
And so, in this elastic anything-goes world where scienceor non-scienceis the hand maiden 
of questionable public policy, we arrive at last at global warming. It is not my purpose here to 
rehash the details of this most magnificent of the demons haunting the world. I would just 
remind you of the now-familiar pattern by which these things are established. Evidentiary 
uncertainties are glossed over in the unseemly rush for an overarching policy, and for grants to 
support the policy by delivering findings that are desired by the patron. Next, the isolation of 
those scientists who wont get with the program, and the characterization of those scientists as 
outsiders and skeptics in quotation markssuspect individuals with suspect motives, industry 
flunkies, reactionaries, or simply anti-environmental nut-cases. In short order, debate ends, even 
though prominent scientists are uncomfortable about how things are being done. 
 
When did skeptic become a dirty word in science? When did a skeptic require quotation marks 
around it? 
 
To an outsider, the most significant innovation in the global warming controversy is the overt 
reliance that is being placed on models. Back in the days of nuclear winter, computer models 
were invoked to add weight to a conclusion: These results are derived with the help of a 
computer model. But now, large-scale computer models are seen as generating data in 
themselves. No longer are models judged by how well they reproduce data from the real world
increasingly, models provide the data. As if they were themselves a reality. And indeed they are, 
when we are projecting forward. There can be no observational data about the year 2100. There 
are only model runs. 
 
This fascination with computer models is something I understand very well. Richard Feynmann 
called it a disease. I fear he is right. Because only if you spend a lot of time looking at a 
computer screen can you arrive at the complex point where the global warming debate now 
stands. 
 
Nobody believes a weather prediction twelve hours ahead. Now were asked to believe a 
prediction that goes out 100 years into the future? And make financial investments based on that 
prediction? Has everybody lost their minds? 

 
Stepping back, I have to say the arrogance of the model-makers is breathtaking. There have been, 
in every century, scientists who say they know it all. Since climate may be a chaotic systemno 
one is surethese predictions are inherently doubtful, to be polite. But more to the point, even if 
the models get the science spot-on, they can never get the sociology. To predict anything about 
the world a hundred years from now is simply absurd. 
 
Look: If I was selling stock in a company that I told you would be profitable in 2100, would you 
buy it? Or would you think the idea was so crazy that it must be a scam? 
 
Lets think back to people in 1900 in, say, New York. If they worried about people in 2000, what 
would they worry about? Probably: Where would people get enough horses? And what would 
they do about all the horseshit? Horse pollution was bad in 1900, think how much worse it would 
be a century later, with so many more people riding horses? 
 
But of course, within a few years, nobody rode horses except for sport. And in 2000, France was 
getting 80% its power from an energy source that was unknown in 1900. Germany, Switzerland, 
Belgium and Japan were getting more than 30% from this source, unknown in 1900. Remember, 
people in 1900 didnt know what an atom was. They didnt know its structure. They also didnt 
know what a radio was, or an airport, or a movie, or a television, or a computer, or a cell phone, 
or a jet, an antibiotic, a rocket, a satellite, an MRI, ICU, IUD, IBM, IRA, ERA, EEG, EPA, IRS, 
DOD, PCP, HTML, internet, interferon, instant replay, remote sensing, remote control, speed 
dialing, gene therapy, gene splicing, genes, spot welding, heat-seeking, bipolar, prozac, leotards, 
lap dancing, email, tape recorder, CDs, airbags, plastic explosive, plastic, robots, cars, 
liposuction, transduction, superconduction, dish antennas, step aerobics, smoothies, twelve-step, 
ultrasound, nylon, rayon, teflon, fiber optics, carpal tunnel, laser surgery, laparoscopy, corneal 
transplant, kidney transplant, AIDS. None of this would have meant anything to a person in the 
year 1900. They wouldnt know what you are talking about. 
 
Now. You tell me you can predict the world of 2100. Tell me its even worth thinking about. Our 
models just carry the present into the future. Theyre bound to be wrong. Everybody who gives a 
moments thought knows it. 
 
I remind you that in the lifetime of most scientists now living, we have already had an example 
of dire predictions set aside by new technology. I refer to the green revolution. In 1960, Paul 
Ehrlich said, The battle to feed humanity is over. In the 1970s the world will undergo famines
hundreds of millions of people are going to starve to death. Ten years later, he predicted four 
billion people would die during the 1980s, including 65 million Americans. The mass starvation 
that was predicted never occurred, and it now seems it isnt ever going to happen. Nor is the 
population explosion going to reach the numbers predicted even ten years ago. In 1990, climate 
modelers anticipated a world population of 11 billion by 2100. Today, some people think the 
correct number will be 7 billion and falling. But nobody knows for sure. 
 
But it is impossible to ignore how closely the history of global warming fits on the previous 
template for nuclear winter. Just as the earliest studies of nuclear winter stated that the 
uncertainties were so great that probabilities could never be known, so, too the first 

pronouncements on global warming argued strong limits on what could be determined with 
certainty about climate change. The 1995 IPCC draft report said, Any claims of positive 
detection of significant climate change are likely to remain controversial until uncertainties in the 
total natural variability of the climate system are reduced. It also said, No study to date has 
positively attributed all or part of observed climate changes to anthropogenic causes. Those 
statements were removed, and in their place appeared: The balance of evidence suggests a 
discernable human influence on climate. 
 
What is clear, however, is that on this issue, science and policy have become inextricably mixed 
to the point where it will be difficult, if not impossible, to separate them out. It is possible for an 
outside observer to ask serious questions about the conduct of investigations into global 
warming, such as whether we are taking appropriate steps to improve the quality of our 
observational data records, whether we are systematically obtaining the information that will 
clarify existing uncertainties, whether we have any organized disinterested mechanism to direct 
research in this contentious area. 
 
The answer to all these questions is no. We dont. 
 
In trying to think about how these questions can be resolved, it occurs to me that in the 
progression from SETI to nuclear winter to second-hand smoke to global warming, we have one 
clear message, and that is that we can expect more and more problems of public policy dealing 
with technical issues in the futureproblems of ever greater seriousness, where people care 
passionately on all sides. 
 
And at the moment we have no mechanism to get good answers. So I will propose one. 
 
Just as we have established a tradition of double-blinded research to determine drug efficacy, we 
must institute double-blinded research in other policy areas as well. Certainly the increased use 
of computer models, such as GCMs, cries out for the separation of those who make the models 
from those who verify them. The fact is that the present structure of science is entrepreneurial, 
with individual investigative teams vying for funding from organizations that all too often have a 
clear stake in the outcome of the researchor appear to, which may be just as bad. This is not 
healthy for science. 
 
Sooner or later, we must form an independent research institute in this country. It must be funded 
by industry, by government, and by private philanthropy, both individuals and trusts. The money 
must be pooled, so that investigators do not know who is paying them. The institute must fund 
more than one team to do research in a particular area, and the verification of results will be a 
foregone requirement: teams will know their results will be checked by other groups. In many 
cases, those who decide how to gather the data will not gather it, and those who gather the data 
will not analyze it. If we were to address the land temperature records with such rigor, we would 
be well on our way to an understanding of exactly how much faith we can place in global 
warming, and therefore with what seriousness we must address this. 
 

I believe that as we come to the end of this litany, some of you may be saying, well what is the 
big deal, really. So we made a few mistakes. So a few scientists have overstated their cases and 
have egg on their faces. So what? 
 
Well, Ill tell you. 
 
In recent years, much has been said about the post-modernist claims about science to the effect 
that science is just another form of raw power, tricked out in special claims for truth-seeking and 
objectivity that really have no basis in fact. Science, we are told, is no better than any other 
undertaking. These ideas anger many scientists, and they anger me. But recent events have made 
me wonder if they are correct. We can take as an example the scientific reception accorded a 
Danish statistician, Bjorn Lomborg, who wrote a book called The Skeptical Environmentalist. 
 
The scientific community responded in a way that can only be described as disgraceful. In 
professional literature, it was complained he had no standing because he was not an earth 
scientist. His publisher, Cambridge University Press, was attacked with cries that the editor 
should be fired, and that all right-thinking scientists should shun the press. The past president of 
the AAAS wondered aloud how Cambridge could have ever published a book that so clearly 
could never have passed peer review. (But of course, the manuscript did pass peer review by 
three earth scientists on both sides of the Atlantic, and all recommended publication.) But what 
are scientists doing attacking a press? Is this the new McCarthyismcoming from scientists? 
 
Worst of all was the behavior of the Scientific American, which seemed intent on proving the 
post-modernist point that it was all about power, not facts. The Scientific American attacked 
Lomborg for eleven pages, yet only came up with nine factual errors despite their assertion that 
the book was rife with careless mistakes. It was a poor display, featuring vicious ad hominem 
attacks, including comparing him to a Holocaust denier. The issue was captioned: Science 
defends itself against the Skeptical Environmentalist. Really. Science has to defend itself? Is 
this what we have come to? 
 
When Lomborg asked for space to rebut his critics, he was given only a page and a half. When 
he said it wasnt enough, he put the critics essays on his web page and answered them in detail. 
Scientific American threatened copyright infringement and made him take the pages down. 
 
Further attacks since, have made it clear what is going on. Lomborg is charged with heresy. 
Thats why none of his critics needs to substantiate their attacks in any detail. Thats why the 
facts dont matter. Thats why they can attack him in the most vicious personal terms. Hes a 
heretic. 
 
Of course, any scientist can be charged as Galileo was charged. I just never thought Id see the 
Scientific American in the role of Mother Church. 
 
Is this what science has become? I hope not. But it is what it will become, unless there is a 
concerted effort by leading scientists to aggressively separate science from policy. The late 
Philip Handler, former president of the National Academy of Sciences, said that Scientists best 
serve public policy by living within the ethics of science, not those of politics. If the scientific 

community will not unfrock the charlatans, the public will not discern the differencescience 
and the nation will suffer. Personally, I dont worry about the nation. But I do worry about 
science. 

