	  

	  

	  	  	  	  
The	  Critical	  Security	  Controls	  
for	  
Effective	  Cyber	  Defense	  

Version	  5.0	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

	  

1	  

	  

CSC	  3:	  	  Secure	  Configurations	  for	  Hardware	  and	  Software	  on	  Mobile	  Devices,	  Laptops,	  

	  
Introduction	  .....................................................................................................................................................................	  3	  
CSC	  1:	  	  Inventory	  of	  Authorized	  and	  Unauthorized	  Devices	  ............................................................................	  8	  
CSC	  2:	  	  Inventory	  of	  Authorized	  and	  Unauthorized	  Software	  .......................................................................	  14	  
Workstations,	  and	  Servers	  .......................................................................................................................................	  19	  
CSC	  4:	  	  Continuous	  Vulnerability	  Assessment	  and	  Remediation	  .................................................................	  27	  
CSC	  5:	  	  Malware	  Defenses	  ..........................................................................................................................................	  33	  
CSC	  6:	  	  Application	  Software	  Security	  ...................................................................................................................	  38	  
CSC	  7:	  	  Wireless	  Access	  Control	  ...............................................................................................................................	  43	  
CSC	  8:	  	  Data	  Recovery	  Capability	  ............................................................................................................................	  48	  
CSC	  9:	  	  Security	  Skills	  Assessment	  and	  Appropriate	  Training	  to	  Fill	  Gaps	  ...............................................	  51	  
CSC	  10:	  	  Secure	  Configurations	  for	  Network	  Devices	  such	  as	  Firewalls,	  Routers,	  and	  Switches	  ......	  54	  
CSC	  11:	  	  Limitation	  and	  Control	  of	  Network	  Ports,	  Protocols,	  and	  Services	  ............................................	  58	  
CSC	  12:	  	  Controlled	  Use	  of	  Administrative	  Privileges	  ......................................................................................	  62	  
CSC	  13:	  	  Boundary	  Defense	  .......................................................................................................................................	  68	  
CSC	  14:	  	  Maintenance,	  Monitoring,	  and	  Analysis	  of	  Audit	  Logs	  ....................................................................	  75	  
CSC	  15:	  	  Controlled	  Access	  Based	  on	  the	  Need	  to	  Know	  ..................................................................................	  80	  
CSC	  16:	  	  Account	  Monitoring	  and	  Control	  ............................................................................................................	  84	  
CSC	  17:	  	  Data	  Protection	  ............................................................................................................................................	  89	  
CSC	  18:	  Incident	  Response	  and	  Management	  .....................................................................................................	  95	  
CSC	  19:	  	  Secure	  Network	  Engineering	  ...................................................................................................................	  98	  
CSC	  20:	  	  Penetration	  Tests	  and	  Red	  Team	  Exercises	  ....................................................................................	  101	  
Appendix	  A:	  	  Attack	  Types	  .....................................................................................................................................	  105	  

	  

2	  

Introduction	  

	  
We	  are	  at	  a	  fascinating	  point	  in	  the	  evolution	  of	  what	  we	  now	  call	  cyber	  defense.	  
Massive	  data	  losses,	  theft	  of	  intellectual	  property,	  credit	  card	  breaches,	  identity	  theft,	  
threats	  to	  our	  privacy,	  denial	  of	  service	  	  these	  have	  become	  a	  way	  of	  life	  for	  all	  of	  us	  in	  
cyberspace.	  	  
Ironically,	  as	  defenders	  we	  have	  access	  to	  an	  extraordinary	  array	  of	  security	  tools	  and	  
technology,	  security	  standards,	  training	  and	  classes,	  certifications,	  vulnerability	  
databases,	  guidance,	  best	  practices,	  catalogs	  of	  security	  controls,	  and	  countless	  security	  
checklists,	  benchmarks,	  and	  recommendations.	  To	  help	  us	  understand	  the	  threat,	  weve	  
seen	  the	  emergence	  of	  threat	  information	  feeds,	  reports,	  tools,	  alert	  services,	  standards,	  
and	  threat	  sharing	  schemes.	  And	  to	  tie	  it	  all	  together,	  we	  are	  surrounded	  by	  security	  
requirements,	  risk	  management	  frameworks,	  compliance	  regimes,	  regulatory	  
mandates,	  and	  so	  forth.	  	  There	  is	  no	  shortage	  of	  information	  available	  to	  security	  
practitioners	  on	  how	  they	  should	  secure	  their	  infrastructure.	  	   
But	  all	  of	  this	  technology,	  information,	  and	  oversight	  has	  become	  a	  veritable	  Fog	  of	  
More:	  	  competing	  options,	  priorities,	  opinions,	  and	  claims	  that	  can	  paralyze	  or	  distract	  
an	  enterprise	  from	  vital	  action.	  The	  threats	  have	  evolved,	  the	  actors	  have	  become	  
smarter,	  and	  our	  users	  have	  become	  more	  mobile.	  Our	  data	  is	  now	  distributed	  across	  
multiple	  locations,	  many	  of	  which	  are	  not	  within	  our	  organizations	  infrastructure	  
anymore.	  	  With	  more	  reliance	  on	  clouds,	  our	  data	  and	  even	  our	  applications	  are	  
becoming	  more	  distributed.	  The	  organizational	  network	  is	  now	  just	  one	  of	  the	  locations	  
for	  users	  to	  access	  applications	  and	  data. And	  since	  in	  our	  complex,	  interconnected	  
world,	  no	  enterprise	  can	  think	  of	  its	  security	  as	  a	  standalone	  problem,	  this	  situation	  
makes	  collective	  action	  nearly	  impossible. 
So	  how	  can	  we	  as	  a	  community	  	  the	  community	  at	  large,	  as	  well	  as	  within	  industries,	  
sectors,	  partnerships,	  and	  coalitions	  -	  band	  together	  to	  establish	  priority	  of	  action,	  
support	  each	  other,	  and	  keep	  our	  knowledge	  and	  technology	  current	  in	  the	  face	  of	  a	  
rapidly	  evolving	  problem	  and	  an	  apparently	  infinite	  number	  of	  possible	  solutions?	  	  
What	  are	  the	  most	  critical	  areas	  we	  need	  to	  address,	  how	  should	  an	  enterprise	  take	  the	  
first	  step	  to	  maturing	  their	  risk	  management	  program?	  Rather	  than	  chase	  every	  new	  
exceptional	  threat	  and	  neglect	  the	  fundamentals,	  how	  can	  we	  get	  on	  track	  with	  a	  
roadmap	  of	  fundamentals,	  and	  guidance	  to	  measure	  and	  improve? Which	  defensive	  
steps	  have	  the	  greatest	  value?	   
These	  are	  the	  kinds	  of	  issues	  that	  led	  to	  and	  now	  drive	  the	  Critical	  Security	  Controls.	  
They	  started	  as	  a	  grass-roots	  activity	  to	  cut	  through	  the	  Fog	  of	  More	  and	  focus	  on	  the	  
most	  fundamental	  and	  valuable	  actions	  that	  every	  enterprise	  should	  take.	  	  And	  value	  
here	  is	  determined	  by	  knowledge	  and	  data	  	  the	  ability	  to	  prevent,	  alert,	  and	  respond	  to	  
the	  attacks	  that	  are	  plaguing	  enterprises	  today.	  	  

3	  

 

 

	  
The	  Critical	  Security	  Controls	  have	  matured	  into	  an	  international	  community	  activity	  to	  
create,	  adopt,	  and	  support	  the	  Critical	  Security	  Controls.	  As	  a	  community,	  these	  
individuals	  and	  institutions:	  
  share	  insight	  into	  attacks	  and	  attackers,	  identify	  root	  causes,	  and	  translate	  that	  
into	  classes	  of	  defensive	  action;	  	  
  document	  stories	  of	  adoption	  and	  the	  use	  of	  tools	  to	  solve	  problems;	  	  
track	  the	  evolution	  of	  threats,	  the	  capabilities	  of	  adversaries,	  and	  current	  vectors	  
of	  intrusions;	  
  map	  the	  Controls	  to	  regulatory	  and	  compliance	  frameworks	  and	  bring	  collective	  
priority	  and	  focus	  to	  them;	  	  
  share	  tools,	  working	  aids,	  and	  translations;	  and	  
identify	  common	  problems	  (like	  initial	  assessment,	  building	  implementation	  
roadmaps)	  	  and	  solve	  them	  as	  a	  community	  instead	  of	  alone.	  	  
The	  activities	  ensure	  that	  the	  Critical	  Security	  Controls	  are	  not	  just	  another	  list	  of	  good	  
things	  to	  do,	  but	  a	  prioritized,	  highly	  focused	  set	  of	  actions	  that	  have	  a	  community-wide	  
support	  network	  to	  make	  them	  implementable,	  usable,	  scalable,	  and	  compliant	  with	  all	  
industry	  or	  government	  security	  requirements.	  	  
The	  Critical	  Security	  Controls	  reflect	  the	  combined	  knowledge	  of	  actual	  attacks	  and	  
effective	  defenses	  of	  experts	  that	  include:	  	  every	  part	  of	  the	  ecosystem	  (companies,	  
governments,	  individuals);	  with	  every	  role	  (threat	  responders	  and	  analysts,	  
technologists,	  vulnerability-finders,	  tool	  makers,	  solution	  providers,	  defenders,	  users,	  
policy-makers,	  auditors,	  etc.);	  and	  within	  many	  sectors	  (government,	  power,	  defense,	  
finance,	  transportation,	  academia,	  consulting,	  security,	  IT)	  who	  have	  banded	  together	  to	  
create,	  adopt,	  and	  support	  the	  Controls.	  Top	  experts	  from	  all	  these	  organizations	  pool	  
their	  extensive	  first-hand	  knowledge	  from	  defending	  against	  actual	  cyber-attacks	  and	  
develop	  a	  consensus	  list	  of	  the	  best	  defensive	  techniques	  to	  prevent	  or	  track	  them.	  This	  
ensures	  that	  the	  Critical	  Security	  Controls	  are	  the	  most	  effective	  and	  specific	  set	  of	  
technical	  measures	  available	  to	  detect,	  prevent,	  
respond,	  and	  mitigate	  damage	  from	  the	  most	  common	  
The	  Council	  on	  CyberSecurity	  was	  
to	  the	  most	  advanced	  of	  those	  attacks.	  	  
established	  in	  2013	  as	  an	  
independent,	  expert,	  not-for-profit	  
The	  Controls	  are	  not	  limited	  to	  blocking	  the	  initial	  
organization	  with	  a	  global	  scope	  
committed	  to	  the	  security	  of	  an	  
compromise	  of	  systems,	  but	  also	  address	  detecting	  
open	  Internet.	  The	  Council	  is	  
already-compromised	  machines	  and	  preventing	  or	  
committed	  to	  the	  ongoing	  
disrupting	  attackers	  follow-on	  actions.	  The	  defenses	  
development,	  support,	  and	  
adoption	  of	  the	  Critical	  Controls;	  to	  
identified	  through	  these	  Controls	  deal	  with	  reducing	  the	  
elevating	  the	  competencies	  of	  the	  
initial	  attack	  surface	  by	  hardening	  device	  
cybersecurity	  workforce;	  and	  to	  the	  
configurations,	  identifying	  compromised	  machines	  to	  
development	  of	  policies	  that	  lead	  to	  
measurable	  improvements	  in	  our	  
address	  long-term	  threats	  inside	  an	  organizations	  
ability	  to	  operate	  safely,	  securely	  
network,	  disrupting	  attackers	  command-and-control	  of	  
and	  reliably	  in	  cyberspace.	  For	  
additional	  information,	  go	  to	  
(www.counciloncybersecurity.org)	  

Why	  the	  Critical	  Security	  Controls	  Work:	  Methodology	  and	  Contributors	  	  

4	  

	  
implanted	  malicious	  code,	  and	  establishing	  an	  adaptive,	  continuous	  defense	  and	  
response	  capability	  that	  can	  be	  maintained	  and	  improved.	  
The	  five	  critical	  tenets	  of	  an	  effective	  cyber	  defense	  system	  as	  reflected	  in	  the	  Critical	  
Security	  Controls	  are:	  
1.  Offense	  informs	  defense:	  	  Use	  knowledge	  of	  actual	  attacks	  that	  have	  compromised	  
systems	  to	  provide	  the	  foundation	  to	  continually	  learn	  from	  these	  events	  to	  build	  
effective,	  practical	  defenses.	  Include	  only	  those	  controls	  that	  can	  be	  shown	  to	  
stop	  known	  real-world	  attacks.	  	  
2.  Prioritization:	  Invest	  first	  in	  Controls	  that	  will	  provide	  the	  greatest	  risk	  
reduction	  and	  protection	  against	  the	  most	  dangerous	  threat	  actors,	  and	  that	  can	  
be	  feasibly	  implemented	  in	  your	  computing	  environment.	  
3.  Metrics:	  	  Establish	  common	  metrics	  to	  provide	  a	  shared	  language	  for	  executives,	  
IT	  specialists,	  auditors,	  and	  security	  officials	  to	  measure	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  
security	  measures	  within	  an	  organization	  so	  that	  required	  adjustments	  can	  be	  
identified	  and	  implemented	  quickly.	  
4.  Continuous	  diagnostics	  and	  mitigation:	  	  Carry	  out	  continuous	  measurement	  to	  
test	  and	  validate	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  current	  security	  measures,	  and	  to	  help	  
drive	  the	  priority	  of	  next	  steps.	  
5.  Automation:	  	  Automate	  defenses	  so	  that	  organizations	  can	  achieve	  reliable,	  
scalable,	  and	  continuous	  measurements	  of	  their	  adherence	  to	  the	  Controls	  and	  
related	  metrics.	  
The	  Critical	  Security	  Controls	  allow	  you	  to	  use	  the	  power	  of	  an	  incredible	  community	  to	  
prioritize	  and	  focus	  your	  resources	  on	  the	  most	  valuable	  defensive	  actions	  	  but	  they	  
are	  not	  a	  replacement	  for	  comprehensive	  mandatory	  compliance	  or	  regulatory	  
schemes.	  The	  Critical	  Security	  Controls	  instead	  prioritize	  and	  focus	  on	  a	  smaller	  
number	  of	  actionable	  controls	  with	  high-payoff,	  aiming	  for	  a	  must	  do	  first	  philosophy.	  
In	  fact,	  the	  actions	  specified	  by	  the	  Critical	  Security	  Controls	  are	  demonstrably	  a	  subset	  
of	  any	  of	  the	  comprehensive	  security	  catalogs	  or	  Control	  lists.	  	  
Although	  lacking	  the	  formality	  of	  traditional	  Risk	  Management	  Frameworks,	  it	  seems	  
reasonable	  to	  refer	  to	  the	  Critical	  Security	  Controls	  process	  as	  a	  foundational	  risk	  
assessment	  	  one	  that	  can	  be	  used	  by	  an	  individual	  enterprise	  as	  a	  starting	  point	  for	  
immediate,	  high-value	  action,	  is	  demonstrably	  consistent	  with	  formal	  risk	  management	  
frameworks,	  and	  provides	  a	  basis	  for	  common	  action	  across	  diverse	  communities	  (e.g.,	  
that	  might	  be	  subject	  to	  different	  regulatory	  or	  compliance	  requirements).	  
The	  Critical	  Security	  Controls	  also	  proactively	  align	  with	  and	  leverage	  ongoing	  work	  in	  
security	  standards	  and	  best	  practices.	  Examples	  include:	  the	  Security	  Content	  
Automation	  Program	  (SCAP)	  and	  Special	  Publication	  800-53	  (Recommended	  Security	  
Controls	  for	  Federal	  Information	  Systems	  and	  Organizations)	  sponsored	  by	  the	  National	  

The	  Critical	  Security	  Controls	  and	  Other	  Risk	  Management	  Approaches	  

5	  

How	  to	  get	  started	  

	  
Institute	  of	  Standards	  and	  Technology	  (NIST);	  the	  Australian	  Signals	  Directorates	  Top	  
35	  Strategies	  to	  Mitigate	  Targeted	  Cyber	  Intrusions;	  and	  the	  International	  
Organization	  for	  Standardization	  (ISO)/	  International	  Electrotechnical	  Commission	  
(IEC)	  27002:2013	  	  Information	  technology	  	  Security	  techniques	  	  Code	  of	  practice	  
for	  information	  security	  controls.	  	  References	  and	  mappings	  to	  these	  can	  be	  found	  at	  
www.counciloncybersecurity.org	   
The	  Critical	  Security	  Controls	  are	  a	  relatively	  small	  number	  of	  prioritized,	  well-vetted,	  
and	  supported	  set	  of	  security	  actions	  that	  organizations	  can	  take	  to	  assess	  and	  improve	  
their	  current	  security	  state.	  It	  also	  changes	  the	  discussion	  from	  what	  should	  my	  
enterprise	  do	  to	  what	  should	  we	  ALL	  be	  doing	  to	  improve	  security	  across	  a	  broad	  
scale.	  	  
But	  it	  is	  not	  a	  one-size-fits-all	  solution,	  in	  either	  content	  or	  priority.	  	  You	  must	  still	  
understand	  what	  is	  critical	  to	  your	  business,	  data,	  systems,	  networks,	  and	  
infrastructures,	  and	  you	  must	  consider	  the	  adversary	  actions	  that	  could	  impact	  your	  
ability	  to	  be	  successful	  in	  the	  business	  or	  operations.	  And	  even	  a	  relatively	  small	  
number	  of	  Controls	  cannot	  be	  executed	  all	  at	  once,	  so	  you	  will	  need	  to	  develop	  a	  plan	  
for	  assessment,	  implementation,	  and	  process	  management.	  	  
Some	  of	  the	  Critical	  Security	  Controls,	  in	  particular	  CSC	  1	  through	  CSC	  5,	  are	  
foundational	  to	  success,	  and	  should	  be	  considered	  as	  the	  first	  things	  to	  be	  done.	  This	  is	  
the	  approach	  taken	  by,	  for	  example,	  the	  DHS	  Continuous	  Diagnostic	  and	  Mitigation	  
(CDM)	  Program,	  one	  of	  the	  partners	  in	  the	  Critical	  Security	  Controls.	  	  	  
For	  those	  wanting	  a	  highly	  focused	  and	  direct	  starting	  point,	  we	  have	  emphasized	  the	  
First	  Five	  Quick	  Wins:	  sub-controls	  that	  have	  the	  most	  immediate	  impact	  on	  
preventing	  attacks.	  	  These	  actions	  are	  specially	  noted	  in	  the	  Controls	  listings,	  and	  
consist	  of:	  	  
1. application	  whitelisting	  (found	  in	  CSC	  2);	  
2. use	  of	  standard,	  secure	  system	  configurations	  (found	  in	  CSC	  3);	  
3. patch	  application	  software	  within	  48	  hours	  (found	  in	  CSC	  4);	  
4. patch	  system	  software	  within	  48	  hours	  (found	  in	  CSC	  4);	  and	  
5. reduced	  number	  of	  users	  with	  administrative	  privileges	  (found	  in	  CSC	  3	  and	  CSC	  
12).	  
	  A	  similar	  approach	  is	  recommended	  by	  our	  partners	  in	  the	  Australian	  Signals	  
Directorate	  (ASD)	  with	  their	  Top	  Four	  Strategies	  to	  Mitigate	  Targeted	  Intrusions1	  	  a	  
	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  	  

1	  http://www.asd.gov.au/infosec/top-mitigations/top-4-strategies-explained.htm	  

6	  

Structure	  of	  the	  Critical	  Security	  Controls	  Document	  

	  
well-regarded	  and	  demonstrably	  effective	  set	  of	  cyber-defense	  actions	  that	  map	  very	  
closely	  into	  the	  Critical	  Security	  Controls	  and	  the	  First	  Five	  Quick	  Wins.	  	  	  
Another	  approach	  is	  to	  learn	  from	  other	  enterprises	  that	  are	  part	  of	  the	  Critical	  Security	  
Controls	  community.	  Use	  Cases	  of	  adoption,	  samples	  of	  Initial	  Assessment	  
methodologies,	  mappings	  to	  formal	  Risk	  Management	  Frameworks,	  pointers	  to	  
assessment	  tools,	  and	  many	  other	  working	  aids	  are	  available	  from	  the	  Council	  on	  
CyberSecurity	  (www.counciloncybersecurity.com).	  	  
The	  presentation	  of	  each	  Critical	  Security	  Control	  in	  this	  document	  includes:	  
  A	  description	  of	  the	  importance	  of	  the	  Control	  in	  blocking	  or	  identifying	  
presence	  of	  attacks	  and	  an	  explanation	  of	  how	  attackers	  actively	  exploit	  the	  
absence	  of	  this	  control.	  	  
  Listing	  of	  the	  specific	  actions	  that	  organizations	  are	  taking	  to	  implement,	  
automate,	  and	  measure	  effectiveness	  of	  this	  control.	  The	  sub-controls	  are	  
grouped	  into	  four	  categories:	  
o  Quick	  wins	  that	  provide	  significant	  risk	  reduction	  without	  major	  financial,	  
procedural,	  architectural,	  or	  technical	  changes	  to	  an	  environment,	  or	  that	  
provide	  such	  substantial	  and	  immediate	  risk	  reduction	  against	  very	  
common	  attacks	  that	  most	  security-aware	  organizations	  prioritize	  these	  
key	  controls.	  	  
o  Visibility	  and	  attribution	  measures	  to	  improve	  the	  process,	  architecture,	  
and	  technical	  capabilities	  of	  organizations	  to	  monitor	  their	  networks	  and	  
computer	  systems	  to	  detect	  attack	  attempts,	  locate	  points	  of	  entry,	  
identify	  already-compromised	  machines,	  interrupt	  infiltrated	  attackers	  
activities,	  and	  gain	  information	  about	  the	  sources	  of	  an	  attack.	  	  
o  Improved	  information	  security	  configuration	  and	  hygiene	  to	  reduce	  the	  
number	  and	  magnitude	  of	  security	  vulnerabilities	  and	  improve	  the	  
operations	  of	  networked	  computer	  systems,	  with	  a	  focus	  on	  protecting	  
against	  poor	  security	  practices	  by	  system	  administrators	  and	  end-users	  
that	  could	  give	  an	  attacker	  an	  advantage.	  	  
o  Advanced	  sub-controls	  that	  use	  new	  technologies	  or	  procedures	  that	  
provide	  maximum	  security	  but	  are	  harder	  to	  deploy	  or	  more	  expensive	  or	  
require	  more	  highly	  skilled	  staff	  than	  commoditized	  security	  solutions.	  	  
  Procedures	  and	  tools	  that	  enable	  implementation	  and	  automation.	  
  Metrics	  and	  tests	  to	  assess	  implementation	  status	  and	  effectiveness.	  
  Sample	  entity	  relationship	  diagrams	  that	  show	  components	  of	  implementation.	  

7	  

	  

CSC	  1:	  	  Inventory	  of	  Authorized	  and	  Unauthorized	  Devices	  

Actively	  manage	  (inventory,	  track,	  and	  correct)	  all	  hardware	  devices	  on	  the	  
network	  so	  that	  only	  authorized	  devices	  are	  given	  access,	  and	  unauthorized	  and	  
unmanaged	  devices	  are	  found	  and	  prevented	  from	  gaining	  access.	  

Why	  Is	  This	  Control	  Critical?	  

Attackers,	  who	  can	  be	  located	  anywhere	  in	  the	  world,	  are	  continuously	  scanning	  the	  
address	  space	  of	  target	  organizations,	  waiting	  for	  new	  and	  unprotected	  systems	  to	  be	  
attached	  to	  the	  network.	  Attackers	  also	  look	  for	  devices	  (especially	  laptops)	  which	  
come	  and	  go	  off	  of	  the	  enterprises	  network,	  and	  so	  get	  out	  of	  synch	  with	  patches	  or	  
security	  updates.	  Attacks	  can	  take	  advantage	  of	  new	  hardware	  that	  is	  installed	  on	  the	  
network	  one	  evening	  but	  not	  configured	  and	  patched	  with	  appropriate	  security	  updates	  
until	  the	  following	  day.	  Even	  devices	  that	  are	  not	  visible	  from	  the	  Internet	  can	  be	  used	  
by	  attackers	  who	  have	  already	  gained	  internal	  access	  and	  are	  hunting	  for	  internal	  jump	  
points	  or	  victims.	  Additional	  systems	  that	  connect	  to	  the	  enterprises	  network	  (e.g.,	  
demonstration	  systems,	  temporary	  test	  systems,	  guest	  networks)	  should	  also	  be	  
managed	  carefully	  and/or	  isolated	  in	  order	  to	  prevent	  adversarial	  access	  from	  affecting	  
the	  security	  of	  enterprise	  operations.	  	  
As	  new	  technology	  continues	  to	  come	  out,	  BYOD	  (bring	  your	  own	  device)	  	  where	  
employees	  bring	  personal	  devices	  into	  work	  and	  connect	  them	  to	  the	  network	  	  is	  
becoming	  very	  common.	  	  These	  devices	  could	  already	  be	  compromised	  and	  be	  used	  to	  
infect	  internal	  resources.	  	  	  
Managed	  control	  of	  all	  devices	  also	  plays	  a	  critical	  role	  in	  planning	  and	  executing	  
system	  backup	  and	  recovery.	  	  
Deploy	  an	  automated	  asset	  inventory	  discovery	  tool	  and	  use	  it	  
CSC	  1-1	  
Quick	  win	  
to	  build	  a	  preliminary	  asset	  inventory	  of	  systems	  connected	  to	  
an	  organizations	  public	  and	  private	  network(s).	  Both	  active	  
tools	  that	  scan	  through	  network	  address	  ranges	  and	  passive	  
tools	  that	  identify	  hosts	  based	  on	  analyzing	  their	  traffic	  
should	  be	  employed.	  
CSC	  1-2	  
Deploy	  dynamic	  host	  configuration	  protocol	  (DHCP)	  server	  
Quick	  win	  
logging,	  and	  utilize	  a	  system	  to	  improve	  the	  asset	  inventory	  
and	  help	  detect	  unknown	  systems	  through	  this	  DHCP	  
information.	  
Ensure	  that	  all	  equipment	  acquisitions	  automatically	  update	  
CSC	  1-3	  
the	  inventory	  system	  as	  new,	  approved	  devices	  are	  connected	   Quick	  win	  

How	  to	  Implement	  This	  Control	  

ID	  #	  

Description	  

Category	  

8	  

	  
CSC	  1-4	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

to	  the	  network.	  
Maintain	  an	  asset	  inventory	  of	  all	  systems	  connected	  to	  the	  
network	  and	  the	  network	  devices	  themselves,	  recording	  at	  
least	  the	  network	  addresses,	  machine	  name(s),	  purpose	  of	  
each	  system,	  an	  asset	  owner	  responsible	  for	  each	  device,	  and	  
the	  department	  associated	  with	  each	  device.	  The	  inventory	  
should	  include	  every	  system	  that	  has	  an	  Internet	  protocol	  (IP)	  
address	  on	  the	  network,	  including	  but	  not	  limited	  to	  desktops,	  
laptops,	  servers,	  network	  equipment	  (routers,	  switches,	  
firewalls,	  etc.),	  printers,	  storage	  area	  networks,	  Voice	  Over-IP	  
telephones,	  multi-homed	  addresses,	  virtual	  addresses,	  etc.	  	  
The	  asset	  inventory	  created	  must	  also	  include	  data	  on	  
whether	  the	  device	  is	  a	  portable	  and/or	  personal	  device.	  
Devices	  such	  as	  mobile	  phones,	  tablets,	  laptops,	  and	  other	  
portable	  electronic	  devices	  that	  store	  or	  process	  data	  must	  be	  
identified,	  regardless	  of	  whether	  they	  are	  attached	  to	  the	  
organizations	  network.	  
Deploy	  network	  level	  authentication	  via	  802.1x	  to	  limit	  and	  
control	  which	  devices	  can	  be	  connected	  to	  the	  network.	  	  The	  
802.1x	  must	  be	  tied	  into	  the	  inventory	  data	  to	  determine	  
authorized	  versus	  unauthorized	  systems.	  
Deploy	  network	  access	  control	  (NAC)	  to	  monitor	  authorized	  
systems	  so	  if	  attacks	  occur,	  the	  impact	  can	  be	  remediated	  by	  
moving	  the	  untrusted	  system	  to	  a	  virtual	  local	  area	  network	  
that	  has	  minimal	  access.	  
Utilize	  client	  certificates	  to	  validate	  and	  authenticate	  systems	  
prior	  to	  connecting	  to	  the	  private	  network.	  

CSC	  1-5	  
Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  
CSC	  1-6	  
Configuration/
Hygiene	  
CSC	  1-7	  
Advanced	  
	  
This	  Control	  requires	  both	  technical	  and	  procedural	  actions,	  united	  in	  a	  process	  that	  
accounts	  for	  and	  manages	  the	  inventory	  of	  hardware	  and	  all	  associated	  information	  
throughout	  its	  life-cycle.	  It	  links	  to	  the	  business	  by	  establishing	  information/asset	  
owners	  who	  are	  responsible	  for	  each	  component	  of	  a	  business	  process	  that	  includes	  
information,	  software,	  and	  hardware.	  Organizations	  can	  use	  large-scale,	  comprehensive	  
enterprise	  products	  to	  maintain	  IT	  asset	  inventories.	  Others	  use	  more	  modest	  tools	  to	  
gather	  the	  data	  by	  sweeping	  the	  network,	  and	  manage	  the	  results	  separately	  in	  a	  
database.	  	  
Maintaining	  a	  current	  and	  accurate	  view	  of	  IT	  assets	  is	  an	  ongoing	  and	  dynamic	  
process.	  Organizations	  can	  actively	  scan	  on	  a	  regular	  basis,	  sending	  a	  variety	  of	  
different	  packet	  types	  to	  identify	  devices	  connected	  to	  the	  network.	  Before	  such	  
scanning	  can	  take	  place,	  organizations	  should	  verify	  that	  they	  have	  adequate	  bandwidth	  
for	  such	  periodic	  scans	  by	  consulting	  load	  history	  and	  capacities	  for	  their	  networks.	  In	  

CSC	  1	  Procedures	  and	  Tools	  

9	  

	  
conducting	  inventory	  scans,	  scanning	  tools	  could	  send	  traditional	  ping	  packets	  (ICMP	  
Echo	  Request)	  looking	  for	  ping	  responses	  to	  identify	  a	  system	  at	  a	  given	  IP	  address.	  
Because	  some	  systems	  block	  inbound	  ping	  packets,	  in	  addition	  to	  traditional	  pings,	  
scanners	  can	  also	  identify	  devices	  on	  the	  network	  using	  transmission	  control	  protocol	  
(TCP)	  synchronize	  (SYN)	  or	  acknowledge	  (ACK)	  packets.	  Once	  they	  have	  identified	  IP	  
addresses	  of	  devices	  on	  the	  network,	  some	  scanners	  provide	  robust	  fingerprinting	  
features	  to	  determine	  the	  operating	  system	  type	  of	  the	  discovered	  machine.	  
In	  addition	  to	  active	  scanning	  tools	  that	  sweep	  the	  network,	  other	  asset	  identification	  
tools	  passively	  listen	  on	  network	  interfaces	  looking	  for	  devices	  to	  announce	  their	  
presence	  by	  sending	  traffic.	  Such	  passive	  tools	  can	  be	  connected	  to	  switch	  span	  ports	  at	  
critical	  places	  in	  the	  network	  to	  view	  all	  data	  flowing	  through	  such	  switches,	  
maximizing	  the	  chance	  of	  identifying	  systems	  communicating	  through	  those	  switches.	  
Many	  organizations	  also	  pull	  information	  from	  network	  assets	  such	  as	  switches	  and	  
routers	  regarding	  the	  machines	  connected	  to	  the	  network.	  Using	  securely	  authenticated	  
and	  encrypted	  network	  management	  protocols,	  tools	  can	  retrieve	  MAC	  addresses	  and	  
other	  information	  from	  network	  devices	  that	  can	  be	  reconciled	  with	  the	  organizations	  
asset	  inventory	  of	  servers,	  workstations,	  laptops,	  and	  other	  devices.	  	  Once	  MAC	  
addresses	  are	  confirmed,	  switches	  should	  implement	  802.1x	  and	  NAC	  to	  only	  allow	  
authorized	  systems	  that	  are	  properly	  configured	  to	  connect	  to	  the	  network.	  
Wireless	  devices	  (and	  wired	  laptops)	  may	  periodically	  join	  a	  network	  and	  then	  
disappear,	  making	  the	  inventory	  of	  currently	  available	  systems	  churn	  significantly.	  
Likewise,	  virtual	  machines	  can	  be	  difficult	  to	  track	  in	  asset	  inventories	  when	  they	  are	  
shut	  down	  or	  paused.	  Additionally,	  remote	  machines	  accessing	  the	  network	  using	  
virtual	  private	  network	  (VPN)	  technology	  may	  appear	  on	  the	  network	  for	  a	  time,	  and	  
then	  be	  disconnected	  from	  it.	  Whether	  physical	  or	  virtual,	  each	  machine	  using	  an	  IP	  
address	  should	  be	  included	  in	  an	  organizations	  asset	  inventory.	  
In	  order	  to	  test	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  the	  automated	  implementation	  of	  this	  control,	  
organizations	  should	  measure	  the	  following:	  
1. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  to	  detect	  new	  devices	  added	  to	  the	  organizations	  network	  
(time	  in	  minutes)?	  
2. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  the	  scanners	  to	  alert	  the	  organizations	  administrators	  
that	  an	  unauthorized	  device	  is	  on	  the	  network	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
3. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  to	  isolate/remove	  unauthorized	  devices	  from	  the	  
organizations	  network	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
4. Are	  the	  scanners	  able	  to	  identify	  the	  location,	  department,	  and	  other	  critical	  
details	  about	  the	  unauthorized	  system	  that	  is	  detected	  (yes	  or	  no)?	  

CSC	  1	  Effectiveness	  Metrics	  

	  

10	  

CSC	  1	  Automation	  Metrics	  

CSC	  1	  Effectiveness	  Test	  

	  
In	  order	  to	  automate	  the	  collection	  of	  relevant	  data	  from	  these	  systems,	  organizations	  
should	  gather	  the	  following	  information	  with	  automated	  technical	  sensors:	  
1. How	  many	  unauthorized	  devices	  are	  presently	  on	  the	  organizations	  network	  
(by	  business	  unit)?	  
2. How	  long,	  on	  average,	  does	  it	  take	  to	  remove	  unauthorized	  devices	  from	  the	  
organizations	  network	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
3. What	  is	  the	  percentage	  of	  systems	  on	  the	  organizations	  network	  that	  are	  not	  
utilizing	  Network	  Access	  Control	  (NAC)	  to	  authenticate	  to	  the	  organizations	  
network	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
4. What	  is	  the	  percentage	  of	  systems	  on	  the	  organizations	  network	  that	  are	  not	  
utilizing	  Network	  Access	  Control	  (NAC)	  with	  client	  certificates	  to	  authenticate	  to	  
the	  organizations	  network	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
To	  evaluate	  the	  implementation	  of	  Control	  1	  on	  a	  periodic	  basis,	  the	  evaluation	  team	  
will	  connect	  hardened	  test	  systems	  to	  at	  least	  10	  locations	  on	  the	  network,	  including	  a	  
selection	  of	  subnets	  associated	  with	  demilitarized	  zones	  (DMZs),	  workstations,	  and	  
servers.	  Two	  of	  the	  systems	  must	  be	  included	  in	  the	  asset	  inventory	  database,	  while	  the	  
other	  systems	  are	  not.	  The	  evaluation	  team	  must	  then	  verify	  that	  the	  systems	  generate	  
an	  alert	  or	  e-mail	  notice	  regarding	  the	  newly	  connected	  systems	  within	  24	  hours	  of	  the	  
test	  machines	  being	  connected	  to	  the	  network.	  The	  evaluation	  team	  must	  verify	  that	  the	  
system	  provides	  details	  of	  the	  location	  of	  all	  the	  test	  machines	  connected	  to	  the	  
network.	  For	  those	  test	  machines	  included	  in	  the	  asset	  inventory,	  the	  team	  must	  also	  
verify	  that	  the	  system	  provides	  information	  about	  the	  asset	  owner.	  
Organizations	  will	  find	  that	  by	  diagramming	  the	  entities	  necessary	  to	  fully	  meet	  the	  
goals	  defined	  in	  this	  control,	  it	  will	  be	  easier	  to	  identify	  how	  to	  implement	  them,	  test	  the	  
controls,	  and	  identify	  where	  potential	  failures	  in	  the	  system	  might	  occur.	  

CSC	  1	  System	  Entity	  Relationship	  Diagram	  	  

11	  

	  

A	  control	  system	  is	  a	  device	  or	  set	  of	  devices	  used	  to	  manage,	  command,	  direct,	  or	  
regulate	  the	  behavior	  of	  other	  devices	  or	  systems.	  In	  this	  case,	  we	  are	  examining	  
hardware	  devices	  on	  the	  organizations	  network.	  These	  systems	  should	  be	  able	  to	  
identify	  if	  new	  systems	  are	  introduced	  into	  the	  environment	  that	  have	  not	  been	  
authorized	  by	  enterprise	  personnel.	  The	  following	  list	  of	  the	  steps	  in	  the	  above	  diagram	  
shows	  how	  the	  entities	  work	  together	  to	  meet	  the	  business	  goal	  defined	  in	  this	  control.	  
The	  list	  also	  delineates	  each	  of	  the	  process	  steps	  in	  order	  to	  help	  identify	  potential	  
failure	  points	  in	  the	  overall	  control.	  

 

Step 1: Active device scanner scans network systems 

Step 2: Passive device scanner captures system information 

Step 3: Active scanner reports to inventory database 

Step 4: Passive scanner reports to inventory database 

Step 5: Inventory database stored offline 

Step 6: Inventory database initiates alert system 

Step 7: Alert system notifies security defenders 

Step 8: Security defenders monitor and secure inventory database 

Step 9: Security defenders update secure inventory database 

12	  

	  

Step 10: Network access control continuously monitors network 

Step 11: Network access control checks and provides updates to the asset inventory 
database. 

	  

13	  

	  

CSC	  2:	  	  Inventory	  of	  Authorized	  and	  Unauthorized	  Software	  

Actively	  manage	  (inventory,	  track,	  and	  correct)	  all	  software	  on	  the	  network	  so	  
that	  only	  authorized	  software	  is	  installed	  and	  can	  execute,	  and	  that	  
unauthorized	  and	  unmanaged	  software	  is	  found	  and	  prevented	  from	  installation	  
or	  execution.	  	  

Why	  Is	  This	  Control	  Critical?	  

Attackers	  continuously	  scan	  target	  organizations	  looking	  for	  vulnerable	  versions	  of	  
software	  that	  can	  be	  remotely	  exploited.	  Some	  attackers	  also	  distribute	  hostile	  web	  
pages,	  document	  files,	  media	  files,	  and	  other	  content	  via	  their	  own	  web	  pages	  or	  
otherwise	  trustworthy	  third-party	  sites.	  When	  unsuspecting	  victims	  access	  this	  content	  
with	  a	  vulnerable	  browser	  or	  other	  client-side	  program,	  attackers	  compromise	  their	  
machines,	  often	  installing	  backdoor	  programs	  and	  bots	  that	  give	  the	  attacker	  long-term	  
control	  of	  the	  system.	  Some	  sophisticated	  attackers	  may	  use	  zero-day	  exploits,	  which	  
take	  advantage	  of	  previously	  unknown	  vulnerabilities	  for	  which	  no	  patch	  has	  yet	  been	  
released	  by	  the	  software	  vendor.	  Without	  proper	  knowledge	  or	  control	  of	  the	  software	  
deployed	  in	  an	  organization,	  defenders	  cannot	  properly	  secure	  their	  assets.	  
Poorly	  controlled	  machines	  are	  more	  likely	  to	  be	  either	  running	  software	  that	  is	  
unneeded	  for	  business	  purposes,	  introducing	  potential	  security	  flaws,	  or	  running	  
malware	  introduced	  by	  an	  attacker	  after	  a	  system	  is	  compromised.	  Once	  a	  single	  
machine	  has	  been	  exploited,	  attackers	  often	  use	  it	  as	  a	  staging	  point	  for	  collecting	  
sensitive	  information	  from	  the	  compromised	  system	  and	  from	  other	  systems	  connected	  
to	  it.	  In	  addition,	  compromised	  machines	  are	  used	  as	  a	  launching	  point	  for	  movement	  
throughout	  the	  network	  and	  partnering	  networks.	  In	  this	  way,	  attackers	  may	  quickly	  
turn	  one	  compromised	  machine	  into	  many.	  Organizations	  that	  do	  not	  have	  complete	  
software	  inventories	  are	  unable	  to	  find	  systems	  running	  vulnerable	  or	  malicious	  
software	  to	  mitigate	  problems	  or	  root	  out	  attackers.	  
Managed	  control	  of	  all	  software	  also	  plays	  a	  critical	  role	  in	  planning	  and	  executing	  
system	  backup	  and	  recovery.	  	  
ID	  #	  
Category	  
Description	  
CSC	  2-1	  
Deploy	  application	  whitelisting	  technology	  that	  allows	  
Quick	  win	  (One	  
systems	  to	  run	  software	  only	  if	  it	  is	  included	  on	  the	  whitelist	  
Five)	  	  
and	  prevents	  execution	  of	  all	  other	  software	  on	  the	  system.	  
The	  whitelist	  may	  be	  very	  extensive	  (as	  is	  available	  from	  
commercial	  whitelist	  vendors),	  so	  that	  users	  are	  not	  
inconvenienced	  when	  using	  common	  software.	  Or,	  for	  some	  
special-purpose	  systems	  (which	  require	  only	  a	  small	  number	  

How	  to	  Implement	  This	  Control	  

of	  the	  First	  

14	  

	  

CSC	  2-2	  
CSC	  2-3	  

CSC	  2-4	  
CSC	  2-5	  
CSC	  2-6	  
CSC	  2-7	  
CSC	  2-8	  
CSC	  2-9	  

of	  programs	  to	  achieve	  their	  needed	  business	  functionality),	  
the	  whitelist	  may	  be	  quite	  narrow.	  	  When	  protecting	  systems	  
with	  customized	  software	  that	  may	  be	  seen	  as	  difficult	  to	  
whitelist,	  use	  item	  8	  below	  (isolating	  the	  custom	  software	  in	  a	  
virtual	  operating	  system	  that	  does	  not	  retain	  infections.).	  	  
Devise	  a	  list	  of	  authorized	  software	  and	  version	  that	  is	  
required	  in	  the	  enterprise	  for	  each	  type	  of	  system,	  including	  
servers,	  workstations,	  and	  laptops	  of	  various	  kinds	  and	  uses.	  	  
This	  list	  should	  be	  monitored	  by	  file	  integrity	  checking	  tools	  to	  
validate	  that	  the	  authorized	  software	  has	  not	  been	  modified.	  	  
Perform	  regular	  scanning	  for	  unauthorized	  software	  and	  
generate	  alerts	  when	  it	  is	  discovered	  on	  a	  system.	  	  A	  strict	  
change-control	  process	  should	  also	  be	  implemented	  to	  control	  
any	  changes	  or	  installation	  of	  software	  to	  any	  systems	  on	  the	  
network.	  This	  includes	  alerting	  when	  unrecognized	  binaries	  
(executable	  files,	  DLLs	  and	  other	  libraries,	  etc.)	  are	  found	  on	  a	  
system,	  even	  inside	  of	  compressed	  archives.	  	  This	  includes	  
checking	  for	  unrecognized	  or	  altered	  versions	  of	  software	  by	  
comparing	  file	  hash	  values	  (attackers	  often	  utilize	  altered	  
versions	  of	  known	  software	  to	  perpetrate	  attacks,	  and	  file	  
hash	  comparisons	  will	  reveal	  the	  compromised	  software	  
components).	  
Deploy	  software	  inventory	  tools	  throughout	  the	  organization	  
covering	  each	  of	  the	  operating	  system	  types	  in	  use,	  including	  
servers,	  workstations,	  and	  laptops.	  The	  software	  inventory	  
system	  should	  track	  the	  version	  of	  the	  underlying	  operating	  
system	  as	  well	  as	  the	  applications	  installed	  on	  it.	  Furthermore,	  
the	  tool	  should	  record	  not	  only	  the	  type	  of	  software	  installed	  
on	  each	  system,	  but	  also	  its	  version	  number	  and	  patch	  level.	  	  
The	  software	  inventory	  systems	  must	  be	  integrated	  with	  the	  
hardware	  asset	  inventory	  so	  that	  all	  devices	  and	  associated	  
software	  are	  tracked	  from	  a	  single	  location.	  
Dangerous	  file	  types	  (e.g.,	  .exe,	  .zip,	  .msi)	  should	  be	  closely	  
monitored	  and/or	  blocked.	  
Virtual	  machines	  and/or	  air-gapped	  systems	  should	  be	  used	  
to	  isolate	  and	  run	  applications	  that	  are	  required	  for	  business	  
operations	  but	  based	  on	  higher	  risk	  should	  not	  be	  installed	  
within	  a	  networked	  environment.	  	  	  
Configure	  client	  workstations	  with	  non-persistent,	  virtualized	  
operating	  environments	  that	  can	  be	  quickly	  and	  easily	  
restored	  to	  a	  trusted	  snapshot	  on	  a	  periodic	  basis.	  
Deploy	  software	  that	  only	  provides	  signed	  software	  ID	  tags.	  	  A	  
software	  identification	  tag	  is	  an	  XML	  file	  that	  is	  installed	  
alongside	  software	  and	  uniquely	  identifies	  the	  software,	  
providing	  data	  for	  software	  inventory	  and	  asset	  management.	  

15	  

Quick	  win	  
Quick	  win	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  
Visibility/	  
Attribution	  
Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  
Advanced	  
Advanced	  
Advanced	  

CSC	  2	  Procedures	  and	  Tools	  

	  
	  
Whitelisting	  can	  be	  implemented	  using	  commercial	  whitelisting	  tools	  or	  application	  
execution	  tools	  that	  come	  with	  anti-virus	  suites	  and	  with	  Windows.	  Commercial	  
software	  and	  asset	  inventory	  tools	  are	  widely	  available	  and	  in	  use	  in	  many	  enterprises	  
today.	  The	  best	  of	  these	  tools	  provide	  an	  inventory	  check	  of	  hundreds	  of	  common	  
applications	  used	  in	  enterprises,	  pulling	  information	  about	  the	  patch	  level	  of	  each	  
installed	  program	  to	  ensure	  that	  it	  is	  the	  latest	  version	  and	  leveraging	  standardized	  
application	  names,	  such	  as	  those	  found	  in	  the	  common	  platform	  enumeration	  
specification.	  
Features	  that	  implement	  whitelists	  of	  programs	  allowed	  to	  run	  are	  included	  in	  many	  
modern	  endpoint	  security	  suites.	  Moreover,	  commercial	  solutions	  are	  increasingly	  
bundling	  together	  anti-virus,	  anti-spyware,	  personal	  firewall,	  and	  host-based	  intrusion	  
detection	  systems	  (IDS)	  and	  intrusion	  prevention	  systems	  (IPS),	  along	  with	  application	  
white	  and	  black	  listing.	  In	  particular,	  most	  endpoint	  security	  solutions	  can	  look	  at	  the	  
name,	  file	  system	  location,	  and/or	  cryptographic	  hash	  of	  a	  given	  executable	  to	  
determine	  whether	  the	  application	  should	  be	  allowed	  to	  run	  on	  the	  protected	  machine.	  
The	  most	  effective	  of	  these	  tools	  offer	  custom	  whitelists	  based	  on	  executable	  path,	  hash,	  
or	  regular	  expression	  matching.	  Some	  even	  include	  a	  gray	  list	  function	  that	  allows	  
administrators	  to	  define	  rules	  for	  execution	  of	  specific	  programs	  only	  by	  certain	  users	  
and	  at	  certain	  times	  of	  day.	  
In	  order	  to	  test	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  the	  automated	  implementation	  of	  this	  control,	  
organizations	  should	  measure	  the	  following:	  
1. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  to	  detect	  new	  software	  installed	  on	  systems	  in	  the	  
organization	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
2. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  the	  scanners	  to	  alert	  the	  organizations	  administrators	  
that	  an	  unauthorized	  software	  application	  is	  on	  a	  system	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
3. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  to	  alert	  that	  a	  new	  software	  application	  has	  been	  
discovered	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
4. Are	  the	  scanners	  able	  to	  identify	  the	  location,	  department,	  and	  other	  critical	  
details	  about	  the	  unauthorized	  software	  that	  is	  detected	  (yes	  or	  no)?	  
In	  order	  to	  automate	  the	  collection	  of	  relevant	  data	  from	  these	  systems,	  organizations	  
should	  gather	  the	  following	  information	  with	  automated	  technical	  sensors:	  

CSC	  2	  Effectiveness	  Metrics	  

CSC	  2	  Automation	  Metrics	  

16	  

	  

CSC	  2	  Effectiveness	  Test	  

1. How	  many	  unauthorized	  software	  applications	  are	  presently	  located	  on	  business	  
systems	  within	  the	  organization	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
2. How	  long,	  on	  average,	  does	  it	  take	  to	  remove	  unauthorized	  applications	  from	  
business	  systems	  within	  the	  organization	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
3. What	  is	  the	  percentage	  of	  the	  organizations	  business	  systems	  that	  are	  not	  
running	  software	  whitelisting	  software	  that	  blocks	  unauthorized	  software	  
applications	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
4. How	  many	  software	  applications	  have	  been	  recently	  blocked	  from	  executing	  by	  
the	  organizations	  software	  whitelisting	  software	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
To	  evaluate	  the	  implementation	  of	  Control	  2	  on	  a	  periodic	  basis,	  the	  evaluation	  team	  
must	  move	  a	  benign	  software	  test	  program	  that	  is	  not	  included	  in	  the	  authorized	  
software	  list	  to	  10	  systems	  on	  the	  network.	  Two	  of	  the	  systems	  must	  be	  included	  in	  the	  
asset	  inventory	  database,	  while	  the	  other	  systems	  do	  not	  need	  to	  be	  included.	  The	  
evaluation	  team	  must	  then	  verify	  that	  the	  systems	  generate	  an	  alert	  or	  e-mail	  notice	  
regarding	  the	  new	  software	  within	  24	  hours.	  The	  team	  must	  also	  verify	  that	  the	  alert	  or	  
e-mail	  is	  received	  within	  one	  additional	  hour	  indicating	  that	  the	  software	  has	  been	  
blocked	  or	  quarantined.	  The	  evaluation	  team	  must	  verify	  that	  the	  system	  provides	  
details	  of	  the	  location	  of	  each	  machine	  with	  this	  new	  test	  software,	  including	  
information	  about	  the	  asset	  owner.	  The	  evaluation	  team	  must	  then	  verify	  that	  the	  
software	  is	  blocked	  by	  attempting	  to	  execute	  it	  and	  verifying	  that	  the	  software	  is	  not	  
allowed	  to	  run.	  
On	  systems	  where	  blocking	  is	  not	  allowed	  or	  blocking	  functionality	  is	  not	  available,	  the	  
team	  must	  verify	  that	  the	  execution	  of	  unauthorized	  software	  is	  detected	  and	  results	  in	  
a	  notification	  to	  alert	  the	  security	  team	  that	  unauthorized	  software	  is	  being	  used.	  
Organizations	  will	  find	  that	  by	  diagramming	  the	  entities	  necessary	  to	  fully	  meet	  the	  
goals	  defined	  in	  this	  control,	  it	  will	  be	  easier	  to	  identify	  how	  to	  implement	  them,	  test	  the	  
controls,	  and	  identify	  where	  potential	  failures	  in	  the	  system	  might	  occur.	  

CSC	  2	  System	  Entity	  Relationship	  Diagram	  

17	  

	  

A	  control	  system	  is	  a	  device	  or	  set	  of	  devices	  to	  manage,	  command,	  direct,	  or	  regulate	  
the	  behavior	  of	  other	  devices	  or	  systems.	  In	  this	  case,	  we	  are	  examining	  software	  
installed	  on	  the	  organizations	  network	  systems.	  These	  systems	  should	  be	  able	  to	  
identify	  if	  new	  software	  is	  introduced	  to	  the	  environment	  that	  has	  not	  been	  authorized	  
by	  enterprise	  personnel.	  The	  following	  list	  of	  the	  steps	  in	  the	  above	  diagram	  shows	  how	  
the	  entities	  work	  together	  to	  meet	  the	  business	  goal	  defined	  in	  this	  control.	  The	  list	  also	  
delineates	  each	  of	  the	  process	  steps	  in	  order	  to	  help	  identify	  potential	  failure	  points	  in	  
the	  overall	  control.	  

 

Step 1: Active device scanner 

Step 2: Active scanner reports to inventory database 

Step 3: Inventory database compares to inventory baseline 

Step 4: Inventory database initiates alerting system 

Step 5: Alert system notifies security defenders 

Step 6: Security defenders monitor and secure inventory database 

Step 7: Security defenders update software inventory database 

Step 8: Whitelisting tool continuously monitors all systems on the network 

Step 9: Whitelisting checks and makes updates to the software inventory database.	  

18	  

	  

CSC	  3:	  	  Secure	  Configurations	  for	  Hardware	  and	  Software	  on	  Mobile	  
Devices,	  Laptops,	  Workstations,	  and	  Servers	  

Establish,	  implement,	  and	  actively	  manage	  (track,	  report	  on,	  correct)	  the	  
security	  configuration	  of	  laptops,	  servers,	  and	  workstations	  using	  a	  rigorous	  
configuration	  management	  and	  change	  control	  process	  in	  order	  to	  prevent	  
attackers	  from	  exploiting	  vulnerable	  services	  and	  settings.	  	  

Why	  Is	  This	  Control	  Critical?	  

As	  delivered	  by	  manufacturers	  and	  resellers,	  the	  default	  configurations	  for	  operating	  
systems	  and	  applications	  are	  normally	  geared	  to	  ease-of-deployment	  and	  ease-of-use	  -	  
not	  security.	  Basic	  controls,	  open	  services	  and	  ports,	  default	  accounts	  or	  passwords,	  
older	  (vulnerable)	  protocols,	  pre-installation	  of	  unneeded	  software;	  all	  can	  be	  
exploitable	  in	  their	  default	  state.	  	  	  
Developing	  configuration	  settings	  with	  good	  security	  properties	  is	  a	  complex	  task	  
beyond	  the	  ability	  of	  individual	  users,	  requiring	  analysis	  of	  potentially	  hundreds	  or	  
thousands	  of	  options	  in	  order	  to	  make	  good	  choices.	  Even	  if	  a	  strong	  initial	  
configuration	  is	  developed	  and	  installed,	  it	  must	  be	  continually	  managed	  to	  avoid	  
security	  decay	  as	  software	  is	  updated	  or	  patched,	  new	  security	  vulnerabilities	  are	  
reported,	  and	  configurations	  are	  tweaked	  to	  allow	  the	  installation	  of	  new	  software	  or	  
support	  new	  operational	  requirements.	  If	  not,	  attackers	  will	  find	  opportunities	  to	  
exploit	  both	  network-accessible	  services	  and	  client	  software.	  	  
Establish	  and	  ensure	  the	  use	  of	  standard	  secure	  
CSC	  3-1	  
configurations	  of	  your	  operating	  systems.	  Standardized	  
images	  should	  represent	  hardened	  versions	  of	  the	  underlying	  
operating	  system	  and	  the	  applications	  installed	  on	  the	  system.	  
Hardening	  typically	  includes:	  removal	  of	  unnecessary	  
accounts	  (including	  service	  accounts),	  disabling	  or	  removal	  of	  
unnecessary	  services,	  configuring	  non-executable	  stacks	  and	  
heaps,	  applying	  patches,	  closing	  open	  and	  unused	  network	  
ports,	  implementing	  intrusion	  detection	  systems	  and/or	  
intrusion	  prevention	  systems,	  and	  use	  of	  host-based	  firewalls.	  
These	  images	  should	  be	  validated	  and	  refreshed	  on	  a	  regular	  
basis	  to	  update	  their	  security	  configuration	  in	  light	  of	  recent	  
vulnerabilities	  and	  attack	  vectors.	  	  
Implement	  automated	  patching	  tools	  and	  processes	  for	  both	  
applications	  and	  for	  operating	  system	  software.	  When	  
outdated	  systems	  can	  no	  longer	  be	  patched,	  update	  to	  the	  

CSC	  3-2	  

How	  to	  Implement	  This	  Control	  

ID	  #	  

Description	  

Category	  
Quick	  win	  (One	  
of	  the	  First	  

Five)	  	  	  

Quick	  win	  (One	  
of	  the	  First	  
Five)	  

19	  

	  
CSC	  3-3	  
CSC	  3-4	  

CSC	  3-5	  

CSC	  3-6	  
CSC	  3-7	  
CSC	  3-8	  

latest	  version	  of	  application	  software.	  	  Remove	  outdated,	  
older,	  and	  unused	  software	  from	  the	  system.	  	  
Limit	  administrative	  privileges	  to	  very	  few	  users	  who	  have	  
both	  the	  knowledge	  necessary	  to	  administer	  the	  operating	  
system	  and	  a	  business	  need	  to	  modify	  the	  configuration	  of	  the	  
underlying	  operating	  system.	  This	  will	  help	  prevent	  
installation	  of	  unauthorized	  software	  and	  other	  abuses	  of	  
administrator	  privileges.	  	  	  
Follow	  strict	  configuration	  management,	  building	  a	  secure	  
image	  that	  is	  used	  to	  build	  all	  new	  systems	  that	  are	  deployed	  
in	  the	  enterprise.	  	  Any	  existing	  system	  that	  becomes	  
compromised	  should	  be	  re-imaged	  with	  the	  secure	  build.	  
Regular	  updates	  or	  exceptions	  to	  this	  image	  should	  be	  
integrated	  into	  the	  organizations	  change	  management	  
processes.	  	  Images	  should	  be	  created	  for	  workstations,	  
servers,	  and	  other	  system	  types	  used	  by	  the	  organization.	  
Store	  the	  master	  images	  on	  securely	  configured	  servers,	  
validated	  with	  integrity	  checking	  tools	  capable	  of	  continuous	  
inspection,	  and	  change	  management	  to	  ensure	  that	  only	  
authorized	  changes	  to	  the	  images	  are	  possible.	  Alternatively,	  
these	  master	  images	  can	  be	  stored	  in	  offline	  machines,	  air-
gapped	  from	  the	  production	  network,	  with	  images	  copied	  via	  
secure	  media	  to	  move	  them	  between	  the	  image	  storage	  
servers	  and	  the	  production	  network.	  	  
Negotiate	  contracts	  to	  buy	  systems	  configured	  securely	  out	  of	  
the	  box	  using	  standardized	  images,	  which	  should	  be	  devised	  
to	  avoid	  extraneous	  software	  that	  would	  increase	  their	  attack	  
surface	  and	  susceptibility	  to	  vulnerabilities.	  	  
Do	  all	  remote	  administration	  of	  servers,	  workstation,	  network	  
devices,	  and	  similar	  equipment	  over	  secure	  channels.	  
Protocols	  such	  as	  telnet,	  VNC,	  RDP,	  or	  others	  that	  do	  not	  
actively	  support	  strong	  encryption	  should	  only	  be	  used	  if	  they	  
are	  performed	  over	  a	  secondary	  encryption	  channel,	  such	  as	  
SSL	  or	  IPSEC.	  
Utilize	  file	  integrity	  checking	  tools	  to	  ensure	  that	  critical	  
system	  files	  (including	  sensitive	  system	  and	  application	  
executables,	  libraries,	  and	  configurations)	  have	  not	  been	  
altered.	  All	  alterations	  to	  such	  files	  should	  be	  automatically	  
reported	  	  security	  personnel.	  The	  reporting	  system	  should	  
have	  the	  ability	  to	  account	  for	  routine	  and	  expected	  changes,	  
highlighting	  unusual	  or	  unexpected	  alterations.	  	  
For	  investigative	  support,	  the	  reporting	  system	  should	  be	  able	  
to	  show	  the	  history	  of	  configuration	  changes	  over	  time	  and	  
identify	  who	  made	  the	  change	  (including	  the	  original	  logged-

20	  

Quick	  win	  (One	  
of	  the	  First	  
Five)	  

Quick	  win	  

Quick	  win	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

Configuration/
Hygiene	  

Configuration/
Hygiene	  

	  

 

CSC	  3-9	  

in	  account	  in	  the	  event	  of	  a	  user	  ID	  switch,	  such	  as	  with	  the	  su	  
or	  sudo	  command).	  These	  integrity	  checks	  should	  also	  
identify	  suspicious	  system	  alterations	  such	  as	  owner	  and	  
permissions	  changes	  to	  files	  or	  directories;	  the	  use	  of	  
alternate	  data	  streams	  which	  could	  be	  used	  to	  hide	  malicious	  
activities;	  as	  well	  as	  detecting	  the	  introduction	  of	  extra	  files	  
into	  key	  system	  areas	  (which	  could	  indicate	  malicious	  
payloads	  left	  by	  attackers	  or	  additional	  files	  inappropriately	  
added	  during	  batch	  distribution	  processes).	  
Implement	  and	  test	  an	  automated	  configuration	  monitoring	  
system	  that	  measures	  all	  secure	  configuration	  elements	  that	  
can	  be	  measured	  through	  remote	  testing	  using	  features	  such	  
as	  those	  included	  with	  tools	  compliant	  with	  Security	  Content	  
Automation	  Protocol	  (SCAP),	  and	  alerts	  when	  unauthorized	  
changes	  occur.	  This	  includes	  detecting	  new	  listening	  ports,	  
new	  administrative	  users,	  changes	  to	  group	  and	  local	  policy	  
objects,	  (where	  applicable),	  and	  new	  services	  running	  on	  a	  
system.	  
CSC	  3-10	   Deploy	  system	  configuration	  management	  tools,	  such	  as	  
Active	  Directory	  Group	  Policy	  Objects	  for	  Microsoft	  Windows	  
systems	  or	  Puppet	  for	  UNIX	  systems	  that	  will	  automatically	  
enforce	  and	  redeploy	  configuration	  settings	  to	  systems	  at	  
regularly	  scheduled	  intervals.	  They	  should	  be	  capable	  of	  
triggering	  redeployment	  of	  configuration	  settings	  on	  a	  
scheduled,	  manual,	  or	  event-driven	  basis.	  

Advanced	  

Configuration/
Hygiene	  

CSC	  3	  Procedures	  and	  Tools	  

Rather	  than	  start	  from	  scratch	  developing	  a	  security	  baseline	  for	  each	  software	  system,	  
organizations	  should	  start	  from	  publicly	  developed,	  vetted,	  and	  supported	  security	  
benchmarks,	  security	  guides,	  or	  checklists.	  Excellent	  resources	  include:	  	  
  The	  Center	  for	  Internet	  Security	  Benchmarks	  Program	  (www.cisecurity.org)	  
  The	  NIST	  National	  Checklist	  Program	  (checklists.nist.gov)	  
	  Organizations	  should	  augment	  or	  adjust	  these	  baselines	  to	  satisfy	  local	  policies	  and	  
requirements,	  but	  deviations	  and	  rationale	  should	  be	  documented	  to	  facilitate	  later	  
reviews	  or	  audits.	  
For	  a	  complex	  enterprise,	  the	  establishment	  of	  a	  single	  security	  baseline	  configuration	  
(for	  example,	  a	  single	  installation	  image	  for	  all	  workstations	  across	  the	  entire	  
enterprise)	  is	  sometimes	  not	  practical	  or	  deemed	  unacceptable.	  It	  is	  likely	  that	  you	  will	  
need	  to	  support	  different	  standardized	  images,	  based	  on	  the	  proper	  hardening	  to	  

21	  

CSC	  3	  Effectiveness	  Metrics	  

	  
address	  risks	  and	  needed	  functionality	  of	  the	  intended	  deployment	  (example,	  a	  web	  
server	  in	  the	  DMZ	  vs.	  an	  email	  or	  other	  application	  server	  in	  the	  internal	  network).	  The	  
number	  of	  variations	  should	  be	  kept	  to	  a	  minimum	  in	  order	  to	  better	  understand	  and	  
manage	  the	  security	  properties	  of	  each,	  but	  organizations	  then	  must	  be	  prepared	  to	  
manage	  multiple	  baselines.	  	  
Commercial	  and/or	  free	  configuration	  management	  tools	  can	  then	  be	  employed	  to	  
measure	  the	  settings	  of	  operating	  systems	  and	  applications	  of	  managed	  machines	  to	  
look	  for	  deviations	  from	  the	  standard	  image	  configurations.	  Typical	  configuration	  
management	  tools	  use	  some	  combination	  of:	  an	  agent	  installed	  on	  each	  managed	  
system,	  or	  agentless	  inspection	  of	  systems	  by	  remotely	  logging	  in	  to	  each	  managed	  
machine	  using	  administrator	  credentials.	  	  Additionally,	  a	  hybrid	  approach	  is	  sometimes	  
used	  whereby	  a	  remote	  session	  is	  initiated,	  a	  temporary	  or	  dynamic	  agent	  is	  deployed	  
on	  the	  target	  system	  for	  the	  scan,	  and	  then	  the	  agent	  is	  removed.	  
In	  order	  to	  test	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  the	  automated	  implementation	  of	  this	  control,	  
organizations	  should	  measure	  the	  following:	  
1. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  to	  detect	  configuration	  changes	  to	  a	  network	  system	  (time	  
in	  minutes)?	  
2. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  the	  scanners	  to	  alert	  the	  organizations	  administrators	  
that	  an	  unauthorized	  configuration	  change	  has	  occurred	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
3. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  to	  block/quarantine	  unauthorized	  changes	  on	  network	  
systems	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
4. Are	  the	  scanners	  able	  to	  identify	  the	  location,	  department,	  and	  other	  critical	  
details	  about	  the	  systems	  where	  unauthorized	  changes	  occurred	  (yes	  or	  no)?	  
5. Are	  the	  scanners	  able	  to	  trigger	  different	  notifications	  /	  workflows	  based	  on	  the	  
severity	  of	  the	  configuration	  variance	  detected?	  
For	  all	  of	  the	  above,	  consider	  that	  system	  priority,	  service	  level	  commitments,	  system	  
role,	  and	  other	  factors	  may	  drive	  varying	  objectives	  for	  scan	  frequency	  and	  alert	  time	  
frames	  on	  different	  systems.	  	  Ensure	  that	  the	  rationale	  for	  these	  classifications	  is	  clear,	  
consistent,	  documented,	  and	  consistently	  applied.	  	  Verify	  that	  target	  detection	  and	  
notification	  results	  are	  aligned	  with	  service	  level	  commitments	  and	  policies	  for	  each	  
class	  of	  system.	  
In	  order	  to	  automate	  the	  collection	  of	  relevant	  data	  from	  these	  systems,	  the	  
organization	  should	  gather	  the	  following	  information	  with	  automated	  technical	  
sensors:	  

CSC	  3	  Automation	  Metrics	  

22	  

	  

CSC	  3	  Effectiveness	  Test	  

1. What	  is	  the	  percentage	  of	  business	  systems	  that	  are	  not	  currently	  configured	  
with	  a	  security	  configuration	  that	  matches	  the	  organizations	  approved	  
configuration	  standard	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
2. What	  is	  the	  percentage	  of	  business	  systems	  whose	  security	  configuration	  is	  not	  
enforced	  by	  the	  organizations	  technical	  configuration	  management	  applications	  
(by	  business	  unit)?	  	  
3. What	  is	  the	  percentage	  of	  business	  systems	  that	  are	  not	  up	  to	  date	  with	  the	  latest	  
available	  operating	  system	  software	  security	  patches	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
4. What	  is	  the	  percentage	  of	  business	  systems	  that	  are	  not	  up	  to	  date	  with	  the	  latest	  
available	  business	  software	  application	  security	  patches	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
5. What	  is	  the	  percentage	  of	  business	  systems	  not	  protected	  by	  file	  integrity	  
assessment	  software	  applications	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
6. What	  is	  the	  percentage	  of	  unauthorized	  or	  undocumented	  changes	  with	  security	  
impact	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
To	  evaluate	  the	  implementation	  of	  Control	  3	  on	  a	  periodic	  basis,	  an	  evaluation	  team	  
must	  move	  a	  benign	  test	  system	  that	  does	  not	  contain	  the	  official	  hardened	  image,	  but	  
that	  does	  contain	  additional	  services,	  ports,	  and	  configuration	  file	  changes,	  onto	  the	  
network.	  This	  must	  be	  performed	  on	  10	  different	  random	  segments	  using	  either	  real	  or	  
virtual	  systems.	  The	  evaluation	  team	  must	  then	  verify	  that	  the	  systems	  generate	  an	  
alert	  regarding	  the	  changes	  to	  the	  software	  within	  the	  target	  service	  window,	  or	  within	  
24	  hours	  	  whichever	  is	  less.	  It	  is	  important	  that	  the	  evaluation	  team	  verify	  that	  all	  
unauthorized	  changes	  have	  been	  detected.	  The	  team	  must	  also	  verify	  that	  the	  alert	  or	  e-
mail	  is	  received	  within	  one	  additional	  hour	  indicating	  that	  the	  software	  has	  been	  
blocked	  or	  quarantined.	  The	  evaluation	  team	  must	  verify	  that	  the	  system	  provides	  
details	  of	  the	  location	  of	  each	  machine	  with	  the	  unauthorized	  changes,	  including	  
information	  about	  the	  asset	  owner.	  
The	  evaluation	  team	  must	  also	  introduce	  undocumented	  /	  out-of-band	  configuration	  
settings	  and	  binaries	  using	  real	  or	  virtual	  systems	  on	  10	  random	  segments.	  	  The	  test	  
should	  include	  making	  a	  non-persistent	  change,	  in	  which	  a	  change	  is	  introduced	  to	  the	  
primary	  program	  location	  (/bin,	  Program	  Files,	  etc.),	  left	  in	  place	  for	  30-60	  minutes,	  
then	  reverted	  to	  the	  original	  configuration.	  	  
The	  evaluation	  team	  must	  verify	  that	  all	  configuration	  changes	  and	  binaries	  are	  
detected,	  and	  that	  there	  is	  a	  record	  of	  the	  non-persistent	  changes	  mentioned	  above.	  	  
The	  detection	  data	  should	  include	  the	  nature	  of	  the	  change	  made	  (addition,	  removal,	  
alteration,	  owner,	  permissions,	  contents,	  etc.),	  as	  well	  as	  the	  user	  account	  that	  made	  the	  
change.	  
	  

23	  

	  
The	  evaluation	  team	  must	  also	  verify	  that	  unauthorized	  software	  is	  blocked	  by	  
attempting	  to	  execute	  it	  and	  verifying	  that	  it	  is	  not	  allowed	  to	  run.	  On	  systems	  where	  
blocking	  is	  not	  allowed	  or	  blocking	  functionality	  is	  not	  available,	  the	  team	  must	  verify	  
that	  the	  execution	  of	  unauthorized	  software	  is	  detected	  and	  results	  in	  a	  notification	  to	  
alert	  the	  security	  team	  that	  unauthorized	  software	  is	  being	  used.	  
In	  addition	  to	  these	  tests,	  the	  following	  tests	  must	  be	  performed:	  
1. File	  integrity	  checking	  tools	  must	  be	  run	  on	  a	  regular	  basis.	  Any	  changes	  to	  
critical	  operating	  system,	  services,	  and	  configuration	  files	  must	  be	  checked	  on	  an	  
hourly	  basis.	  Any	  changes	  must	  be	  detected	  and	  either	  blocked	  or	  trigger	  an	  
alert	  that	  follows	  the	  above	  notification	  process.	  	  
	  2. Detection	  software	  must	  detect	  the	  disabling	  of	  system	  logging,	  as	  well	  as	  the	  
truncation,	  modification	  or	  deletion	  of	  log	  files.	  	  Note	  that	  growth	  of	  logs	  should	  
not	  trigger	  notifications,	  but	  suspicious	  changes	  associated	  with	  malicious	  
activities	  should;	  examples	  include	  deletion	  or	  truncation	  of	  logs,	  modification	  of	  
past	  log	  events,	  owner	  or	  permission	  changes,	  etc.	  	  Any	  inappropriate	  changes	  to	  
logs	  must	  trigger	  an	  alert	  that	  follows	  the	  above	  notification	  process.	  
3. System	  scanning	  tools	  that	  check	  for	  software	  version,	  patch	  levels,	  and	  
configuration	  files	  must	  be	  run	  on	  a	  daily	  basis.	  Any	  changes	  must	  be	  detected	  
and	  either	  blocked	  or	  trigger	  an	  alert	  that	  follows	  the	  above	  notification	  process.	  	  

CSC	  3	  System	  Entity	  Relationship	  Diagram	  

Organizations will find that by diagramming the entities necessary to fully meet the goals 
defined in this control, it will be easier to identify how to implement them, test the controls, 
and identify where potential failures in the system might occur.  As with any configurations, 
all changes must be approved and managed by a change control process. 

24	  

	  

 

A control system is a device or set of devices to manage, command, direct, or regulate the 
behavior of other devices or systems. In this case, we are examining the devices, software, 
and entities used to manage and implement consistent configuration settings to workstations, 
laptops, and servers on the network.  The following list of the steps in the above diagram 
shows how the entities work together to meet the business goal defined in this control. The 
list also delineates each of the process steps in order to help identify potential failure points 
in the overall control. 

 Step 1: Secured system images applied to computer systems 

Step 2: Secured system images stored in a secure manner 

Step 3: Configuration management system validates and checks system images 

Step 4: Configuration policy enforcement system actively scans production systems for 

misconfigurations or deviations from baselines 

Step 5: File integrity assessment systems monitor critical system binaries and data sets 

Step 6: Whitelisting tool monitors systems configurations and software 

25	  

	  

Step 7: SCAP configuration scanner validates configurations 

Step 8: File integrity assessment system sends deviations to alerting system 

Step 9: Whitelisting tool sends deviations to alerting system 

Step 10: SCAP configuration scanner sends deviations to alerting system 

Step 11 and 12: Management reports document configuration status. 

	  

26	  

	  

CSC	  4:	  	  Continuous	  Vulnerability	  Assessment	  and	  Remediation	  

Continuously	  acquire,	  assess,	  and	  take	  action	  on	  new	  information	  in	  order	  to	  
identify	  vulnerabilities,	  remediate,	  and	  minimize	  the	  window	  of	  opportunity	  for	  
attackers.	  

Why	  Is	  This	  Control	  Critical?	  

Cyber	  defenders	  must	  operate	  in	  a	  constant	  stream	  of	  new	  information:	  software	  
updates,	  patches,	  security	  advisories,	  threat	  bulletins,	  etc.	  Understanding	  and	  managing	  
vulnerabilities	  has	  become	  a	  continuous	  activity,	  requiring	  significant	  time,	  attention,	  
and	  resources.	  	  
Attackers	  have	  access	  to	  the	  same	  information,	  and	  can	  take	  advantage	  of	  gaps	  between	  
the	  appearance	  of	  new	  knowledge	  and	  remediation.	  For	  example,	  when	  new	  
vulnerabilities	  are	  reported	  by	  researchers,	  a	  race	  starts	  among	  all	  parties,	  including:	  
attackers	  (to	  weaponize,	  deploy	  an	  attack,	  exploit);	  vendors	  (to	  develop,	  deploy	  
patches	  or	  signatures	  and	  updates),	  and	  defenders	  (to	  assess	  risk,	  regression-test	  
patches,	  install).	  	  
Organizations	  that	  do	  not	  scan	  for	  vulnerabilities	  and	  proactively	  address	  discovered	  
flaws	  face	  a	  significant	  likelihood	  of	  having	  their	  computer	  systems	  compromised.	  	  
Defenders	  face	  particular	  challenges	  in	  scaling	  remediation	  across	  an	  entire	  enterprise,	  
and	  prioritizing	  actions	  with	  conflicting	  priorities,	  and	  sometimes-uncertain	  side	  
effects.	  	  
CSC	  4-1	  

Run	  automated	  vulnerability	  scanning	  tools	  against	  all	  
systems	  on	  the	  network	  on	  a	  weekly	  or	  more	  frequent	  basis	  
and	  deliver	  prioritized	  lists	  of	  the	  most	  critical	  vulnerabilities	  
to	  each	  responsible	  system	  administrator	  along	  with	  risk	  
scores	  that	  compare	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  system	  
administrators	  and	  departments	  in	  reducing	  risk.	  	  Use	  a	  SCAP-
validated	  vulnerability	  scanner	  that	  looks	  for	  both	  code-based	  
vulnerabilities	  (such	  as	  those	  described	  by	  Common	  
Vulnerabilities	  and	  Exposures	  entries)	  and	  configuration-
based	  vulnerabilities	  (as	  enumerated	  by	  the	  Common	  
Configuration	  Enumeration	  Project).	  	  
Correlate	  event	  logs	  with	  information	  from	  vulnerability	  scans	  
to	  fulfill	  two	  goals.	  First,	  personnel	  should	  verify	  that	  the	  
activity	  of	  the	  regular	  vulnerability	  scanning	  tools	  themselves	  
is	  logged.	  Second,	  personnel	  should	  be	  able	  to	  correlate	  attack	   Quick	  win	  

CSC	  4-2	  

How	  to	  Implement	  This	  Control	  

ID	  #	  

Description	  

Category	  
Quick	  win	  
(Supports	  the	  
First	  Five)	  

27	  

	  
CSC	  4-3	  

CSC	  4-4	  
CSC	  4-5	  
CSC	  4-6	  
CSC	  4-7	  

detection	  events	  with	  earlier	  vulnerability	  scanning	  results	  to	  
determine	  whether	  the	  given	  exploit	  was	  used	  against	  a	  target	  
known	  to	  be	  vulnerable.	  
Perform	  vulnerability	  scanning	  in	  authenticated	  mode	  either	  
with	  agents	  running	  locally	  on	  each	  end	  system	  to	  analyze	  the	  
security	  configuration	  or	  with	  remote	  scanners	  that	  are	  given	  
administrative	  rights	  on	  the	  system	  being	  tested.	  Use	  a	  
dedicated	  account	  for	  authenticated	  vulnerability	  scans,	  which	  
should	  not	  be	  used	  for	  any	  other	  administrative	  activities	  and	  
should	  be	  tied	  to	  specific	  machines	  at	  specific	  IP	  addresses.	  	  
Ensure	  that	  only	  authorized	  employees	  have	  access	  to	  the	  
vulnerability	  management	  user	  interface	  and	  that	  roles	  are	  
applied	  to	  each	  user.	  
Subscribe	  to	  vulnerability	  intelligence	  services	  in	  order	  to	  stay	  
aware	  of	  emerging	  exposures,	  and	  use	  the	  information	  gained	  
from	  this	  subscription	  to	  update	  the	  organizations	  
vulnerability	  scanning	  activities	  on	  at	  least	  a	  monthly	  basis.	  	  
Alternatively,	  ensure	  that	  the	  vulnerability	  scanning	  tools	  you	  
use	  are	  regularly	  updated	  with	  all	  relevant	  important	  security	  
vulnerabilities.	  
Deploy	  automated	  patch	  management	  tools	  and	  software	  
update	  tools	  for	  operating	  system	  and	  software/applications	  
on	  all	  systems	  for	  which	  such	  tools	  are	  available	  and	  safe.	  	  
Patches	  should	  be	  applied	  to	  all	  systems,	  even	  systems	  that	  
are	  properly	  air	  gapped.	  
Carefully	  monitor	  logs	  associated	  with	  any	  scanning	  activity	  
and	  associated	  administrator	  accounts	  to	  ensure	  that	  all	  
scanning	  activity	  and	  associated	  access	  via	  the	  privileged	  
account	  is	  limited	  to	  the	  timeframes	  of	  legitimate	  scans.	  	  	  
Compare	  the	  results	  from	  back-to-back	  vulnerability	  scans	  to	  
verify	  that	  vulnerabilities	  were	  addressed	  either	  by	  patching,	  
implementing	  a	  compensating	  control,	  or	  documenting	  and	  
accepting	  a	  reasonable	  business	  risk.	  Such	  acceptance	  of	  
business	  risks	  for	  existing	  vulnerabilities	  should	  be	  
periodically	  reviewed	  to	  determine	  if	  newer	  compensating	  
controls	  or	  subsequent	  patches	  can	  address	  vulnerabilities	  
that	  were	  previously	  accepted,	  or	  if	  conditions	  have	  changed,	  
increasing	  the	  risk.	  	  
CSC	  4-8	   Measure	  the	  delay	  in	  patching	  new	  vulnerabilities	  and	  ensure	  
that	  the	  delay	  is	  equal	  to	  or	  less	  than	  the	  benchmarks	  set	  forth	  
by	  the	  organization.	  	  Alternative	  countermeasures	  should	  be	  
considered	  if	  patches	  are	  not	  available.	  
CSC	  4-9	  
Evaluate	  critical	  patches	  in	  a	  test	  environment	  before	  pushing	  
them	  into	  production	  on	  enterprise	  systems.	  If	  such	  patches	  
break	  critical	  business	  applications	  on	  test	  machines,	  the	  

28	  

Quick	  win	  	  

Quick	  win	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

Configuration/
Hygiene	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

CSC	  4	  Procedures	  and	  Tools	  

	  
organization	  must	  devise	  other	  mitigating	  controls	  that	  block	  
exploitation	  on	  systems	  where	  the	  patch	  cannot	  be	  deployed	  
because	  of	  its	  impact	  on	  business	  functionality.	  	  	  
CSC	  4-10	   Establish	  a	  process	  to	  risk-rate	  vulnerabilities	  based	  on	  the	  
exploitability	  and	  potential	  impact	  of	  the	  vulnerability,	  and	  
segmented	  by	  appropriate	  groups	  of	  assets	  (example,	  DMZ	  
servers,	  internal	  network	  servers,	  desktops,	  laptops).	  	  Apply	  
patches	  for	  the	  riskiest	  vulnerabilities	  first.	  	  A	  phased	  rollout	  
can	  be	  used	  to	  minimize	  the	  impact	  to	  the	  organization.	  
Establish	  expected	  patching	  timelines	  based	  on	  the	  risk	  rating	  
level.	  	  

	  
A	  large	  number	  of	  vulnerability	  scanning	  tools	  are	  available	  to	  evaluate	  the	  security	  
configuration	  of	  systems.	  Some	  enterprises	  have	  also	  found	  commercial	  services	  using	  
remotely	  managed	  scanning	  appliances	  to	  be	  effective.	  To	  help	  standardize	  the	  
definitions	  of	  discovered	  vulnerabilities	  in	  multiple	  departments	  of	  an	  organization	  or	  
even	  across	  organizations,	  it	  is	  preferable	  to	  use	  vulnerability	  scanning	  tools	  that	  
measure	  security	  flaws	  and	  map	  them	  to	  vulnerabilities	  and	  issues	  categorized	  using	  
one	  or	  more	  of	  the	  following	  industry-recognized	  vulnerability,	  configuration,	  and	  
platform	  classification	  schemes	  and	  languages:	  CVE,	  CCE,	  OVAL,	  CPE,	  CVSS,	  and/or	  
XCCDF.	  
Advanced	  vulnerability	  scanning	  tools	  can	  be	  configured	  with	  user	  credentials	  to	  log	  in	  
to	  scanned	  systems	  and	  perform	  more	  comprehensive	  scans	  than	  can	  be	  achieved	  
without	  login	  credentials.	  The	  frequency	  of	  scanning	  activities,	  however,	  should	  
increase	  as	  the	  diversity	  of	  an	  organizations	  systems	  increases	  to	  account	  for	  the	  
varying	  patch	  cycles	  of	  each	  vendor.	  
In	  addition	  to	  the	  scanning	  tools	  that	  check	  for	  vulnerabilities	  and	  misconfigurations	  
across	  the	  network,	  various	  free	  and	  commercial	  tools	  can	  evaluate	  security	  settings	  
and	  configurations	  of	  local	  machines	  on	  which	  they	  are	  installed.	  Such	  tools	  can	  provide	  
fine-grained	  insight	  into	  unauthorized	  changes	  in	  configuration	  or	  the	  inadvertent	  
introduction	  of	  security	  weaknesses	  by	  administrators.	  
Effective	  organizations	  link	  their	  vulnerability	  scanners	  with	  problem-ticketing	  systems	  
that	  automatically	  monitor	  and	  report	  progress	  on	  fixing	  problems,	  and	  that	  make	  
unmitigated	  critical	  vulnerabilities	  visible	  to	  higher	  levels	  of	  management	  to	  ensure	  the	  
problems	  are	  solved.	  
The	  most	  effective	  vulnerability	  scanning	  tools	  compare	  the	  results	  of	  the	  current	  scan	  
with	  previous	  scans	  to	  determine	  how	  the	  vulnerabilities	  in	  the	  environment	  have	  

29	  

CSC	  4	  Effectiveness	  Metrics	  

	  
changed	  over	  time.	  Security	  personnel	  use	  these	  features	  to	  conduct	  vulnerability	  
trending	  from	  month	  to	  month.	  
As	  vulnerabilities	  related	  to	  unpatched	  systems	  are	  discovered	  by	  scanning	  tools,	  
security	  personnel	  should	  determine	  and	  document	  the	  amount	  of	  time	  that	  elapses	  
between	  the	  public	  release	  of	  a	  patch	  for	  the	  system	  and	  the	  occurrence	  of	  the	  
vulnerability	  scan.	  If	  this	  time	  window	  exceeds	  the	  organizations	  benchmarks	  for	  
deployment	  of	  the	  given	  patchs	  criticality	  level,	  security	  personnel	  should	  note	  the	  
delay	  and	  determine	  if	  a	  deviation	  was	  formally	  documented	  for	  the	  system	  and	  its	  
patch.	  If	  not,	  the	  security	  team	  should	  work	  with	  management	  to	  improve	  the	  patching	  
process.	  
Additionally,	  some	  automated	  patching	  tools	  may	  not	  detect	  or	  install	  certain	  patches	  
due	  to	  an	  error	  by	  the	  vendor	  or	  administrator.	  Because	  of	  this,	  all	  patch	  checks	  should	  
reconcile	  system	  patches	  with	  a	  list	  of	  patches	  each	  vendor	  has	  announced	  on	  its	  
website.	  
In	  order	  to	  test	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  the	  automated	  implementation	  of	  this	  control,	  
organizations	  should	  measure	  the	  following:	  
1. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  vulnerability	  scanning	  systems,	  if	  they	  detect	  
unauthorized	  devices	  on	  the	  network,	  to	  generate	  an	  alert	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
2. How	  long	  after	  a	  scan	  successfully	  completes	  does	  it	  take	  to	  generate	  an	  alert	  
indicating	  that	  it	  completed	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
3. If	  a	  scan	  does	  not	  complete,	  how	  long	  does	  it	  take	  to	  generate	  an	  alert	  that	  the	  
scan	  failed	  to	  run	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
4. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  automated	  patch	  management	  tools	  to	  alert	  or	  send	  e-mail	  
to	  administrative	  personnel	  regarding	  the	  successful	  installation	  of	  new	  patches	  	  
(time	  in	  minutes)?	  
For	  all	  of	  the	  above,	  consider	  that	  system	  priority,	  service	  level	  commitments,	  system	  
role,	  and	  other	  factors	  may	  drive	  varying	  objectives	  for	  scan	  frequency	  and	  alert	  time	  
frames	  on	  different	  systems.	  	  Ensure	  that	  the	  rationale	  for	  these	  classifications	  is	  clear,	  
consistent,	  documented,	  and	  consistently	  applied.	  	  Verify	  that	  target	  detection	  and	  
notification	  results	  are	  aligned	  with	  service	  level	  commitments	  and	  policies	  for	  each	  
class	  of	  system.	  
In	  order	  to	  automate	  the	  collection	  of	  relevant	  data	  from	  these	  systems,	  organizations	  
should	  gather	  the	  following	  information	  with	  automated	  technical	  sensors:	  

CSC	  4	  Automation	  Metrics	  

30	  

	  

CSC	  4	  Effectiveness	  Test	  

1. What	  is	  the	  percentage	  of	  the	  organizations	  business	  systems	  that	  have	  not	  
recently	  been	  scanned	  by	  the	  organizations	  approved,	  SCAP	  compliant,	  
vulnerability	  management	  system	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
2. What	  is	  the	  average	  SCAP	  vulnerability	  score	  of	  each	  of	  the	  organizations	  
business	  systems	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
3. What	  is	  the	  total	  SCAP	  vulnerability	  score	  of	  each	  of	  the	  organizations	  business	  
systems	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
4. How	  long	  does	  it	  take,	  on	  average,	  to	  completely	  deploy	  operating	  system	  
software	  updates	  to	  a	  business	  system	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
5. How	  long	  does	  it	  take,	  on	  average,	  to	  completely	  deploy	  application	  software	  
updates	  to	  a	  business	  system	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
To	  evaluate	  the	  implementation	  of	  Control	  4	  on	  a	  periodic	  basis,	  the	  evaluation	  team	  
must	  verify	  that	  scanning	  tools	  have	  successfully	  completed	  their	  weekly	  or	  daily	  scans	  
for	  the	  previous	  30	  cycles	  of	  scanning	  by	  reviewing	  archived	  alerts	  and	  reports	  to	  
ensure	  that	  the	  scan	  was	  completed.	  If	  a	  scan	  could	  not	  be	  completed	  in	  that	  timeframe,	  
the	  evaluation	  team	  must	  verify	  that	  an	  alert	  or	  e-mail	  was	  generated	  indicating	  that	  
the	  scan	  did	  not	  finish.	  
Organizations	  will	  find	  that	  by	  diagramming	  the	  entities	  necessary	  to	  fully	  meet	  the	  
goals	  defined	  in	  this	  control,	  it	  will	  be	  easier	  to	  identify	  how	  to	  implement	  them,	  test	  the	  
controls,	  and	  identify	  where	  potential	  failures	  in	  the	  system	  might	  occur.	  

CSC	  4	  System	  Entity	  Relationship	  Diagram	  

31	  

	  

A	  control	  system	  is	  a	  device	  or	  set	  of	  devices	  to	  manage,	  command,	  direct,	  or	  regulate	  
the	  behavior	  of	  other	  devices	  or	  systems.	  In	  this	  case,	  the	  vulnerability	  scanners,	  
management	  system,	  patch	  management	  systems,	  and	  configuration	  baselines	  all	  work	  
together	  to	  address	  an	  organizations	  vulnerability	  management	  and	  remediation	  
strategy.	  The	  following	  list	  of	  the	  steps	  in	  the	  above	  diagram	  shows	  how	  the	  entities	  
work	  together	  to	  meet	  the	  business	  goal	  defined	  in	  this	  control.	  The	  list	  also	  delineates	  
each	  of	  the	  process	  steps	  in	  order	  to	  help	  identify	  potential	  failure	  points	  in	  the	  overall	  
control.	  	  

 

Step 1: Vulnerability intelligence service provides inputs to vulnerability scanner 

Step 2: Vulnerability scanners scan production systems 

Step 3: Vulnerability scanners report detected vulnerabilities to a vulnerability management 

system (VMS) 

Step 4: The VMS compares production systems to configuration baselines 

Step 5: The VMS sends information to log management correlation system 

Step 6: The VMS produces reports for management 

Step 7: A patch management system applies software updates to production systems.	  

32	  

	  

CSC	  5:	  	  Malware	  Defenses	  

Control	  the	  installation,	  spread,	  and	  execution	  of	  malicious	  code	  at	  multiple	  
points	  in	  the	  enterprise,	  while	  optimizing	  the	  use	  of	  automation	  to	  enable	  rapid	  
updating	  of	  defense,	  data	  gathering,	  and	  corrective	  action.	  

Why	  Is	  This	  Control	  Critical?	  

ID	  #	  

Description	  

How	  to	  Implement	  This	  Control	  

Malicious	  software	  is	  an	  integral	  and	  dangerous	  aspect	  of	  Internet	  threats,	  and	  can	  be	  
designed	  to	  attack	  your	  systems,	  devices,	  or	  your	  data.	  It	  can	  be	  fast-moving,	  fast-
changing,	  and	  enter	  through	  any	  number	  of	  points	  like	  end-user	  devices,	  e-mail	  
attachments,	  web	  pages,	  cloud	  services,	  user	  actions,	  and	  removable	  media.	  Modern	  
malware	  can	  be	  designed	  to	  avoid	  defenses,	  or	  to	  attack	  or	  disable	  them.	  	  
Malware	  defenses	  must	  be	  able	  to	  operate	  in	  this	  dynamic	  environment	  through	  large-
scale	  automation,	  rapid	  updating,	  and	  integration	  with	  processes	  like	  Incident	  
Response.	  They	  must	  also	  be	  deployed	  at	  multiple	  possible	  points-of-attack	  to	  detect,	  
stop	  the	  movement	  of,	  or	  control	  the	  execution	  of	  malicious	  software.	  Enterprise	  
endpoint	  security	  suites	  provide	  administrative	  features	  to	  verify	  that	  all	  defenses	  are	  
active	  and	  current	  on	  every	  managed	  system.	  	  
CSC	  5-1	  
CSC	  5-2	  
CSC	  5-3	  
CSC	  5-4	  
CSC	  5-5	  

Employ	  automated	  tools	  to	  continuously	  monitor	  
workstations,	  servers,	  and	  mobile	  devices	  with	  anti-virus,	  
anti-spyware,	  personal	  firewalls,	  and	  host-based	  IPS	  
functionality.	  All	  malware	  detection	  events	  should	  be	  sent	  to	  
enterprise	  anti-malware	  administration	  tools	  and	  event	  log	  
servers.	  
Employ	  anti-malware	  software	  that	  offers	  a	  remote,	  cloud-
based	  centralized	  infrastructure	  that	  compiles	  information	  on	  
file	  reputations	  or	  have	  administrators	  manually	  push	  updates	  
to	  all	  machines.	  After	  applying	  an	  update,	  automated	  systems	  
should	  verify	  that	  each	  system	  has	  received	  its	  signature	  
update.	  
Configure	  laptops,	  workstations,	  and	  servers	  so	  that	  they	  will	  
not	  auto-run	  content	  from	  removable	  media,	  like	  USB	  tokens	  
(i.e.,	  thumb	  drives),	  USB	  hard	  drives,	  CDs/DVDs,	  FireWire	  
devices,	  external	  serial	  advanced	  technology	  attachment	  
devices,	  and	  mounted	  network	  shares,.	  	  
Configure	  systems	  so	  that	  they	  automatically	  conduct	  an	  anti-
malware	  scan	  of	  removable	  media	  when	  inserted.	  	  
Scan	  and	  block	  all	  e-mail	  attachments	  entering	  the	  

Category	  
Quick	  win	  

Quick	  win	  

Quick	  win	  

Quick	  win	  

Quick	  win	  

33	  

	  

 

Quick	  win	  

Quick	  win	  

organizations	  e-mail	  gateway	  if	  they	  contain	  malicious	  code	  
or	  file	  types	  that	  are	  unnecessary	  for	  the	  organizations	  
business.	  	  This	  scanning	  should	  be	  done	  before	  the	  e-mail	  is	  
placed	  in	  the	  users	  inbox.	  	  This	  includes	  e-mail	  content	  
filtering	  and	  web	  content	  filtering.	  
Enable	  anti-exploitation	  features	  such	  as	  Data	  Execution	  
CSC	  5-6	  
Prevention	  (DEP),	  Address	  Space	  Layout	  Randomization	  
(ASLR),	  virtualization/containerization,	  etc.	  For	  increased	  
protection,	  deploy	  capabilities	  such	  as	  Enhanced	  Mitigation	  
Experience	  Toolkit	  (EMET)	  that	  can	  be	  configured	  to	  apply	  
these	  protections	  to	  a	  broader	  set	  of	  applications	  and	  
executables.	  
Limit	  use	  of	  external	  devices	  to	  those	  that	  have	  a	  business	  
CSC	  5-7	  
need.	  Monitor	  for	  use	  and	  attempted	  use	  of	  external	  devices.	  
Ensure	  that	  automated	  monitoring	  tools	  use	  behavior-based	  
CSC	  5-8	  
anomaly	  detection	  to	  complement	  traditional	  signature-based	  
detection.	  
Use	  network-based	  anti-malware	  tools	  to	  identify	  executables	  
CSC	  5-9	  
in	  all	  network	  traffic	  and	  use	  techniques	  other	  than	  signature-
based	  detection	  to	  identify	  and	  filter	  out	  malicious	  content	  
before	  it	  arrives	  at	  the	  endpoint.	  	  
Implement	  an	  incident	  response	  process	  that	  allows	  the	  IT	  
CSC	  5-10	  
support	  organization	  to	  supply	  the	  security	  team	  with	  
samples	  of	  malware	  running	  on	  corporate	  systems	  that	  do	  not	  
appear	  to	  be	  recognized	  by	  the	  enterprises	  anti-malware	  
software.	  	  Samples	  should	  be	  provided	  to	  the	  security	  vendor	  
for	  out-of-band	  signature	  creation	  and	  later	  deployed	  to	  the	  
enterprise	  by	  system	  administrators.	  
CSC	  5-11	   Enable	  domain	  name	  system	  (DNS)	  query	  logging	  to	  detect	  
hostname	  lookup	  for	  known	  malicious	  C2	  domains.	  
To	  ensure	  anti-virus	  signatures	  are	  up	  to	  date,	  organizations	  use	  automation.	  They	  use	  
the	  built-in	  administrative	  features	  of	  enterprise	  endpoint	  security	  suites	  to	  verify	  that	  
anti-virus,	  anti-spyware,	  and	  host-based	  IDS	  features	  are	  active	  on	  every	  managed	  
system.	  They	  run	  automated	  assessments	  daily	  and	  review	  the	  results	  to	  find	  and	  
mitigate	  systems	  that	  have	  deactivated	  such	  protections,	  as	  well	  as	  systems	  that	  do	  not	  
have	  the	  latest	  malware	  definitions.	  	  
Some	  enterprises	  deploy	  free	  or	  commercial	  honeypot	  and	  tarpit	  tools	  to	  identify	  
attackers	  in	  their	  environment.	  Security	  personnel	  should	  continuously	  monitor	  these	  
tools	  to	  determine	  whether	  traffic	  is	  directed	  to	  them	  and	  account	  logins	  are	  attempted.	  
When	  they	  identify	  such	  events,	  these	  personnel	  should	  gather	  the	  source	  address	  from	  

CSC	  5	  Procedures	  and	  Tools	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

Advanced	  

Advanced	  

34	  

CSC	  5	  Effectiveness	  Metrics	  

	  
which	  this	  traffic	  originates	  and	  other	  details	  associated	  with	  the	  attack	  for	  follow-on	  
investigation.	  
In	  order	  to	  test	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  the	  automated	  implementation	  of	  this	  control,	  
organizations	  should	  measure	  the	  following:	  
1. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  the	  system	  to	  identify	  any	  malicious	  software	  that	  is	  
installed,	  attempted	  to	  be	  installed,	  executed,	  or	  attempted	  to	  be	  executed	  on	  a	  
computer	  system	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
2. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  the	  system	  to	  send	  e-mail	  notification	  to	  a	  list	  of	  enterprise	  
personnel	  via	  their	  centralized	  anti-malware	  console	  or	  event	  log	  system	  after	  
malicious	  code	  has	  been	  identified	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
3. Does	  the	  system	  have	  the	  ability	  to	  block	  installation,	  prevent	  execution,	  or	  
quarantine	  malicious	  software	  (yes	  or	  no)?	  
4. Does	  the	  system	  have	  the	  ability	  to	  identify	  the	  business	  unit	  in	  the	  organization	  
where	  the	  malicious	  software	  was	  identified	  (yes	  or	  no)?	  
5. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  the	  organization	  to	  completely	  remove	  the	  malicious	  code	  
from	  the	  system	  after	  it	  has	  been	  identified	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
In	  order	  to	  automate	  the	  collection	  of	  relevant	  data	  from	  these	  systems,	  organizations	  
should	  gather	  the	  following	  information	  with	  automated	  technical	  sensors:	  
1. How	  many	  instances	  of	  malicious	  code	  have	  been	  detected	  within	  a	  period	  of	  
time	  by	  host	  based	  anti-malware	  systems	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
2. How	  many	  instances	  of	  malicious	  code	  that	  were	  detected	  within	  a	  period	  of	  
time	  were	  automatically	  remediated	  by	  the	  organizations	  host	  based	  anti-
malware	  systems	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
3. How	  many	  instances	  of	  malicious	  code	  have	  been	  detected	  within	  a	  period	  of	  
time	  by	  network	  based	  anti-malware	  systems	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
4. How	  many	  instances	  of	  malicious	  code	  that	  were	  detected	  within	  a	  period	  of	  
time	  were	  automatically	  remediated	  by	  the	  organizations	  network	  based	  anti-
malware	  systems	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
5. Percentage	  of	  applications	  on	  a	  system	  that	  are	  not	  utilizing	  application	  
sandboxing	  products	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
6. Percentage	  of	  systems	  with	  anti-malware	  systems	  deployed,	  enabled,	  and	  up-to-
date	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  

CSC	  5	  Automation	  Metrics	  

35	  

CSC	  5	  Effectiveness	  Test	  

	  
To	  evaluate	  the	  implementation	  of	  Control	  5	  on	  a	  periodic	  basis,	  the	  evaluation	  team	  
must	  move	  a	  benign	  software	  test	  program	  that	  appears	  to	  be	  malware	  (such	  as	  an	  
EICAR	  file	  or	  benign	  hacker	  tools),	  but	  that	  is	  not	  included	  in	  the	  official	  authorized	  
software	  list,	  to	  10	  systems	  on	  the	  network	  via	  a	  network	  share.	  The	  selection	  of	  these	  
systems	  must	  be	  as	  random	  as	  possible	  and	  include	  a	  cross-section	  of	  the	  organization's	  
systems	  and	  locations.	  The	  evaluation	  team	  must	  then	  verify	  that	  the	  systems	  generate	  
an	  alert	  or	  e-mail	  notice	  regarding	  the	  benign	  malware	  within	  one	  hour.	  The	  team	  must	  
also	  verify	  that	  the	  alert	  or	  e-mail	  indicating	  that	  the	  software	  has	  been	  blocked	  or	  
quarantined	  is	  received	  within	  one	  hour.	  The	  evaluation	  team	  must	  verify	  that	  the	  
system	  provides	  details	  of	  the	  location	  of	  each	  machine	  with	  this	  new	  test	  file,	  including	  
information	  about	  the	  asset	  owner.	  The	  team	  must	  then	  verify	  that	  the	  file	  is	  blocked	  by	  
attempting	  to	  execute	  or	  open	  it	  and	  verifying	  that	  it	  is	  not	  allowed	  to	  be	  accessed.	  
Once	  this	  test	  has	  been	  performed	  transferring	  the	  files	  to	  organization	  systems	  via	  
removable	  media,	  the	  same	  test	  must	  be	  repeated,	  but	  this	  time	  transferring	  the	  benign	  
malware	  to	  10	  systems	  via	  e-mail	  instead.	  The	  organization	  must	  expect	  the	  same	  
notification	  results	  as	  noted	  with	  the	  removable	  media	  test.	  
Organizations	  will	  find	  that	  by	  diagramming	  the	  entities	  necessary	  to	  fully	  meet	  the	  
goals	  defined	  in	  this	  control,	  it	  will	  be	  easier	  to	  identify	  how	  to	  implement	  them,	  test	  the	  
controls,	  and	  identify	  where	  potential	  failures	  in	  the	  system	  might	  occur.	  

CSC	  5	  System	  Entity	  Relationship	  Diagram	  

 

36	  

	  
A	  control	  system	  is	  a	  device	  or	  set	  of	  devices	  to	  manage,	  command,	  direct,	  or	  regulate	  
the	  behavior	  of	  other	  devices	  or	  systems.	  In	  this	  case,	  we	  are	  examining	  anti-malware	  
systems	  and	  threat	  vectors	  such	  as	  removable	  media.	  The	  following	  list	  of	  the	  steps	  in	  
the	  above	  diagram	  shows	  how	  the	  entities	  work	  together	  to	  meet	  the	  business	  goal	  
defined	  in	  this	  control.	  The	  list	  also	  delineates	  each	  of	  the	  process	  steps	  in	  order	  to	  help	  
identify	  potential	  failure	  points	  in	  the	  overall	  control.	  	  

Step 1: Anti-malware systems analyze production systems and removable media  

Step 2: Removable media is analyzed when connected to production systems 

Step 3: Email/web and network proxy devices analyze all incoming and outgoing traffic 

Step 4: Network access control monitors all systems connected to the network 

Step 5: Intrusion/network monitoring systems perform continuous monitoring looking for 
signs of malware. 

	  

37	  

	  

CSC	  6:	  	  Application	  Software	  Security	  

Manage	  the	  security	  lifecycle	  of	  all	  in-house	  developed	  and	  acquired	  software	  in	  
order	  to	  prevent,	  detect,	  and	  correct	  security	  weaknesses.	  

Why	  Is	  This	  Control	  Critical?	  

Attacks	  often	  take	  advantage	  of	  vulnerabilities	  found	  in	  web-based	  and	  other	  
application	  software.	  Vulnerabilities	  can	  be	  present	  for	  many	  reasons,	  including	  coding	  
mistakes,	  logic	  errors,	  incomplete	  requirements,	  and	  failure	  to	  test	  for	  unusual	  or	  
unexpected	  conditions.	  Examples	  of	  specific	  errors	  include:	  the	  failure	  to	  check	  the	  size	  
of	  user	  input;	  failure	  to	  filter	  out	  unneeded	  but	  potentially	  malicious	  character	  
sequences	  from	  input	  streams;	  failure	  to	  initialize	  and	  clear	  variables;	  and	  poor	  
memory	  management	  allowing	  flaws	  in	  one	  part	  of	  the	  software	  to	  affect	  unrelated	  
(and	  more	  security	  critical)	  portions.	  There	  is	  a	  flood	  of	  public	  and	  private	  information	  
about	  such	  vulnerabilities	  available	  to	  attackers	  and	  defenders	  alike,	  as	  well	  as	  a	  robust	  
marketplace	  for	  tools	  and	  techniques	  to	  allow	  weaponization	  of	  vulnerabilities	  into	  
exploits.	  Attackers	  can	  inject	  specific	  exploits,	  including	  buffer	  overflows,	  SQL	  injection	  
attacks,	  cross-site	  scripting,	  cross-site	  request	  forgery,	  and	  click-jacking	  of	  code	  to	  gain	  
control	  over	  vulnerable	  machines.	  In	  one	  attack,	  more	  than	  1	  million	  web	  servers	  were	  
exploited	  and	  turned	  into	  infection	  engines	  for	  visitors	  to	  those	  sites	  using	  SQL	  
injection.	  During	  that	  attack,	  trusted	  websites	  from	  state	  governments	  and	  other	  
organizations	  compromised	  by	  attackers	  were	  used	  to	  infect	  hundreds	  of	  thousands	  of	  
browsers	  that	  accessed	  those	  websites.	  Many	  more	  web	  and	  non-web	  application	  
vulnerabilities	  are	  discovered	  on	  a	  regular	  basis.	  
CSC	  6-1	  
CSC	  6-2	  

For	  all	  acquired	  application	  software,	  check	  that	  the	  version	  
you	  are	  using	  is	  still	  supported	  by	  the	  vendor.	  If	  not,	  update	  to	  
the	  most	  current	  version	  and	  install	  all	  relevant	  patches	  and	  
vendor	  security	  recommendations.	  	  
Protect	  web	  applications	  by	  deploying	  web	  application	  
firewalls	  (WAFs)	  that	  inspect	  all	  traffic	  flowing	  to	  the	  web	  
application	  for	  common	  web	  application	  attacks,	  including	  but	  
not	  limited	  to	  cross-site	  scripting,	  SQL	  injection,	  command	  
injection,	  and	  directory	  traversal	  attacks.	  For	  applications	  that	  
are	  not	  web-based,	  specific	  application	  firewalls	  should	  be	  
deployed	  if	  such	  tools	  are	  available	  for	  the	  given	  application	  
type.	  	  If	  the	  traffic	  is	  encrypted,	  the	  device	  should	  either	  sit	  
behind	  the	  encryption	  or	  be	  capable	  of	  decrypting	  the	  traffic	  
prior	  to	  analysis.	  	  If	  neither	  option	  is	  appropriate,	  a	  host-based	  
web	  application	  firewall	  should	  be	  deployed.	  	  

How	  to	  Implement	  This	  Control	  

ID	  #	  

Description	  

Category	  
Quick	  Win	  

Quick	  Win	  	  

(NEW)	  

38	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

	  
For	  in-house	  developed	  software,	  ensure	  that	  explicit	  error	  
CSC	  6-3	  
checking	  is	  performed	  and	  documented	  for	  all	  input,	  including	  
for	  size,	  data	  type,	  and	  acceptable	  ranges	  or	  formats.	  	  	  
Test	  in-house-developed	  and	  third-party-procured	  web	  
CSC	  6-4	  
applications	  for	  common	  security	  weaknesses	  using	  
automated	  remote	  web	  application	  scanners	  prior	  to	  
deployment,	  whenever	  updates	  are	  made	  to	  the	  application,	  
and	  on	  a	  regular	  recurring	  basis.	  Include	  tests	  for	  application	  
behavior	  under	  denial-of-service	  or	  resource	  exhaustion	  
attacks.	  
Do	  not	  display	  system	  error	  messages	  to	  end-users	  (output	  
CSC	  6-5	  
sanitization).	  
CSC	  6-6	   Maintain	  separate	  environments	  for	  production	  and	  
nonproduction	  systems.	  Developers	  should	  not	  typically	  have	  
unmonitored	  access	  to	  production	  environments.	  
Test	  in-house-developed	  web	  and	  other	  application	  software	  
CSC	  6-7	  
for	  coding	  errors	  and	  potential	  vulnerabilities	  prior	  to	  
deployment	  using	  automated	  static	  code	  analysis	  software,	  as	  
well	  as	  manual	  testing	  and	  inspection.	  In	  particular,	  input	  
validation	  and	  output	  encoding	  routines	  of	  application	  
software	  should	  be	  reviewed	  and	  tested.	  
CSC	  6-8	  
For	  acquired	  application	  software,	  examine	  the	  product	  
security	  process	  of	  the	  vendor	  (history	  of	  vulnerabilities,	  
customer	  notification,	  patching/remediation)	  as	  part	  of	  the	  
overall	  enterprise	  risk	  management	  process.	  
CSC	  6-9	  
For	  applications	  that	  rely	  on	  a	  database,	  use	  standard	  
hardening	  configuration	  templates.	  All	  systems	  that	  are	  part	  
of	  critical	  business	  processes	  should	  also	  be	  tested.	  
CSC	  6-10	   Ensure	  that	  all	  software	  development	  personnel	  receive	  
training	  in	  writing	  secure	  code	  for	  their	  specific	  development	  
environment.	  
CSC	  6-11	   For	  in-house	  developed	  applications,	  ensure	  that	  development	  
artifacts	  (sample	  data	  and	  scripts;	  unused	  libraries,	  
components,	  debug	  code;	  or	  tools)	  are	  not	  included	  in	  the	  
deployed	  software,	  or	  accessible	  in	  the	  production	  
environment.	  	  
	  
The	  security	  of	  applications	  (in-house	  developed	  or	  acquired)	  is	  a	  complex	  activity	  
requiring	  a	  complete	  program	  encompassing	  enterprise-wide	  policy,	  technology,	  and	  
the	  role	  of	  people.	  These	  are	  often	  broadly	  defined	  or	  required	  by	  formal	  Risk	  
Management	  Frameworks	  and	  processes.	  	  

CSC	  6	  Procedures	  and	  Tools	  

(NEW)	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  
Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

39	  

CSC	  6	  Effectiveness	  Metrics	  

	  
A	  comprehensive	  treatment	  of	  this	  topic	  is	  beyond	  the	  scope	  of	  the	  Critical	  Security	  
Controls.	  However,	  the	  actions	  in	  CSC	  6	  provide	  specific,	  high-priority	  steps	  that	  can	  
improve	  Application	  Software	  Security.	  In	  addition,	  we	  recommend	  use	  of	  the	  many	  
excellent	  comprehensive	  resources	  dedicated	  to	  this	  topic.	  Examples	  include:	  the	  DHS	  
Build	  Security	  In	  Program	  <	  buildsecurityin.us-cert.gov	  >,	  and	  The	  Open	  Web	  
Application	  Security	  Project	  (OWASP)	  <	  www.owasp.org	  >.	  	  
In	  order	  to	  test	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  the	  automated	  implementation	  of	  this	  control,	  
organizations	  should	  measure	  the	  following:	  
1. Can	  the	  application	  system	  detect	  attacks	  &	  block	  them	  within	  24	  hours	  of	  being	  
detected	  (yes	  or	  no)?	  
2. Are	  all	  Internet	  facing	  applications	  scanned	  by	  web	  application	  vulnerability	  
scanners	  at	  least	  weekly	  (yes	  or	  no)?	  
3. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  for	  alerts	  to	  be	  generated	  &	  sent	  to	  system	  administrators	  
that	  a	  vulnerability	  scan	  has	  or	  has	  not	  completed	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
4. Are	  all	  vulnerabilities	  detected	  by	  the	  scanning	  tools	  fixed	  or	  remediated	  within	  
15	  days	  of	  detection	  (yes	  or	  no)?	  
In	  order	  to	  automate	  the	  collection	  of	  relevant	  data	  from	  these	  systems,	  organizations	  
should	  gather	  the	  following	  information	  with	  automated	  technical	  sensors:	  
1. What	  percentage	  of	  the	  organizations	  custom	  applications	  have	  not	  been	  
recently	  scanned	  by	  an	  application	  security	  code	  scanner	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
2. What	  percentage	  of	  the	  organizations	  database	  systems	  have	  not	  been	  recently	  
scanned	  by	  a	  database	  specific	  vulnerability	  scanner	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
3. What	  is	  the	  aggregate	  vulnerability	  rating	  for	  all	  application	  and	  database	  
system	  in	  the	  organization	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
To	  evaluate	  the	  implementation	  of	  Control	  6	  on	  a	  monthly	  basis,	  an	  evaluation	  team	  
must	  use	  a	  web	  application	  vulnerability	  scanner	  to	  test	  for	  each	  relevant	  type	  of	  flaw	  
identified	  in	  the	  regularly	  updated	  list	  of	  the	  "25	  Most	  Dangerous	  Programming	  Errors"	  
by	  MITRE	  and	  the	  SANS	  Institute.	  The	  scanner	  must	  be	  configured	  to	  assess	  all	  of	  the	  
organization's	  Internet-accessible	  web	  applications	  to	  identify	  such	  errors.	  The	  
evaluation	  team	  must	  verify	  that	  the	  scan	  is	  detected	  within	  24	  hours	  and	  that	  an	  alert	  
is	  generated.	  

CSC	  6	  Automation	  Metrics	  

CSC	  6	  Effectiveness	  Test	  

40	  

	  
In	  addition	  to	  the	  web	  application	  vulnerability	  scanner,	  the	  evaluation	  team	  must	  also	  
run	  static	  code	  analysis	  tools	  and	  database	  configuration	  review	  tools	  against	  Internet-
accessible	  applications	  to	  identify	  security	  flaws	  on	  a	  monthly	  basis.	  
The	  evaluation	  team	  must	  verify	  that	  all	  high-risk	  vulnerabilities	  identified	  by	  the	  
automated	  vulnerability	  scanning	  tools	  or	  static	  code	  analysis	  tools	  have	  been	  
remediated	  or	  addressed	  through	  a	  compensating	  control	  (such	  as	  a	  web	  application	  
firewall)	  within	  15	  days	  of	  discovery.	  
The	  evaluation	  team	  must	  verify	  that	  application	  vulnerability	  scanning	  tools	  have	  
successfully	  completed	  their	  regular	  scans	  for	  the	  previous	  30	  cycles	  of	  scanning	  by	  
reviewing	  archived	  alerts	  and	  reports	  to	  ensure	  that	  the	  scan	  was	  completed.	  If	  a	  scan	  
was	  not	  completed	  successfully,	  the	  system	  must	  alert	  or	  send	  e-mail	  to	  enterprise	  
administrative	  personnel	  indicating	  what	  happened.	  If	  a	  scan	  could	  not	  be	  completed	  in	  
that	  timeframe,	  the	  evaluation	  team	  must	  verify	  that	  an	  alert	  or	  e-mail	  was	  generated	  
indicating	  that	  the	  scan	  did	  not	  finish.	  
Organizations	  will	  find	  that	  by	  diagramming	  the	  entities	  necessary	  to	  fully	  meet	  the	  
goals	  defined	  in	  this	  control,	  it	  will	  be	  easier	  to	  identify	  how	  to	  implement	  them,	  test	  the	  
controls,	  and	  identify	  where	  potential	  failures	  in	  the	  system	  might	  occur.	  

CSC	  6	  System	  Entity	  Relationship	  Diagram	  

A	  control	  system	  is	  a	  device	  or	  set	  of	  devices	  used	  to	  manage,	  command,	  direct,	  or	  
regulate	  the	  behavior	  of	  other	  devices	  or	  systems.	  In	  this	  case,	  we	  are	  examining	  the	  
process	  of	  monitoring	  applications	  and	  using	  tools	  that	  enforce	  a	  security	  style	  when	  
developing	  applications.	  
The	  following	  list	  of	  the	  steps	  in	  the	  above	  diagram	  shows	  how	  the	  entities	  work	  
together	  to	  meet	  the	  business	  goal	  defined	  in	  this	  control.	  The	  list	  also	  delineates	  each	  
of	  the	  process	  steps	  in	  order	  to	  help	  identify	  potential	  failure	  points	  in	  the	  overall	  
control.	  	  

 

41	  

	  

Step 1: Web application firewalls protect connections to internal web applications 

Step 2: Software applications securely connect to database systems 

Step 3: Code analysis and vulnerability scanning tools scan application systems and 
database systems. 

42	  

	  

CSC	  7:	  	  Wireless	  Access	  Control	  

The	  processes	  and	  tools	  used	  to	  track/control/prevent/correct	  the	  security	  use	  
of	  wireless	  local	  area	  networks	  (LANS),	  access	  points,	  and	  wireless	  client	  
systems.	  

Why	  Is	  This	  Control	  Critical?	  

ID	  #	  

Description	  

How	  to	  Implement	  This	  Control	  

Major	  thefts	  of	  data	  have	  been	  initiated	  by	  attackers	  who	  have	  gained	  wireless	  access	  to	  
organizations	  from	  outside	  the	  physical	  building,	  bypassing	  organizations	  security	  
perimeters	  by	  connecting	  wirelessly	  to	  access	  points	  inside	  the	  organization.	  Wireless	  
clients	  accompanying	  traveling	  officials	  are	  infected	  on	  a	  regular	  basis	  through	  remote	  
exploitation	  during	  air	  travel	  or	  in	  cyber	  cafes.	  Such	  exploited	  systems	  are	  then	  used	  as	  
back	  doors	  when	  they	  are	  reconnected	  to	  the	  network	  of	  a	  target	  organization.	  Still	  
other	  organizations	  have	  reported	  the	  discovery	  of	  unauthorized	  wireless	  access	  points	  
on	  their	  networks,	  planted	  and	  sometimes	  hidden	  for	  unrestricted	  access	  to	  an	  internal	  
network.	  Because	  they	  do	  not	  require	  direct	  physical	  connections,	  wireless	  devices	  are	  
a	  convenient	  vector	  for	  attackers	  to	  maintain	  long-term	  access	  into	  a	  target	  
environment.	  
Ensure	  that	  each	  wireless	  device	  connected	  to	  the	  network	  
CSC	  7-1	  
matches	  an	  authorized	  configuration	  and	  security	  profile,	  with	  
a	  documented	  owner	  of	  the	  connection	  and	  a	  defined	  business	  
need.	  Organizations	  should	  deny	  access	  to	  those	  wireless	  
devices	  that	  do	  not	  have	  such	  a	  configuration	  and	  profile.	  
Configure	  network	  vulnerability	  scanning	  tools	  to	  detect	  
CSC	  7-2	  
wireless	  access	  points	  connected	  to	  the	  wired	  network.	  
Identified	  devices	  should	  be	  reconciled	  against	  a	  list	  of	  
authorized	  wireless	  access	  points.	  Unauthorized	  (i.e.,	  rogue)	  
access	  points	  should	  be	  deactivated.	  
Use	  wireless	  intrusion	  detection	  systems	  (WIDS)	  to	  identify	  
CSC	  7-3	  
rogue	  wireless	  devices	  and	  detect	  attack	  attempts	  and	  
successful	  compromises.	  In	  addition	  to	  WIDS,	  all	  wireless	  
traffic	  should	  be	  monitored	  by	  WIDS	  as	  traffic	  passes	  into	  the	  
wired	  network.	  	  
CSC	  7-4	   Where	  a	  specific	  business	  need	  for	  wireless	  access	  has	  been	  
identified,	  configure	  wireless	  access	  on	  client	  machines	  to	  
allow	  access	  only	  to	  authorized	  wireless	  networks.	  	  
For	  devices	  that	  do	  not	  have	  an	  essential	  wireless	  business	  
CSC	  7-5	  
purpose,	  disable	  wireless	  access	  in	  the	  hardware	  
configuration	  (basic	  input/output	  system	  or	  extensible	  

Quick	  win	  	  	  
Quick	  win	  	  	  

Category	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

43	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

	  
firmware	  interface),	  with	  password	  protections	  to	  lower	  the	  
possibility	  that	  the	  user	  will	  override	  such	  configurations.	  	  
Ensure	  that	  all	  wireless	  traffic	  leverages	  at	  least	  Advanced	  
CSC	  7-6	  
Encryption	  Standard	  (AES)	  encryption	  used	  with	  at	  least	  Wi-
Fi	  Protected	  Access	  2	  (WPA2)	  protection.	  	  
Ensure	  that	  wireless	  networks	  use	  authentication	  protocols	  
CSC	  7-7	  
such	  as	  Extensible	  Authentication	  Protocol-Transport	  Layer	  
Security	  (EAP/TLS),	  which	  provide	  credential	  protection	  and	  
mutual	  authentication.	  
Disable	  peer-to-peer	  wireless	  network	  capabilities	  on	  wireless	  
CSC	  7-8	  
clients,	  unless	  such	  functionality	  meets	  a	  documented	  
business	  need.	  
CSC	  7-9	  
Disable	  wireless	  peripheral	  access	  of	  devices	  (such	  as	  
Bluetooth),	  unless	  such	  access	  is	  required	  for	  a	  documented	  
business	  need.	  
CSC	  7-10	   Create	  separate	  virtual	  local	  area	  networks	  (VLANs)	  for	  BYOD	  
systems	  or	  other	  untrusted	  devices.	  Internet	  access	  from	  this	  
VLAN	  should	  go	  through	  at	  least	  the	  same	  border	  as	  corporate	  
traffic.	  Enterprise	  access	  from	  this	  VLAN	  should	  be	  treated	  as	  
untrusted	  and	  filtered	  and	  audited	  accordingly.	  
	  
Effective	  organizations	  run	  commercial	  wireless	  scanning,	  detection,	  and	  discovery	  
tools	  as	  well	  as	  commercial	  wireless	  intrusion	  detection	  systems.	  
Additionally,	  the	  security	  team	  should	  periodically	  capture	  wireless	  traffic	  from	  within	  
the	  borders	  of	  a	  facility	  and	  use	  free	  and	  commercial	  analysis	  tools	  to	  determine	  
whether	  the	  wireless	  traffic	  was	  transmitted	  using	  weaker	  protocols	  or	  encryption	  than	  
the	  organization	  mandates.	  When	  devices	  relying	  on	  weak	  wireless	  security	  settings	  are	  
identified,	  they	  should	  be	  found	  within	  the	  organizations	  asset	  inventory	  and	  either	  
reconfigured	  more	  securely	  or	  denied	  access	  to	  the	  organization	  network.	  
Additionally,	  the	  security	  team	  should	  employ	  remote	  management	  tools	  on	  the	  wired	  
network	  to	  pull	  information	  about	  the	  wireless	  capabilities	  and	  devices	  connected	  to	  
managed	  systems.	  
In	  order	  to	  test	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  the	  automated	  implementation	  of	  this	  control,	  
organizations	  should	  measure	  the	  following:	  

CSC	  7	  Procedures	  and	  Tools	  

CSC	  7	  Effectiveness	  Metrics	  

Configuration/
Hygiene	  

44	  

	  

CSC	  7	  Automation	  Metrics	  

1. Are	  systems	  capable	  of	  identifying	  unauthorized	  wireless	  devices	  or	  
configurations	  when	  they	  are	  within	  range	  of	  the	  organizations	  systems	  or	  
connected	  to	  their	  networks	  (yes	  or	  no)?	  
2. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  to	  generate	  alerts	  about	  unauthorized	  wireless	  devices	  
that	  are	  detected	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
3. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  for	  unauthorized	  wireless	  devices	  to	  be	  blocked	  from	  
connecting	  or	  isolated	  from	  the	  network	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
4. Are	  additional	  alerts	  generated	  every	  24	  hours	  after	  the	  initial	  alert	  until	  the	  
system	  is	  isolated	  or	  removed	  from	  the	  network	  (yes	  or	  no)?	  
5. Is	  the	  system	  able	  to	  identify	  the	  location,	  department,	  and	  other	  details	  of	  
where	  authorized	  and	  unauthorized	  wireless	  devices	  are	  plugged	  into	  the	  
network	  (yes	  or	  no)?	  
In	  order	  to	  automate	  the	  collection	  of	  relevant	  data	  from	  these	  systems,	  organizations	  
should	  gather	  the	  following	  information	  with	  automated	  technical	  sensors:	  
1. How	  many	  rogue	  wireless	  access	  points	  have	  been	  discovered	  recently	  in	  the	  
organization	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  This	  should	  include	  non-persistent,	  temporary	  
and	  transient	  access	  points.	  
2. What	  is	  the	  average	  time	  that	  it	  takes	  to	  remove	  rogue	  access	  points	  from	  the	  
organizations	  network	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
3. How	  many	  wireless	  access	  points	  or	  clients	  have	  been	  discovered	  using	  an	  
unauthorized	  wireless	  configuration	  recently	  in	  the	  organization	  (by	  business	  
unit)?	  	  
To	  evaluate	  the	  implementation	  of	  Control	  7	  on	  a	  periodic	  basis,	  the	  evaluation	  team	  
must	  configure	  10	  unauthorized	  but	  hardened	  wireless	  clients	  and	  wireless	  access	  
points	  to	  the	  organization's	  network	  and	  attempt	  to	  connect	  them	  to	  its	  wireless	  
networks.	  In	  the	  case	  of	  wireless	  access	  points,	  these	  access	  points	  must	  not	  be	  directly	  
connected	  to	  the	  organization's	  trusted	  network.	  Instead,	  they	  must	  simply	  be	  
configured	  to	  act	  as	  a	  wireless	  gateway	  without	  physically	  connecting	  to	  a	  wired	  
network	  interface.	  In	  the	  case	  of	  scanning	  for	  wireless	  access	  points	  from	  a	  wired	  
interface,	  the	  connected	  access	  point	  must	  have	  the	  wireless	  radio	  disabled	  for	  the	  
duration	  of	  the	  test.	  These	  systems	  must	  be	  configured	  to	  test	  each	  of	  the	  following	  
scenarios:	  
  A	  wireless	  client	  with	  an	  unauthorized	  service	  set	  identifier	  configured	  on	  it.	  	  
  A	  wireless	  client	  with	  improper	  encryption	  configured.	  	  
  A	  wireless	  client	  with	  improper	  authentication	  configured.	  	  

CSC	  7	  Effectiveness	  Test	  

45	  

	  
  A	  wireless	  access	  point	  with	  improper	  encryption	  configured.	  	  
  A	  wireless	  access	  point	  with	  improper	  authentication	  configured.	  	  
  A	  completely	  rogue	  wireless	  access	  point	  using	  an	  unauthorized	  configuration.	  	  
When	  any	  of	  the	  above-noted	  systems	  attempt	  to	  connect	  to	  the	  wireless	  network,	  an	  
alert	  must	  be	  generated	  and	  enterprise	  staff	  must	  respond	  to	  the	  alerts	  to	  isolate	  the	  
detected	  device	  or	  remove	  the	  device	  from	  the	  network.	  
Organizations	  will	  find	  that	  by	  diagramming	  the	  entities	  necessary	  to	  fully	  meet	  the	  
goals	  defined	  in	  this	  control,	  it	  will	  be	  easier	  to	  identify	  how	  to	  implement	  them,	  test	  the	  
controls,	  and	  identify	  where	  potential	  failures	  in	  the	  system	  might	  occur.	  

CSC	  7	  System	  Entity	  Relationship	  Diagram	  	  

A	  control	  system	  is	  a	  device	  or	  set	  of	  devices	  used	  to	  manage,	  command,	  direct,	  or	  
regulate	  the	  behavior	  of	  other	  devices	  or	  systems.	  In	  this	  case,	  we	  are	  examining	  the	  
configuration	  and	  management	  of	  wireless	  devices,	  wireless	  IDS/scanners,	  wireless	  
device	  management	  systems,	  and	  vulnerability	  scanners.	  The	  following	  list	  of	  the	  steps	  
in	  the	  above	  diagram	  shows	  how	  the	  entities	  work	  together	  to	  meet	  the	  business	  goal	  
defined	  in	  this	  control.	  The	  list	  also	  delineates	  each	  of	  the	  process	  steps	  in	  order	  to	  help	  
identify	  potential	  failure	  points	  in	  the	  overall	  control.	  	  

 

Step 1: Hardened configurations applied to wireless devices 

Step 2: Hardened configurations managed by a configuration management system 

Step 3: Configuration management system manages the configurations on wireless devices 

Step 4: Wireless IDS monitor usage of wireless communications 

46	  

	  
Step 6: Wireless clients utilize wireless infrastructure systems in a secure manner.	  

Step 5: Vulnerability scanners scan wireless devices for potential vulnerabilities 

47	  

	  

CSC	  8:	  	  Data	  Recovery	  Capability	  

The	  processes	  and	  tools	  used	  to	  properly	  back	  up	  critical	  information	  with	  a	  
proven	  methodology	  for	  timely	  recovery	  of	  it.	  	  

Why	  Is	  This	  Control	  Critical?	  

When	  attackers	  compromise	  machines,	  they	  often	  make	  significant	  changes	  to	  
configurations	  and	  software.	  Sometimes	  attackers	  also	  make	  subtle	  alterations	  of	  data	  
stored	  on	  compromised	  machines,	  potentially	  jeopardizing	  organizational	  effectiveness	  
with	  polluted	  information.	  When	  the	  attackers	  are	  discovered,	  it	  can	  be	  extremely	  
difficult	  for	  organizations	  without	  a	  trustworthy	  data	  recovery	  capability	  to	  remove	  all	  
aspects	  of	  the	  attackers	  presence	  on	  the	  machine.	  
Quick	  win	  	  	  
CSC	  8-1	  

How	  to	  Implement	  This	  Control	  

ID	  #	  

CSC	  8-2	  
CSC	  8-3	  
CSC	  8-4	  

(NEW)	  

Description	  

Ensure	  that	  each	  system	  is	  automatically	  backed	  up	  on	  at	  least	  
a	  weekly	  basis,	  and	  more	  often	  for	  systems	  storing	  sensitive	  
information.	  To	  help	  ensure	  the	  ability	  to	  rapidly	  restore	  a	  
system	  from	  backup,	  the	  operating	  system,	  application	  
software,	  and	  data	  on	  a	  machine	  should	  each	  be	  included	  in	  
the	  overall	  backup	  procedure.	  These	  three	  components	  of	  a	  
system	  do	  not	  have	  to	  be	  included	  in	  the	  same	  backup	  file	  or	  
use	  the	  same	  backup	  software.	  There	  should	  be	  multiple	  
backups	  over	  time,	  so	  that	  in	  the	  event	  of	  malware	  infection,	  
restoration	  can	  be	  from	  a	  version	  that	  is	  believed	  to	  predate	  
the	  original	  infection.	  All	  backup	  policies	  should	  be	  compliant	  
with	  any	  regulatory	  or	  official	  requirements.	  
Test	  data	  on	  backup	  media	  on	  a	  regular	  basis	  by	  performing	  a	  
data	  restoration	  process	  to	  ensure	  that	  the	  backup	  is	  properly	  
working.	  	  
Ensure	  that	  backups	  are	  properly	  protected	  via	  physical	  
security	  or	  encryption	  when	  they	  are	  stored,	  as	  well	  as	  when	  
they	  are	  moved	  across	  the	  network.	  	  This	  includes	  remote	  
backups	  and	  cloud	  services.	  
Ensure	  that	  key	  systems	  have	  at	  least	  one	  backup	  destination	  
that	  is	  not	  continuously	  addressable	  through	  operating	  
system	  calls.	  	  This	  will	  mitigate	  the	  risk	  of	  attacks	  like	  
CryptoLocker	  which	  seek	  to	  encrypt	  or	  damage	  data	  on	  all	  
addressable	  data	  shares,	  including	  backup	  destinations.	  

Category	  

Quick	  win	  	  	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

	  

48	  

	  

	  

CSC	  8	  Automation	  Metrics	  

CSC	  8	  Effectiveness	  Test	  

CSC	  8	  Effectiveness	  Metrics	  

CSC	  8	  Procedures	  and	  Tools	  	  

Once	  per	  quarter	  (or	  whenever	  new	  backup	  equipment	  is	  purchased),	  a	  testing	  team	  
should	  evaluate	  a	  random	  sample	  of	  system	  backups	  by	  attempting	  to	  restore	  them	  on	  a	  
test	  bed	  environment.	  The	  restored	  systems	  should	  be	  verified	  to	  ensure	  that	  the	  
operating	  system,	  application,	  and	  data	  from	  the	  backup	  are	  all	  intact	  and	  functional.	  
In	  the	  event	  of	  malware	  infection,	  restoration	  procedures	  should	  use	  a	  version	  of	  the	  
backup	  which	  is	  believed	  to	  predate	  the	  original	  infection.	  	  
  Percentage	  of	  systems	  with	  current	  backups	  within	  their	  target	  frequency	  
(targets	  can	  vary	  by	  system	  role,	  type,	  and	  criticality)	  
None	  
The	  evaluation	  team	  should	  identify	  5	  systems	  in	  the	  environment	  and	  restore	  to	  a	  test	  
system	  (physical	  or	  virtual)	  using	  the	  most	  recent	  backup.	  	  Verify	  that	  the	  system	  has	  
been	  restored	  properly	  by	  comparing	  the	  restore	  results	  to	  the	  original	  system.	  
Organizations	  will	  find	  that	  by	  diagramming	  the	  entities	  necessary	  to	  fully	  meet	  the	  
goals	  defined	  in	  this	  control,	  it	  will	  be	  easier	  to	  identify	  how	  to	  implement	  them,	  test	  the	  
controls,	  and	  identify	  where	  potential	  failures	  in	  the	  system	  might	  occur.	  

CSC	  8	  System	  Entity	  Relationship	  Diagram	  

49	  

	  

 

A	  control	  system	  is	  a	  device	  or	  set	  of	  devices	  used	  to	  manage,	  command,	  direct,	  or	  
regulate	  the	  behavior	  of	  other	  devices	  or	  systems.	  In	  this	  case,	  we	  are	  examining	  an	  
organizations	  capability	  to	  restore	  systems	  in	  the	  event	  that	  data	  need	  to	  be	  restored	  
because	  of	  a	  data	  loss	  or	  breach	  of	  a	  system.	  While	  backups	  are	  certainly	  an	  important	  
part	  of	  this	  process,	  the	  ability	  to	  restore	  data	  is	  the	  critical	  component.	  The	  following	  
list	  of	  the	  steps	  in	  the	  above	  diagram	  shows	  how	  the	  entities	  work	  together	  to	  meet	  the	  
business	  goal	  defined	  in	  this	  control.	  The	  list	  also	  delineates	  each	  of	  the	  process	  steps	  in	  
order	  to	  help	  identify	  potential	  failure	  points	  in	  the	  overall	  control.	  
	  

Step 1: Production business systems backed up on a regular basis to authorized 

organizational backup systems 

Step 2: Backups created are stored offline at secure storage facilities. 

50	  

	  

CSC	  9:	  	  Security	  Skills	  Assessment	  and	  Appropriate	  Training	  to	  Fill	  Gaps	  

For	  all	  functional	  roles	  in	  the	  organization	  (prioritizing	  those	  mission-critical	  to	  
the	  business	  and	  its	  security),	  identify	  the	  specific	  knowledge,	  skills,	  and	  
abilities	  needed	  to	  support	  defense	  of	  the	  enterprise;	  develop	  and	  execute	  an	  
integrated	  plan	  to	  assess,	  identify	  gaps,	  and	  remediate	  through	  policy,	  
organizational	  planning,	  training,	  and	  awareness	  programs.	  	  

Why	  Is	  This	  Control	  Critical?	  

It	  is	  tempting	  to	  think	  of	  cyber	  defense	  primarily	  as	  a	  technical	  challenge,	  but	  the	  
actions	  of	  people	  also	  play	  a	  critical	  part	  in	  the	  success	  or	  failure	  of	  an	  enterprise.	  
People	  fulfill	  important	  functions	  at	  every	  stage	  of	  system	  design,	  implementation,	  
operation,	  use,	  and	  oversight.	  Examples	  include:	  the	  actions	  of	  end	  users	  (who	  can	  fall	  
prey	  to	  social	  engineering	  schemes	  such	  as	  phishing);	  IT	  operations	  (who	  may	  not	  
recognize	  the	  security	  implications	  of	  IT	  artifacts	  and	  logs);	  security	  analysts	  (who	  
struggle	  to	  keep	  up	  with	  an	  explosion	  of	  new	  information);	  system	  developers	  and	  
programmers	  (who	  dont	  understand	  the	  opportunity	  to	  resolve	  root	  cause	  
vulnerabilities	  early	  in	  the	  system	  life-cycle);	  and	  executives	  and	  system	  owners	  (who	  
struggle	  to	  quantify	  the	  role	  that	  cybersecurity	  plays	  in	  overall	  operational/mission	  
risk,	  and	  have	  no	  reasonable	  way	  to	  make	  relevant	  investment	  decisions).	  	  
Attackers	  are	  very	  conscious	  of	  these	  issues	  and	  use	  them	  to	  plan	  their	  exploitations	  by,	  
for	  example:	  carefully	  crafting	  phishing	  messages	  that	  look	  like	  routine	  and	  expected	  
traffic	  to	  an	  unwary	  user;	  exploiting	  the	  gaps	  or	  seams	  between	  policy	  and	  technology	  
(e.g.,	  policies	  that	  have	  no	  technical	  enforcement);	  working	  within	  the	  time	  window	  of	  
patching	  or	  log	  review;	  using	  nominally	  non-security-critical	  systems	  as	  jump	  points	  or	  
bots.	  	  	  
No	  cyber	  defense	  approach	  can	  begin	  to	  address	  cyber	  risk	  without	  a	  means	  to	  address	  
this	  fundamental	  vulnerability.	  	  Conversely,	  empowering	  people	  with	  good	  cyber	  
defense	  habits	  can	  significantly	  increase	  readiness.	  	  	  
CSC	  9-1	  
CSC	  9-2	  

Perform	  gap	  analysis	  to	  see	  which	  skills	  employees	  need	  and	  
which	  behaviors	  employees	  are	  not	  adhering	  to,	  using	  this	  
information	  to	  build	  a	  baseline	  training	  and	  awareness	  
roadmap	  for	  all	  employees.	  	  
Deliver	  training	  to	  fill	  the	  skills	  gap.	  If	  possible,	  use	  more	  
senior	  staff	  to	  deliver	  the	  training.	  A	  second	  option	  is	  to	  have	  
outside	  teachers	  provide	  training	  onsite	  so	  the	  examples	  used	  
will	  be	  directly	  relevant.	  If	  you	  have	  small	  numbers	  of	  people	  

How	  to	  Implement	  This	  Control	  

ID	  #	  

Description	  

Category	  
Quick	  win	  	  	  

Quick	  win	  	  	  

51	  

Quick	  win	  	  	  

Visibility/	  
Hygiene	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

	  
CSC	  9-3	  

to	  train,	  use	  training	  conferences	  or	  online	  training	  to	  fill	  the	  
gaps.	  
Implement	  an	  online	  security	  awareness	  program	  that	  (1)	  
focuses	  only	  on	  the	  methods	  commonly	  used	  in	  intrusions	  that	  
can	  be	  blocked	  through	  individual	  action,	  (2)	  is	  delivered	  in	  
short	  online	  modules	  convenient	  for	  employees	  (3)	  is	  updated	  
frequently	  (at	  least	  annually)	  to	  represent	  the	  latest	  attack	  
techniques,	  (4)	  is	  mandated	  for	  completion	  by	  all	  employees	  
at	  least	  annually,	  and	  (5)	  is	  reliably	  monitored	  for	  employee	  
completion.	  
Validate	  and	  improve	  awareness	  levels	  through	  periodic	  tests	  
to	  see	  whether	  employees	  will	  click	  on	  a	  link	  from	  suspicious	  
e-mail	  or	  provide	  sensitive	  information	  on	  the	  telephone	  
without	  following	  appropriate	  procedures	  for	  authenticating	  a	  
caller;	  targeted	  training	  should	  be	  provided	  to	  those	  who	  fall	  
victim	  to	  the	  exercise.	  
Use	  security	  skills	  assessments	  for	  each	  of	  the	  mission-critical	  
roles	  to	  identify	  skills	  gaps.	  Use	  hands-on,	  real-world	  
examples	  to	  measure	  mastery.	  If	  you	  do	  not	  have	  such	  
assessments,	  use	  one	  of	  the	  available	  online	  competitions	  that	  
simulate	  real-world	  scenarios	  for	  each	  of	  the	  identified	  jobs	  in	  
order	  to	  measure	  skills	  mastery.	  

CSC	  9-4	  
CSC	  9-5	  
	  
An	  effective	  enterprise-wide	  training	  program	  should	  take	  a	  holistic	  approach	  and	  
consider	  policy	  and	  technology	  at	  the	  same	  time	  as	  the	  training	  of	  people.	  For	  example,	  
policies	  should	  be	  designed	  with	  technical	  measurement	  and	  enforcement	  when	  
possible,	  reinforced	  by	  training	  to	  fill	  gaps;	  technical	  controls	  can	  be	  implemented	  to	  
bound	  and	  minimize	  the	  opportunity	  for	  people	  to	  make	  mistakes,	  and	  so	  focus	  the	  
training	  on	  things	  that	  cannot	  be	  managed	  technically.	  	  
To	  be	  effective	  in	  both	  cost	  and	  outcome,	  security	  training	  should	  be	  prioritized,	  
focused,	  and	  specific	  (for	  example,	  using	  a	  S.M.A.R.T.	  metrics	  program).	  	  A	  key	  way	  to	  
prioritize	  training	  is	  to	  focus	  first	  on	  those	  jobs	  and	  roles	  that	  are	  critical	  to	  the	  mission	  
or	  business	  outcome	  of	  the	  enterprise.	  One	  way	  to	  identify	  these	  mission-critical	  jobs	  is	  
to	  reference	  the	  list	  prepared	  by	  the	  Council	  on	  CyberSecurity	  (which	  builds	  upon	  the	  
work	  of	  the	  2012	  Task	  Force	  on	  Cyber	  Skills	  established	  by	  the	  Secretary	  of	  Homeland	  
Security):	  1)	  System	  and	  Network	  Penetration	  Testers,	  2)	  Application	  Penetration	  
Testers,	  3)	  Security	  Monitoring	  and	  Event	  Analysts,	  4)	  Incident	  Responders	  In-Depth,	  5)	  
Counter-Intelligence/Insider	  Threat	  Analysts,	  6)	  Risk	  Assessment	  Engineers,	  7)	  Secure	  
Coders	  and	  Code	  Reviewers,	  8)	  Security	  Engineers/Architecture	  and	  Design,	  9)	  Security	  
Engineers/Operations,	  and	  10)	  Advanced	  Forensics	  Analysts.	  	  The	  Council	  has	  validated	  
this	  list	  as	  consistent	  with	  the	  broader	  NIST	  National	  Initiative	  on	  Cybersecurity	  

CSC	  9	  Procedures	  and	  Tools	  

52	  

	  
Education	  (NICE)	  framework,	  and	  with	  the	  needs	  of	  many	  enterprises	  in	  government	  
and	  industry.	  	  Training	  for	  these	  mission	  critical	  roles	  should	  be	  supplemented	  with	  
foundational	  security	  training	  for	  all	  users.	  	  	  	  
<	  www.counciloncybersecurity.org/practice-areas/people	  >.	  
General	  awareness	  training	  for	  all	  users	  also	  plays	  an	  important	  role.	  But	  even	  this	  
training	  should	  be	  tailored	  to	  functional	  roles	  and	  focused	  on	  specific	  actions	  that	  put	  
the	  organization	  at	  risk,	  and	  measured	  in	  order	  to	  drive	  remediation.	  	  
The	  key	  to	  upgrading	  skills	  is	  measurement	  through	  assessments	  that	  show	  both	  the	  
employee	  and	  the	  employer	  where	  knowledge	  is	  sufficient	  and	  where	  there	  are	  gaps.	  
Once	  the	  gaps	  have	  been	  identified,	  those	  employees	  who	  have	  the	  requisite	  skills	  and	  
knowledge	  can	  be	  called	  upon	  to	  mentor	  employees	  who	  need	  to	  improve	  their	  skills.	  In	  
addition,	  the	  organization	  can	  develop	  training	  plans	  to	  fill	  the	  gaps	  and	  maintain	  
employee	  readiness.	  
A	  full	  treatment	  of	  this	  topic	  is	  beyond	  the	  scope	  of	  the	  Critical	  Security	  Controls.	  
However,	  the	  actions	  in	  CSC	  9	  provide	  specific,	  high-priority	  steps	  that	  can	  improve	  
enterprise	  security,	  and	  should	  be	  a	  part	  of	  any	  comprehensive	  security	  training	  
program.	  	  
1. Participation	  rate	  for	  online	  training	  courses	  	  percentage	  of	  staff	  completing	  
security	  training	  (by	  business	  unit)	  
2. Average	  scores	  of	  online	  tests,	  compared	  to	  baseline	  (previous	  tests,	  industry	  
data	  if	  available,	  etc.)	  by	  business	  unit	  
3. Average	  scores	  of	  periodic	  tests	  (e.g.	  click	  rates	  for	  test	  phishing	  emails)	  by	  
business	  unit	  
4. Individual	  scores	  on	  skill	  assessment	  tests	  for	  individual	  mission	  critical	  roles	  by	  
business	  unit	  
5. Retention	  (or	  job	  opening	  fill	  rate)	  of	  mission	  critical	  roles	  (org/unit	  metric) 
None	  
None	  
	  

Control	  9	  Effectiveness	  Metrics 

CSC	  9	  Automation	  Metrics	  

CSC	  9	  Effectiveness	  Test	  

53	  

	  

CSC	  10:	  	  Secure	  Configurations	  for	  Network	  Devices	  such	  as	  Firewalls,	  
Routers,	  and	  Switches	  

Establish,	  implement,	  and	  actively	  manage	  (track,	  report	  on,	  correct)	  the	  
security	  configuration	  of	  network	  infrastructure	  devices	  using	  a	  rigorous	  
configuration	  management	  and	  change	  control	  process	  in	  order	  to	  prevent	  
attackers	  from	  exploiting	  vulnerable	  services	  and	  settings.	  	  

Why	  Is	  This	  Control	  Critical?	  

As delivered from manufacturers and resellers, the default configurations for network 
infrastructure devices are geared for ease-of-deployment and ease-of-use - not security. Open 
services and ports, default accounts (including service accounts) or passwords, support for 
older (vulnerable) protocols, pre-installation of unneeded software; all can be exploitable in 
their default state.   

Attackers take advantage of network devices becoming less securely configured over time as 
users demand exceptions for specific business needs. Sometimes the exceptions are deployed 
and then left undone when they are no longer applicable to the business needs. In some cases, 
the security risk of the exception is neither properly analyzed nor measured against the 
associated business need and can change over time. Attackers search for vulnerable default 
settings, electronic holes in firewalls, routers, and switches and use those to penetrate 
defenses. They exploit flaws in these devices to gain access to networks, redirect traffic on a 
network, and intercept information while in transmission. Through such actions, the attacker 
gains access to sensitive data, alters important information, or even uses a compromised 
machine to pose as another trusted system on the network.  

ID	  #	  

Description	  

How	  to	  Implement	  This	  Control	  

CSC	  10-1	   Compare	  firewall,	  router,	  and	  switch	  configuration	  against	  
standard	  secure	  configurations	  defined	  for	  each	  type	  of	  
network	  device	  in	  use	  in	  the	  organization.	  The	  security	  
configuration	  of	  such	  devices	  should	  be	  documented,	  
reviewed,	  and	  approved	  by	  an	  organization	  change	  control	  
board.	  Any	  deviations	  from	  the	  standard	  configuration	  or	  
updates	  to	  the	  standard	  configuration	  should	  be	  
documented	  and	  approved	  in	  a	  change	  control	  system.	  
CSC	  10-2	   All	  new	  configuration	  rules	  beyond	  a	  baseline-hardened	  
configuration	  that	  allow	  traffic	  to	  flow	  through	  network	  
security	  devices,	  such	  as	  firewalls	  and	  network-based	  IPS,	  
should	  be	  documented	  and	  recorded	  in	  a	  configuration	  
management	  system,	  with	  a	  specific	  business	  reason	  for	  
each	  change,	  a	  specific	  individuals	  name	  responsible	  for	  

Quick	  win	  	  	  

Category	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

54	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

Advanced	  

CSC	  10	  Procedures	  and	  Tools	  	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  
Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

	  
that	  business	  need,	  and	  an	  expected	  duration	  of	  the	  need.	  
CSC	  10-3	   Use	  automated	  tools	  to	  verify	  standard	  device	  
configurations	  and	  detect	  changes.	  All	  alterations	  to	  such	  
files	  should	  be	  automatically	  reported	  to	  security	  
personnel.	  	  
CSC	  10-4	   Manage	  network	  devices	  using	  two-factor	  authentication	  
and	  encrypted	  sessions.	  	  
Install	  the	  latest	  stable	  version	  of	  any	  security-related	  
CSC	  10-5	  
updates.	  
CSC	  10-6	   Manage	  the	  network	  infrastructure	  across	  network	  
connections	  that	  are	  separated	  from	  the	  business	  use	  of	  
that	  network,	  relying	  on	  separate	  VLANs	  or,	  preferably,	  on	  
entirely	  different	  physical	  connectivity	  for	  management	  
sessions	  for	  network	  devices.	  
	  
Some	  organizations	  use	  commercial	  tools	  that	  evaluate	  the	  rule	  set	  of	  network	  filtering	  
devices	  to	  determine	  whether	  they	  are	  consistent	  or	  in	  conflict,	  providing	  an	  automated	  
sanity	  check	  of	  network	  filters	  and	  search	  for	  errors	  in	  rule	  sets	  or	  access	  controls	  lists	  
(ACLs)	  that	  may	  allow	  unintended	  services	  through	  the	  device.	  Such	  tools	  should	  be	  run	  
each	  time	  significant	  changes	  are	  made	  to	  firewall	  rule	  sets,	  router	  ACLs,	  or	  other	  
filtering	  technologies.	  
In	  order	  to	  test	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  the	  automated	  implementation	  of	  this	  control,	  
organizations	  should	  measure	  the	  following:	  
1. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  to	  detect	  configuration	  changes	  to	  a	  network	  system	  (time	  
in	  minutes)?	  
2. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  the	  scanners	  to	  alert	  the	  organizations	  administrators	  
that	  an	  unauthorized	  configuration	  change	  has	  occurred	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
3. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  to	  block/quarantine	  unauthorized	  changes	  on	  network	  
systems	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
4. Are	  the	  scanners	  able	  to	  identify	  the	  location,	  department,	  and	  other	  critical	  
details	  about	  the	  systems	  where	  unauthorized	  changes	  occurred	  (yes	  or	  no)?	  
In	  order	  to	  automate	  the	  collection	  of	  relevant	  data	  from	  these	  systems,	  organizations	  
should	  gather	  the	  following	  information	  with	  automated	  technical	  sensors:	  

CSC	  10	  Effectiveness	  Metrics	  

CSC	  10	  Automation	  Metrics	  

55	  

	  

CSC	  10	  Effectiveness	  Test	  

1. What	  is	  the	  percentage	  of	  network	  devices	  that	  are	  not	  currently	  configured	  with	  
a	  security	  configuration	  that	  matches	  the	  organizations	  approved	  configuration	  
standard	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
2. What	  is	  the	  percentage	  of	  network	  devices	  whose	  security	  configuration	  is	  not	  
enforced	  by	  the	  organizations	  technical	  configuration	  management	  applications	  
(by	  business	  unit)?	  	  
3. What	  is	  the	  percentage	  of	  network	  devices	  that	  are	  not	  up	  to	  date	  with	  the	  latest	  
available	  operating	  system	  software	  security	  patches	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
4. What	  is	  the	  percentage	  of	  network	  devices	  do	  not	  require	  two-factor	  
authentication	  to	  administer	  the	  device	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
To	  evaluate	  the	  implementation	  of	  Control	  10	  on	  a	  periodic	  basis,	  an	  evaluation	  team	  
must	  make	  a	  change	  to	  each	  type	  of	  network	  device	  plugged	  into	  the	  network.	  At	  a	  
minimum,	  routers,	  switches,	  and	  firewalls	  need	  to	  be	  tested.	  If	  they	  exist,	  IPS,	  IDS,	  and	  
other	  network	  devices	  must	  be	  included.	  Backups	  must	  be	  made	  prior	  to	  making	  any	  
changes	  to	  critical	  network	  devices.	  It	  is	  critical	  that	  changes	  not	  impact	  or	  weaken	  the	  
security	  of	  the	  device.	  Acceptable	  changes	  include	  but	  are	  not	  limited	  to	  making	  a	  
comment	  or	  adding	  a	  duplicate	  entry	  in	  the	  configuration.	  The	  change	  must	  be	  
performed	  twice	  for	  each	  critical	  device.	  The	  evaluation	  team	  must	  then	  verify	  that	  the	  
systems	  generate	  an	  alert	  or	  e-mail	  notice	  regarding	  the	  changes	  to	  the	  device	  within	  24	  
hours.	  It	  is	  important	  that	  the	  evaluation	  team	  verify	  that	  all	  unauthorized	  changes	  have	  
been	  detected,	  the	  account	  making	  the	  changes	  has	  been	  recorded,	  and	  the	  changes	  
have	  resulted	  in	  an	  alert	  or	  e-mail	  notification.	  The	  evaluation	  team	  must	  verify	  that	  the	  
system	  provides	  details	  of	  the	  location	  of	  each	  device,	  including	  information	  about	  the	  
asset	  owner.	  While	  the	  24-hour	  timeframe	  represents	  the	  current	  metric	  to	  help	  
organizations	  improve	  their	  state	  of	  security,	  in	  the	  future	  organizations	  should	  strive	  
for	  even	  more	  rapid	  alerting	  and	  isolation,	  with	  notification	  about	  unauthorized	  
configuration	  changes	  in	  network	  devices	  sent	  within	  two	  minutes.	  
If	  appropriate,	  an	  additional	  test	  must	  be	  performed	  on	  a	  daily	  basis	  to	  ensure	  that	  
other	  protocols	  such	  as	  IPv6	  are	  being	  filtered	  properly.	  
Organizations	  will	  find	  that	  by	  diagramming	  the	  entities	  necessary	  to	  fully	  meet	  the	  
goals	  defined	  in	  this	  control,	  it	  will	  be	  easier	  to	  identify	  how	  to	  implement	  them,	  test	  the	  
controls,	  and	  identify	  where	  potential	  failures	  in	  the	  system	  might	  occur.	  

Control	  10	  System	  Entity	  Relationship	  Diagram	  

56	  

	  

A	  control	  system	  is	  a	  device	  or	  set	  of	  devices	  used	  to	  manage,	  command,	  direct,	  or	  
regulate	  the	  behavior	  of	  other	  devices	  or	  systems.	  In	  this	  case	  we	  are	  examining	  the	  
network	  devices,	  test	  lab	  network	  devices,	  configuration	  systems,	  and	  configuration	  
management	  devices.	  The	  following	  list	  of	  the	  steps	  in	  the	  diagram	  above	  shows	  how	  
the	  entities	  work	  together	  to	  meet	  the	  business	  goal	  defined	  in	  this	  control.	  The	  list	  also	  
delineates	  each	  of	  the	  process	  steps	  in	  order	  to	  help	  identify	  potential	  failure	  points	  in	  
the	  overall	  control.	  	  

 

Step 1: Hardened device configurations applied to production devices 

Step 2: Hardened device configuration stored in a secure configuration management system 

Step 3: Management network system validates configurations on production network devices 

Step 4: Patch management system applies tested software updates to production network 
devices 

Step 5: Two-factor authentication system required for administrative access to production 

devices 

Step 6: Proxy/firewall/network monitoring systems analyze all connections to production 

network devices. 

	  	  

57	  

	  

CSC	  11:	  	  Limitation	  and	  Control	  of	  Network	  Ports,	  Protocols,	  and	  Services	  

Manage	  (track/control/correct)	  the	  ongoing	  operational	  use	  of	  ports,	  protocols,	  
and	  services	  on	  networked	  devices	  in	  order	  to	  minimize	  windows	  of	  vulnerability	  
available	  to	  attackers.	  

ID	  #	  

Description	  

Category	  

Why	  Is	  This	  Control	  Critical?	  

How	  to	  Implement	  This	  Control	  

Attackers	  search	  for	  remotely	  accessible	  network	  services	  that	  are	  vulnerable	  to	  
exploitation.	  Common	  examples	  include	  poorly	  configured	  web	  servers,	  mail	  servers,	  
file	  and	  print	  services,	  and	  domain	  name	  system	  (DNS)	  servers	  installed	  by	  default	  on	  a	  
variety	  of	  different	  device	  types,	  often	  without	  a	  business	  need	  for	  the	  given	  service.	  
Many	  software	  packages	  automatically	  install	  services	  and	  turn	  them	  on	  as	  part	  of	  the	  
installation	  of	  the	  main	  software	  package	  without	  informing	  a	  user	  or	  administrator	  
that	  the	  services	  have	  been	  enabled.	  Attackers	  scan	  for	  such	  issues	  and	  attempt	  to	  
exploit	  these	  services,	  often	  attempting	  default	  user	  IDs	  and	  passwords	  or	  widely	  
available	  exploitation	  code.	  
Quick	  win	  	  	  
CSC	  11-1	   Ensure	  that	  only	  ports,	  protocols,	  and	  services	  with	  
validated	  business	  needs	  are	  running	  on	  each	  system.	  
CSC	  11-2	   Apply	  host-based	  firewalls	  or	  port	  filtering	  tools	  on	  end	  
Quick	  win	  	  	  
systems,	  with	  a	  default-deny	  rule	  that	  drops	  all	  traffic	  
except	  those	  services	  and	  ports	  that	  are	  explicitly	  
allowed.	  	  
Quick	  win	  	  	  
CSC	  11-3	   Perform	  automated	  port	  scans	  on	  a	  regular	  basis	  
against	  all	  key	  servers	  and	  compared	  to	  a	  known	  
effective	  baseline.	  	  If	  a	  change	  that	  is	  not	  listed	  on	  the	  
organizations	  approved	  baseline	  is	  discovered,	  an	  alert	  
should	  be	  generated	  and	  reviewed.	  
Quick	  win	  	  	  
CSC	  11-4	   Keep	  all	  services	  up	  to	  date	  and	  uninstall	  and	  remove	  
any	  unnecessary	  components	  from	  the	  system.	  
CSC	  11-5	   Verify	  any	  server	  that	  is	  visible	  from	  the	  Internet	  or	  an	  
untrusted	  network,	  and	  if	  it	  is	  not	  required	  for	  business	  
purposes,	  move	  it	  to	  an	  internal	  VLAN	  and	  give	  it	  a	  
private	  address.	  
CSC	  11-6	   Operate	  critical	  services	  on	  separate	  physical	  or	  logical	  
host	  machines,	  such	  as	  DNS,	  file,	  mail,	  web,	  and	  
database	  servers.	  
CSC	  11-7	   Place	  application	  firewalls	  in	  front	  of	  any	  critical	  
servers	  to	  verify	  and	  validate	  the	  traffic	  going	  to	  the	  
server.	  	  Any	  unauthorized	  services	  or	  traffic	  should	  be	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

Advanced	  

58	  

CSC	  11	  Procedures	  and	  Tools	  

CSC	  11	  Effectiveness	  Metrics	  

blocked	  and	  an	  alert	  generated.	  

	  
Port	  scanning	  tools	  are	  used	  to	  determine	  which	  services	  are	  listening	  on	  the	  network	  
for	  a	  range	  of	  target	  systems.	  In	  addition	  to	  determining	  which	  ports	  are	  open,	  effective	  
port	  scanners	  can	  be	  configured	  to	  identify	  the	  version	  of	  the	  protocol	  and	  service	  
listening	  on	  each	  discovered	  open	  port.	  This	  list	  of	  services	  and	  their	  versions	  are	  
compared	  against	  an	  inventory	  of	  services	  required	  by	  the	  organization	  for	  each	  server	  
and	  workstation	  in	  an	  asset	  management	  system.	  Recently	  added	  features	  in	  these	  port	  
scanners	  are	  being	  used	  to	  determine	  the	  changes	  in	  services	  offered	  by	  scanned	  
machines	  on	  the	  network	  since	  the	  previous	  scan,	  helping	  security	  personnel	  identify	  
differences	  over	  time.	  
In	  order	  to	  test	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  the	  automated	  implementation	  of	  this	  control,	  
organizations	  should	  measure	  the	  following:	  
1. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  systems	  to	  identify	  any	  new	  unauthorized	  listening	  
network	  ports	  that	  are	  installed	  on	  network	  systems	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
2. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  for	  alerts	  to	  be	  generated	  about	  new	  services	  being	  
installed	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
3. Are	  alerts	  then	  sent	  every	  24	  hours	  until	  the	  listening	  network	  port	  has	  been	  
disabled	  or	  it	  has	  been	  authorized	  by	  change	  management	  (yes	  or	  no)?	  
4. Do	  alerts	  indicate	  the	  location,	  department,	  and	  other	  details	  about	  the	  system	  
where	  authorized	  and	  unauthorized	  network	  ports	  are	  running	  (yes	  or	  no)?	  
In	  order	  to	  automate	  the	  collection	  of	  relevant	  data	  from	  these	  systems,	  organization	  
should	  gather	  the	  following	  information	  with	  automated	  technical	  sensors:	  
1. What	  is	  the	  percentage	  of	  the	  organizations	  systems	  that	  are	  not	  currently	  
running	  a	  host	  based	  firewall	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
2. How	  many	  unauthorized	  services	  are	  currently	  running	  on	  the	  organizations	  
business	  systems	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
3. How	  many	  deviations	  from	  approved	  service	  baselines	  have	  been	  discovered	  
recently	  on	  the	  organizations	  business	  systems	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  

CSC	  11	  Automation	  Metrics	  

59	  

CSC	  11	  Effectiveness	  Test	  

	  
To	  evaluate	  the	  implementation	  of	  Control	  11	  on	  a	  periodic	  basis,	  the	  evaluation	  team	  
must	  install	  hardened	  test	  services	  with	  network	  listeners	  on	  10	  locations	  on	  the	  
network,	  including	  a	  selection	  of	  subnets	  associated	  with	  DMZs,	  workstations,	  and	  
servers.	  The	  selection	  of	  these	  systems	  must	  be	  as	  random	  as	  possible	  and	  include	  a	  
cross-section	  of	  the	  organization's	  systems	  and	  locations.	  The	  evaluation	  team	  must	  
then	  verify	  that	  the	  systems	  generate	  an	  alert	  or	  e-mail	  notice	  regarding	  the	  newly	  
installed	  services	  within	  24	  hours	  of	  the	  services	  being	  installed	  on	  the	  network.	  The	  
team	  must	  verify	  that	  the	  system	  provides	  details	  of	  the	  location	  of	  all	  of	  the	  systems	  
where	  test	  services	  have	  been	  installed.	  
Organizations	  will	  find	  that	  by	  diagramming	  the	  entities	  necessary	  to	  fully	  meet	  the	  
goals	  defined	  in	  this	  control,	  it	  will	  be	  easier	  to	  identify	  how	  to	  implement	  them,	  test	  the	  
controls,	  and	  identify	  where	  potential	  failures	  in	  the	  system	  might	  occur.	  

CSC	  11	  System	  Entity	  Relationship	  Diagram	  

A	  control	  system	  is	  a	  device	  or	  set	  of	  devices	  used	  to	  manage,	  command,	  direct,	  or	  
regulate	  the	  behavior	  of	  other	  devices	  or	  systems.	  In	  this	  case,	  we	  are	  examining	  how	  
active	  scanning	  systems	  gather	  information	  on	  network	  devices	  and	  evaluate	  that	  data	  
against	  the	  authorized	  service	  baseline	  database.	  The	  following	  list	  of	  the	  steps	  in	  the	  
above	  diagram	  shows	  how	  the	  entities	  work	  together	  to	  meet	  the	  business	  goal	  defined	  
in	  this	  control.	  The	  list	  also	  delineates	  each	  of	  the	  process	  steps	  in	  order	  to	  help	  identify	  
potential	  failure	  points	  in	  the	  overall	  control.	  	  

 

Step 1: Active scanner analyzes production systems for unauthorized ports, protocols, and 

services 

Step 2: System baselines regularly updated based on necessary/required services 

60	  

	  

Step 3: Active scanner validates which ports, protocols, and services are blocked or allowed 

Step 4: Active scanner validates which ports, protocols, and services are accessible on 

by the application firewall 

business systems protected with host-based firewalls.	  

61	  

	  

CSC	  12:	  	  Controlled	  Use	  of	  Administrative	  Privileges	  

The	  processes	  and	  tools	  used	  to	  track/control/prevent/correct	  the	  use,	  
assignment,	  and	  configuration	  of	  administrative	  privileges	  on	  computers,	  
networks,	  and	  applications.	  

Why	  Is	  This	  Control	  Critical?	  

The	  misuse	  of	  administrative	  privileges	  is	  a	  primary	  method	  for	  attackers	  to	  spread	  
inside	  a	  target	  enterprise.	  Two	  very	  common	  attacker	  techniques	  take	  advantage	  of	  
uncontrolled	  administrative	  privileges.	  In	  the	  first,	  a	  workstation	  user	  running	  as	  a	  
privileged	  user,	  is	  fooled	  into	  opening	  a	  malicious	  e-mail	  attachment,	  downloading	  and	  
opening	  a	  file	  from	  a	  malicious	  website,	  or	  simply	  surfing	  to	  a	  website	  hosting	  attacker	  
content	  that	  can	  automatically	  exploit	  browsers.	  The	  file	  or	  exploit	  contains	  executable	  
code	  that	  runs	  on	  the	  victims	  machine	  either	  automatically	  or	  by	  tricking	  the	  user	  into	  
executing	  the	  attackers	  content.	  If	  the	  victim	  users	  account	  has	  administrative	  
privileges,	  the	  attacker	  can	  take	  over	  the	  victims	  machine	  completely	  and	  install	  
keystroke	  loggers,	  sniffers,	  and	  remote	  control	  software	  to	  find	  administrative	  
passwords	  and	  other	  sensitive	  data.	  	  Similar	  attacks	  occur	  with	  e-mail.	  	  An	  
administrator	  inadvertently	  opens	  an	  e-mail	  that	  contains	  an	  infected	  attachment	  and	  
this	  is	  used	  to	  obtain	  a	  pivot	  point	  within	  the	  network	  that	  is	  used	  to	  attack	  other	  
systems.	  
The	  second	  common	  technique	  used	  by	  attackers	  is	  elevation	  of	  privileges	  by	  guessing	  
or	  cracking	  a	  password	  for	  an	  administrative	  user	  to	  gain	  access	  to	  a	  target	  machine.	  If	  
administrative	  privileges	  are	  loosely	  and	  widely	  distributed,	  or	  identical	  to	  passwords	  
used	  on	  less	  critical	  systems,	  the	  attacker	  has	  a	  much	  easier	  time	  gaining	  full	  control	  of	  
systems,	  because	  there	  are	  many	  more	  accounts	  that	  can	  act	  as	  avenues	  for	  the	  attacker	  
to	  compromise	  administrative	  privileges.	  	  
Quick	  win	  	  (One	  
CSC	  12-1	   Minimize	  administrative	  privileges	  and	  only	  use	  
administrative	  accounts	  when	  they	  are	  required.	  	  
Implement	  focused	  auditing	  on	  the	  use	  of	  
administrative	  privileged	  functions	  and	  monitor	  for	  
anomalous	  behavior.	  
Quick	  win	  	  	  
Use	  automated	  tools	  to	  inventory	  all	  administrative	  
CSC	  12-2	  
accounts	  and	  validate	  that	  each	  person	  with	  
administrative	  privileges	  on	  desktops,	  laptops,	  and	  
servers	  is	  authorized	  by	  a	  senior	  executive.	  
Quick	  win	  	  	  
Configure	  all	  administrative	  passwords	  to	  be	  complex	  
CSC	  12-3	  
and	  contain	  letters,	  numbers,	  and	  special	  characters	  

How	  to	  Implement	  This	  Control	  

ID	  #	  

Description	  

Category	  

of	  the	  First	  
Five)	  	  

62	  

	  
CSC	  12-4	  
CSC	  12-5	  
CSC	  12-6	  
CSC	  12-7	  
CSC	  12-8	  

intermixed,	  and	  with	  no	  dictionary	  words	  present	  in	  the	  
password.	  Pass	  phrases	  containing	  multiple	  dictionary	  
words,	  along	  with	  special	  characters,	  are	  acceptable	  if	  
they	  are	  of	  a	  reasonable	  length.	  
Before	  deploying	  any	  new	  devices	  in	  a	  networked	  
environment,	  change	  all	  default	  passwords	  for	  
applications,	  operating	  systems,	  routers,	  firewalls,	  
wireless	  access	  points,	  and	  other	  systems	  to	  have	  
values	  consistent	  with	  administration-level	  accounts.	  
Ensure	  that	  all	  service	  accounts	  have	  long	  and	  difficult-
to-guess	  passwords	  that	  are	  changed	  on	  a	  periodic	  
basis,	  as	  is	  done	  for	  traditional	  user	  and	  administrative	  
passwords.	  
Passwords	  should	  be	  hashed	  or	  encrypted	  in	  storage.	  	  
Passwords	  that	  are	  hashed	  should	  be	  salted	  and	  follow	  
guidance	  provided	  in	  NIST	  SP	  800-132	  or	  similar	  
guidance.	  	  Files	  containing	  these	  encrypted	  or	  hashed	  
passwords	  required	  for	  systems	  to	  authenticate	  users	  
should	  be	  readable	  only	  with	  super-user	  privileges.	  
Utilize	  access	  control	  lists	  to	  ensure	  that	  administrative	  
accounts	  are	  used	  only	  for	  system	  administration	  
activities,	  and	  not	  for	  reading	  e-mail,	  composing	  
documents,	  or	  surfing	  the	  Internet.	  Web	  browsers	  and	  
e-mail	  clients	  especially	  must	  be	  configured	  to	  never	  
run	  as	  administrator.	  
Through	  policy	  and	  user	  awareness,	  require	  that	  
administrators	  establish	  unique,	  different	  passwords	  
for	  their	  administrative	  and	  non-administrative	  
accounts.	  	  Each	  person	  requiring	  administrative	  access	  
should	  be	  given	  his/her	  own	  separate	  account.	  Users	  
should	  only	  use	  the	  Windows	  administrator	  or	  UNIX	  
root	  accounts	  in	  emergency	  situations.	  	  Domain	  
administration	  accounts	  should	  be	  used	  when	  required	  
for	  system	  administration	  instead	  of	  local	  
administrative	  accounts.	  
Configure	  operating	  systems	  so	  that	  passwords	  cannot	  
CSC	  12-9	  
be	  re-used	  within	  a	  timeframe	  of	  six	  months.	  
CSC	  12-10	   Configure	  systems	  to	  issue	  a	  log	  entry	  and	  alert	  when	  
an	  account	  is	  added	  to	  or	  removed	  from	  a	  domain	  
administrators	  group,	  or	  when	  a	  new	  local	  
administrator	  account	  is	  added	  on	  a	  system.	  	  
CSC	  12-11	  
Configure	  systems	  to	  issue	  a	  log	  entry	  and	  alert	  when	  
unsuccessful	  login	  to	  an	  administrative	  account	  is	  
attempted.	  
CSC	  12-12	   Use	  multifactor	  authentication	  for	  all	  administrative	  

(NEW)	  

63	  

Quick	  win	  	  	  
Quick	  win	  	  	  
Quick	  win	  	  	  
Quick	  win	  	  	  
Quick	  win	  	  	  

Quick	  win	  	  	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

Configuration/	  

	  

access,	  including	  domain	  administrative	  access.	  	  Multi-
factor	  authentication	  can	  include	  a	  variety	  of	  
techniques,	  to	  include	  the	  use	  of	  smart	  cards	  with	  
certificates,	  One	  Time	  Password	  (OTP)	  tokens,	  and	  
biometrics.	  	  
CSC	  12-13	  
When	  using	  certificates	  to	  enable	  multi-factor	  
certificate-based	  authentication,	  ensure	  that	  the	  private	  
(NEW)	  
keys	  are	  protected	  using	  strong	  passwords	  or	  are	  
stored	  in	  trusted,	  secure	  hardware	  tokens.	  
CSC	  12-14	   Block	  access	  to	  a	  machine	  (either	  remotely	  or	  locally)	  
for	  administrator-level	  accounts.	  Instead,	  
administrators	  should	  be	  required	  to	  access	  a	  system	  
using	  a	  fully	  logged	  and	  non-administrative	  account.	  
Then,	  once	  logged	  on	  to	  the	  machine	  without	  
administrative	  privileges,	  the	  administrator	  should	  
transition	  to	  administrative	  privileges	  using	  tools	  such	  
as	  Sudo	  on	  Linux/UNIX,	  RunAs	  on	  Windows,	  and	  other	  
similar	  facilities	  for	  other	  types	  of	  systems.	  	  Users	  
would	  use	  their	  own	  administrative	  accounts	  and	  enter	  
a	  password	  each	  time	  that	  is	  different	  than	  their	  user	  
account.	  

Hygiene	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

CSC	  12	  Procedures	  and	  Tools	  

	  
Built-in	  operating	  system	  features	  can	  extract	  lists	  of	  accounts	  with	  super-user	  
privileges,	  both	  locally	  on	  individual	  systems	  and	  on	  overall	  domain	  controllers.	  To	  
verify	  that	  users	  with	  high-privileged	  accounts	  do	  not	  use	  such	  accounts	  for	  day-to-day	  
web	  surfing	  and	  e-mail	  reading,	  security	  personnel	  should	  periodically	  gather	  a	  list	  of	  
running	  processes	  to	  determine	  whether	  any	  browsers	  or	  e-mail	  readers	  are	  running	  
with	  high	  privileges.	  Such	  information	  gathering	  can	  be	  scripted,	  with	  short	  shell	  scripts	  
searching	  for	  a	  dozen	  or	  more	  different	  browsers,	  e-mail	  readers,	  and	  document	  editing	  
programs	  running	  with	  high	  privileges	  on	  machines.	  Some	  legitimate	  system	  
administration	  activity	  may	  require	  the	  execution	  of	  such	  programs	  over	  the	  short	  
term,	  but	  long-term	  or	  frequent	  use	  of	  such	  programs	  with	  administrative	  privileges	  
could	  indicate	  that	  an	  administrator	  is	  not	  adhering	  to	  this	  control.	  
To	  enforce	  the	  requirement	  for	  strong	  passwords,	  built-in	  operating	  system	  features	  for	  
minimum	  password	  length	  can	  be	  configured	  to	  prevent	  users	  from	  choosing	  short	  
passwords.	  To	  enforce	  password	  complexity	  (requiring	  passwords	  to	  be	  a	  string	  of	  
pseudo-random	  characters),	  built-in	  operating	  system	  settings	  or	  third-party	  password	  
complexity	  enforcement	  tools	  can	  be	  applied.	  

64	  

Control	  12	  Effectiveness	  Metrics 

	  
In	  order	  to	  test	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  the	  automated	  implementation	  of	  this	  control,	  
organizations	  should	  measure	  the	  following:	  
1. Does	  the	  system	  report	  on	  log-in	  to	  administrative	  accounts?	  
2. Does	  the	  system	  report	  on	  the	  elevation	  to	  administrative	  access,	  to	  include	  
traceability	  to	  the	  user	  account	  that	  performed	  the	  elevation?	  	  
3. Does	  the	  system	  provide	  an	  inventory	  of	  all	  administrative	  accounts?	  	  
4. Does	  the	  system	  report	  on	  the	  addition	  of	  new	  administrative	  accounts?	  
5. Does	  the	  system	  allow	  limitations	  to	  be	  placed	  on	  the	  use	  of	  administrative	  
accounts,	  to	  include	  not	  allowing	  web	  browsers	  and	  email	  clients	  to	  run	  as	  
administrator?	  	  	  
6. Does	  the	  system	  prevent	  administrative	  accounts	  from	  logging	  into	  machines,	  
either	  locally	  or	  remotely,	  instead	  requiring	  elevation	  of	  privileges	  once	  logged	  
in	  with	  a	  user	  account?	  	  
7. Does	  the	  system	  require	  strong	  passwords	  for	  all	  administrative	  accounts	  and	  
does	  the	  system	  require	  update	  of	  administrator	  passwords	  on	  a	  regular	  basis?	  
8. Does	  the	  system	  audit	  all	  attempts	  to	  gain	  access	  to	  password	  files	  within	  the	  
system?	  
9. Does	  the	  system	  comply	  with	  password	  policies	  detailed	  in	  the	  control	  (yes	  or	  
no)?	  
10. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  for	  administrators	  to	  be	  notified	  about	  user	  accounts	  
being	  added	  to	  super	  user	  groups	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
11. Are	  additional	  alerts	  generated	  every	  24	  hours	  until	  the	  user	  account	  has	  been	  
removed	  from	  or	  authorized	  to	  be	  a	  part	  of	  the	  super	  user	  group	  (yes	  or	  no)?	  
In	  order	  to	  automate	  the	  collection	  of	  relevant	  data	  from	  these	  systems,	  organizations	  
should	  gather	  the	  following	  information	  with	  automated	  technical	  sensors:	  
1. How	  many	  unauthorized	  elevated	  operating	  system	  accounts	  (local	  
administrator/root)	  are	  currently	  configured	  on	  the	  organizations	  systems	  (by	  
business	  unit)?	  
2. How	  many	  unauthorized	  elevated	  application	  accounts	  are	  currently	  configured	  
on	  the	  organizations	  systems	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
3. What	  percentage	  of	  the	  organizations	  elevated	  accounts	  do	  not	  currently	  adhere	  
to	  the	  organizations	  password	  standard	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
4. What	  percentage	  of	  the	  organizations	  elevated	  accounts	  do	  not	  require	  two-
factor	  authentication	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
5. How	  many	  attempts	  to	  upgrade	  an	  account	  to	  administrative	  privileges	  have	  
been	  detected	  on	  the	  organizations	  systems	  recently	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  	  
6. How	  many	  attempts	  to	  gain	  access	  to	  password	  files	  within	  the	  system	  have	  

CSC	  12	  Automation	  Metrics	  

65	  

	  

Control	  12	  Effectiveness	  Test	  

been	  detected	  on	  the	  organizations	  systems	  recently	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  	  
	  
To	  evaluate	  the	  implementation	  of	  Control	  12	  on	  a	  periodic	  basis,	  the	  evaluation	  team	  
must	  attempt	  a	  variety	  of	  techniques	  to	  gain	  access	  and	  exploit	  administrative	  accounts	  
within	  the	  system.	  Each	  of	  the	  following	  tests	  must	  be	  performed	  at	  least	  three	  times:	  
  Attempt	  to	  gain	  access	  to	  a	  cross	  section	  of	  devices	  within	  the	  system,	  using	  
default	  administrative	  passwords.	  
  Attempt	  to	  log-in	  remotely	  to	  machines	  using	  administrative	  accounts	  directly.	  	  
Verify	  that	  this	  is	  disallowed	  by	  policy.	  	  	  
  Attempt	  to	  log-in	  directly	  to	  a	  workstation	  or	  server	  with	  root	  or	  administrator	  
accounts.	  	  Verify	  that	  this	  is	  disallowed	  by	  policy.	  	  
  Attempt	  to	  gain	  access	  to	  password	  files	  within	  the	  system	  using	  unauthorized	  
accounts.	  	  Verify	  that	  access	  is	  disallowed	  and	  that	  attempts	  are	  logged	  and	  
reported.	  
  Attempt	  to	  elevate	  to	  a	  privileged	  account	  on	  the	  system.	  	  Verify	  that	  the	  
administrator	  password	  is	  required	  to	  perform	  the	  elevation	  and	  that	  the	  
elevation	  is	  logged	  and	  reported	  by	  the	  system.	  	  Verify	  that	  traceability	  within	  
the	  audit	  logs	  is	  provided	  to	  detail	  the	  user	  account	  that	  performed	  the	  elevation.	  	  	  
  Attempt	  to	  configure	  weak	  administrator	  passwords	  that	  are	  non-compliant	  
with	  established	  policy.	  	  Verify	  that	  the	  system	  does	  not	  allow	  weak	  passwords	  
to	  be	  used.	  	  
  Attempt	  to	  re-use	  an	  administrator	  password	  that	  was	  previously	  used	  for	  the	  
account.	  	  Verify	  that	  the	  system	  requires	  unique	  new	  passwords	  during	  each	  
update.	  	  
	  Each	  of	  these	  tests	  must	  be	  performed	  from	  multiple,	  widely	  distributed	  systems	  on	  the	  
organization's	  network	  in	  order	  to	  test	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  administrator	  controls.	  	  
Organizations	  will	  find	  that	  by	  diagramming	  the	  entities	  necessary	  to	  fully	  meet	  the	  
goals	  defined	  in	  this	  control,	  it	  will	  be	  easier	  to	  identify	  how	  to	  implement	  them,	  test	  the	  
controls,	  and	  identify	  where	  potential	  failures	  in	  the	  system	  might	  occur.	  

CSC	  12	  System	  Entity	  Relationship	  Diagram	  

66	  

	  

5

Password Assessment

System

Authentication 

Systems

1

2

2

Standard 

User Accounts

3

3

4

Administrative 
User Accounts

User Groups

Log Management
System / SIEM

 

Production Business
Systems with ACLs

A	  control	  system	  is	  a	  device	  or	  set	  of	  devices	  used	  to	  manage,	  command,	  direct,	  or	  
regulate	  the	  behavior	  of	  other	  devices	  or	  systems.	  In	  this	  case,	  we	  are	  examining	  the	  
components	  of	  user	  account	  provisioning	  and	  user	  authentication.	  The	  following	  list	  of	  
the	  steps	  in	  the	  above	  diagram	  shows	  how	  the	  entities	  work	  together	  to	  meet	  the	  
business	  goal	  defined	  in	  this	  control.	  The	  list	  also	  delineates	  each	  of	  the	  process	  steps	  in	  
order	  to	  help	  identify	  potential	  failure	  points	  in	  the	  overall	  control.	  	  

Step 1: Production systems use proper authentication systems 

Step 2: Standard and administrative user accounts use proper authentication systems 

Step 3: Standard and administrative user accounts properly managed via group 
memberships 

Step 4: Administrative access to systems properly logged via log management systems 

Step 5: Password assessment system validates the strength of the authentication systems. 

	  

67	  

	  

CSC	  13:	  	  Boundary	  Defense	  

Detect/prevent/correct	  the	  flow	  of	  information	  transferring	  networks	  of	  
different	  trust	  levels	  with	  a	  focus	  on	  security-damaging	  data.	  

Why	  Is	  This	  Control	  Critical?	  

Attackers	  focus	  on	  exploiting	  systems	  that	  they	  can	  reach	  across	  the	  Internet,	  including	  
not	  only	  DMZ	  systems	  but	  also	  workstation	  and	  laptop	  computers	  that	  pull	  content	  
from	  the	  Internet	  through	  network	  boundaries.	  Threats	  such	  as	  organized	  crime	  groups	  
and	  nation-states	  use	  configuration	  and	  architectural	  weaknesses	  found	  on	  perimeter	  
systems,	  network	  devices,	  and	  Internet-accessing	  client	  machines	  to	  gain	  initial	  access	  
into	  an	  organization.	  Then,	  with	  a	  base	  of	  operations	  on	  these	  machines,	  attackers	  often	  
pivot	  to	  get	  deeper	  inside	  the	  boundary	  to	  steal	  or	  change	  information	  or	  to	  set	  up	  a	  
persistent	  presence	  for	  later	  attacks	  against	  internal	  hosts.	  Additionally,	  many	  attacks	  
occur	  between	  business	  partner	  networks,	  sometimes	  referred	  to	  as	  extranets,	  as	  
attackers	  hop	  from	  one	  organizations	  network	  to	  another,	  exploiting	  vulnerable	  
systems	  on	  extranet	  perimeters.	  
To	  control	  the	  flow	  of	  traffic	  through	  network	  borders	  and	  police	  content	  by	  looking	  for	  
attacks	  and	  evidence	  of	  compromised	  machines,	  boundary	  defenses	  should	  be	  multi-
layered,	  relying	  on	  firewalls,	  proxies,	  DMZ	  perimeter	  networks,	  and	  network-based	  IPS	  
and	  IDS.	  	  It	  is	  also	  critical	  to	  filter	  both	  inbound	  and	  outbound	  traffic.	  
It	  should	  be	  noted	  that	  boundary	  lines	  between	  internal	  and	  external	  networks	  are	  
diminishing	  as	  a	  result	  of	  increased	  interconnectivity	  within	  and	  between	  organizations	  
as	  well	  as	  the	  rapid	  rise	  in	  deployment	  of	  wireless	  technologies.	  These	  blurring	  lines	  
sometimes	  allow	  attackers	  to	  gain	  access	  inside	  networks	  while	  bypassing	  boundary	  
systems.	  However,	  even	  with	  this	  blurring	  of	  boundaries,	  effective	  security	  
deployments	  still	  rely	  on	  carefully	  configured	  boundary	  defenses	  that	  separate	  
networks	  with	  different	  threat	  levels,	  sets	  of	  users,	  and	  levels	  of	  control.	  And	  despite	  
the	  blurring	  of	  internal	  and	  external	  networks,	  effective	  multi-layered	  defenses	  of	  
perimeter	  networks	  help	  lower	  the	  number	  of	  successful	  attacks,	  allowing	  security	  
personnel	  to	  focus	  on	  attackers	  who	  have	  devised	  methods	  to	  bypass	  boundary	  
restrictions.	  
	  	  	  

68	  

How	  to	  Implement	  This	  Control	  

	  
CSC	  13-1	  

ID	  #	  

CSC	  13-2	  

CSC	  13-3	  
CSC	  13-4	  
CSC	  13-5	  

Category	  
Quick	  win	  

Quick	  win	  	  	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

Description	  

Deny	  communications	  with	  (or	  limit	  data	  flow	  to)	  known	  
malicious	  IP	  addresses	  (black	  lists),	  or	  limit	  access	  only	  
to	  trusted	  sites	  (whitelists).	  Tests	  can	  be	  periodically	  
carried	  out	  by	  sending	  packets	  from	  bogon	  source	  IP	  
addresses	  (non-routable	  or	  otherwise	  unused	  IP	  
addresses)	  into	  the	  network	  to	  verify	  that	  they	  are	  not	  
transmitted	  through	  network	  perimeters.	  Lists	  of	  bogon	  
addresses	  are	  publicly	  available	  on	  the	  Internet	  from	  
various	  sources,	  and	  indicate	  a	  series	  of	  IP	  addresses	  
that	  should	  not	  be	  used	  for	  legitimate	  traffic	  traversing	  
the	  Internet.	  	  
On	  DMZ	  networks,	  configure	  monitoring	  systems	  (which	  
may	  be	  built	  in	  to	  the	  IDS	  sensors	  or	  deployed	  as	  a	  
separate	  technology)	  to	  record	  at	  least	  packet	  header	  
information,	  and	  preferably	  full	  packet	  header	  and	  
payloads	  of	  the	  traffic	  destined	  for	  or	  passing	  through	  
the	  network	  border.	  	  This	  traffic	  should	  be	  sent	  to	  a	  
properly	  configured	  Security	  Information	  Event	  
Management	  (SIEM)	  or	  log	  analytics	  system	  so	  that	  
events	  can	  be	  correlated	  from	  all	  devices	  on	  the	  
network.	  .	  
To	  lower	  the	  chance	  of	  spoofed	  e-mail	  messages,	  
implement	  the	  Sender	  Policy	  Framework	  (SPF)	  by	  
deploying	  SPF	  records	  in	  DNS	  and	  enabling	  receiver-side	  
verification	  in	  mail	  servers.	  
Deploy	  network-based	  IDS	  sensors	  on	  Internet	  and	  
extranet	  DMZ	  systems	  and	  networks	  that	  look	  for	  
unusual	  attack	  mechanisms	  and	  detect	  compromise	  of	  
these	  systems.	  These	  network-based	  IDS	  sensors	  may	  
detect	  attacks	  through	  the	  use	  of	  signatures,	  network	  
behavior	  analysis,	  or	  other	  mechanisms	  to	  analyze	  
traffic.	  	  
Network-based	  IPS	  devices	  should	  be	  deployed	  to	  
complement	  IDS	  by	  blocking	  known	  bad	  signature	  or	  
behavior	  of	  attacks.	  	  As	  attacks	  become	  automated,	  
methods	  such	  as	  IDS	  typically	  delay	  the	  amount	  of	  time	  
it	  takes	  for	  someone	  to	  react	  to	  an	  attack.	  	  A	  properly	  
configured	  network-based	  IPS	  can	  provide	  automation	  
to	  block	  bad	  traffic.	  When	  evaluating	  network-based	  IPS	  
products,	  include	  those	  using	  techniques	  other	  than	  
signature-based	  detection	  (such	  as	  virtual	  machine	  or	  
sandbox-based	  approaches)	  for	  consideration.	  	  

69	  

	  
CSC	  13-6	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

Design	  and	  implement	  network	  perimeters	  so	  that	  all	  
outgoing	  web,	  file	  transfer	  protocol	  (FTP),	  and	  secure	  
shell	  traffic	  to	  the	  Internet	  must	  pass	  through	  at	  least	  
one	  proxy	  on	  a	  DMZ	  network.	  The	  proxy	  should	  support	  
logging	  individual	  TCP	  sessions;	  blocking	  specific	  URLs,	  
domain	  names,	  and	  IP	  addresses	  to	  implement	  a	  black	  
list;	  and	  applying	  whitelists	  of	  allowed	  sites	  that	  can	  be	  
accessed	  through	  the	  proxy	  while	  blocking	  all	  other	  
sites.	  	  Organizations	  should	  force	  outbound	  traffic	  to	  the	  
Internet	  through	  an	  authenticated	  proxy	  server	  on	  the	  
enterprise	  perimeter.	  	  Proxies	  can	  also	  be	  used	  to	  
encrypt	  all	  traffic	  leaving	  an	  organization.	  
Require	  all	  remote	  login	  access	  (including	  VPN,	  dial-up,	  
CSC	  13-7	  
and	  other	  forms	  of	  access	  that	  allow	  login	  to	  internal	  
systems)	  to	  use	  two-factor	  authentication.	  
All	  enterprise	  devices	  remotely	  logging	  into	  the	  internal	  
CSC	  13-8	  
network	  should	  be	  managed	  by	  the	  enterprise,	  with	  
remote	  control	  of	  their	  configuration,	  installed	  software,	  
and	  patch	  levels.	  For	  third-party	  devices	  (e.g.,	  
subcontractors/vendors),	  publish	  minimum	  security	  
standards	  for	  access	  to	  the	  enterprise	  network	  and	  
perform	  a	  security	  scan	  before	  allowing	  access.	  	  
Periodically	  scan	  for	  back-channel	  connections	  to	  the	  
CSC	  13-9	  
Internet	  that	  bypass	  the	  DMZ,	  including	  unauthorized	  
VPN	  connections	  and	  dual-homed	  hosts	  connected	  to	  the	  
enterprise	  network	  and	  to	  other	  networks	  via	  wireless,	  
dial-up	  modems,	  or	  other	  mechanisms.	  	  	  	  
CSC	  13-10	   To	  limit	  access	  by	  an	  insider,	  untrusted	  
subcontractor/vendor,	  or	  malware	  spreading	  on	  an	  
internal	  network,	  devise	  internal	  network	  segmentation	  
schemes	  to	  limit	  traffic	  to	  only	  those	  services	  needed	  for	  
business	  use	  across	  the	  organizations	  internal	  network.	  	   Configuration/	  
CSC	  13-12	   To	  minimize	  the	  impact	  of	  an	  attacker	  pivoting	  between	  
compromised	  systems,	  only	  allow	  DMZ	  systems	  to	  
communicate	  with	  private	  network	  systems	  via	  
application	  proxies	  or	  application-aware	  firewalls	  over	  
approved	  channels.	  
CSC	  13-13	   To	  help	  identify	  covert	  channels	  exfiltrating	  data	  
through	  a	  firewall,	  configure	  the	  built-in	  firewall	  session	  
tracking	  mechanisms	  included	  in	  many	  commercial	  
firewalls	  to	  identify	  TCP	  sessions	  that	  last	  an	  unusually	  
long	  time	  for	  the	  given	  organization	  and	  firewall	  device,	  
alerting	  personnel	  about	  the	  source	  and	  destination	  
addresses	  associated	  with	  these	  long	  sessions.	  
CSC	  13-14	   Deploy	  NetFlow	  collection	  and	  analysis	  to	  DMZ	  network	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

Configuration/

Hygiene	  

Advanced	  

Advanced	  

70	  

	  

flows	  to	  detect	  anomalous	  activity.	  

Hygiene	  

	  

CSC	  13	  Procedures	  and	  Tools	  

The	  boundary	  defenses	  included	  in	  this	  control	  build	  on	  Critical	  Control	  10.	  The	  
additional	  recommendations	  here	  focus	  on	  improving	  the	  overall	  architecture	  and	  
implementation	  of	  both	  Internet	  and	  internal	  network	  boundary	  points.	  Internal	  
network	  segmentation	  is	  central	  to	  this	  control	  because	  once	  inside	  a	  network,	  many	  
intruders	  attempt	  to	  target	  the	  most	  sensitive	  machines.	  Usually,	  internal	  network	  
protection	  is	  not	  set	  up	  to	  defend	  against	  an	  internal	  attacker.	  Setting	  up	  even	  a	  basic	  
level	  of	  security	  segmentation	  across	  the	  network	  and	  protecting	  each	  segment	  with	  a	  
proxy	  and	  a	  firewall	  will	  greatly	  reduce	  an	  intruders	  access	  to	  the	  other	  parts	  of	  the	  
network.	  
One	  element	  of	  this	  control	  can	  be	  implemented	  using	  free	  or	  commercial	  IDS	  and	  
sniffers	  to	  look	  for	  attacks	  from	  external	  sources	  directed	  at	  DMZ	  and	  internal	  systems,	  
as	  well	  as	  attacks	  originating	  from	  internal	  systems	  against	  the	  DMZ	  or	  Internet.	  
Security	  personnel	  should	  regularly	  test	  these	  sensors	  by	  launching	  vulnerability-
scanning	  tools	  against	  them	  to	  verify	  that	  the	  scanner	  traffic	  triggers	  an	  appropriate	  
alert.	  The	  captured	  packets	  of	  the	  IDS	  sensors	  should	  be	  reviewed	  using	  an	  automated	  
script	  each	  day	  to	  ensure	  that	  log	  volumes	  are	  within	  expected	  parameters	  and	  that	  the	  
logs	  are	  formatted	  properly	  and	  have	  not	  been	  corrupted.	  
Additionally,	  packet	  sniffers	  should	  be	  deployed	  on	  DMZs	  to	  look	  for	  Hypertext	  Transfer	  
Protocol	  (HTTP)	  traffic	  that	  bypasses	  HTTP	  proxies.	  By	  sampling	  traffic	  regularly,	  such	  
as	  over	  a	  three-hour	  period	  once	  a	  week,	  information	  security	  personnel	  can	  search	  for	  
HTTP	  traffic	  that	  is	  neither	  sourced	  by	  nor	  destined	  for	  a	  DMZ	  proxy,	  implying	  that	  the	  
requirement	  for	  proxy	  use	  is	  being	  bypassed.	  
To	  identify	  back-channel	  connections	  that	  bypass	  approved	  DMZs,	  network	  security	  
personnel	  can	  establish	  an	  Internet-accessible	  system	  to	  use	  as	  a	  receiver	  for	  testing	  
outbound	  access.	  This	  system	  is	  configured	  with	  a	  free	  or	  commercial	  packet	  sniffer.	  
Then,	  security	  personnel	  can	  connect	  a	  sending	  test	  system	  to	  various	  points	  on	  the	  
organizations	  internal	  network,	  sending	  easily	  identifiable	  traffic	  to	  the	  sniffing	  
receiver	  on	  the	  Internet.	  These	  packets	  can	  be	  generated	  using	  free	  or	  commercial	  tools	  
with	  a	  payload	  that	  contains	  a	  custom	  file	  used	  for	  the	  test.	  When	  the	  packets	  arrive	  at	  
the	  receiver	  system,	  the	  source	  address	  of	  the	  packets	  should	  be	  verified	  against	  
acceptable	  DMZ	  addresses	  allowed	  for	  the	  organization.	  If	  source	  addresses	  are	  
discovered	  that	  are	  not	  included	  in	  legitimate,	  registered	  DMZs,	  more	  detail	  can	  be	  
gathered	  by	  using	  a	  traceroute	  tool	  to	  determine	  the	  path	  that	  packets	  take	  from	  the	  
sender	  to	  the	  receiver	  system.	  

71	  

CSC	  13	  Effectiveness	  Metrics	  

	  
In	  order	  to	  test	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  the	  automated	  implementation	  of	  this	  control,	  
organizations	  should	  measure	  the	  following:	  
1. Are	  all	  unauthorized	  packets	  entering	  or	  leaving	  the	  network	  detected	  (yes	  or	  
no)?	  
2. Do	  all	  network	  connections	  to	  the	  Internet,	  business	  partners,	  or	  other	  third	  
parties	  currently	  utilize	  inbound	  &	  outbound	  network	  filters,	  and	  Intrusion	  
Detection	  Systems	  (IDS)	  (yes	  or	  no)?	  	  
3. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  before	  unauthorized	  network	  packets	  are	  alerted	  on	  when	  
passing	  through	  perimeter	  systems	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
4. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  to	  apply	  configuration	  changes	  to	  block	  unauthorized	  
traffic	  passing	  through	  perimeter	  systems	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
In	  order	  to	  automate	  the	  collection	  of	  relevant	  data	  from	  these	  systems,	  organizations	  
should	  gather	  the	  following	  information	  with	  automated	  technical	  sensors:	  
1. What	  percentage	  of	  the	  organizations	  remote	  access	  users	  are	  not	  required	  to	  
use	  two-factor	  authentication	  to	  remotely	  access	  the	  organizations	  network	  (by	  
business	  unit)?	  
2. What	  percentage	  of	  remote	  business	  systems	  are	  not	  managed	  using	  the	  same	  
security	  standards	  as	  internal	  network	  systems	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
3. What	  percentage	  of	  the	  organizations	  internal	  systems	  are	  not	  on	  dedicated	  
Virtual	  LANs	  (VLANs)	  that	  are	  segmented	  with	  access	  control	  lists	  (by	  business	  
unit)?	  
4. How	  many	  events	  of	  interest	  have	  been	  discovered	  recently	  on	  the	  
organizations	  network	  through	  analysis	  of	  NetFlow	  configured	  on	  network	  
devices	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
To	  evaluate	  the	  implementation	  of	  Control	  13	  on	  a	  periodic	  basis,	  an	  evaluation	  team	  
must	  test	  boundary	  devices	  by	  sending	  packets	  from	  outside	  any	  trusted	  network	  to	  
ensure	  that	  only	  authorized	  packets	  are	  allowed	  through	  the	  boundary.	  All	  other	  
packets	  must	  be	  dropped.	  In	  addition,	  unauthorized	  packets	  must	  be	  sent	  from	  a	  
trusted	  network	  to	  an	  untrusted	  network	  to	  make	  sure	  egress	  filtering	  is	  functioning	  
properly.	  The	  evaluation	  team	  must	  then	  verify	  that	  the	  systems	  generate	  an	  alert	  or	  e-
mail	  notice	  regarding	  the	  unauthorized	  packets	  within	  24	  hours.	  It	  is	  important	  that	  the	  
evaluation	  team	  verify	  that	  all	  unauthorized	  packets	  have	  been	  detected.	  The	  evaluation	  
team	  must	  also	  verify	  that	  the	  alert	  or	  e-mail	  indicating	  that	  the	  unauthorized	  traffic	  is	  

CSC	  13	  Automation	  Metrics	  

CSC	  13	  Effectiveness	  Test	  

72	  

	  
now	  being	  blocked	  is	  received	  within	  one	  hour.	  The	  evaluation	  team	  must	  verify	  that	  
the	  system	  provides	  details	  of	  the	  location	  of	  each	  machine	  with	  this	  new	  test	  software,	  
including	  information	  about	  the	  asset	  owner.	  It	  is	  also	  important	  that	  the	  evaluation	  
team	  test	  to	  ensure	  that	  the	  device	  fails	  in	  a	  state	  where	  it	  does	  not	  forward	  traffic	  when	  
it	  crashes	  or	  becomes	  flooded.	  
Organizations	  will	  find	  that	  by	  diagramming	  the	  entities	  necessary	  to	  fully	  meet	  the	  
goals	  defined	  in	  this	  control,	  it	  will	  be	  easier	  to	  identify	  how	  to	  implement	  them,	  test	  the	  
controls,	  and	  identify	  where	  potential	  failures	  in	  the	  system	  might	  occur.	  

CSC	  13	  System	  Entity	  Relationship	  Diagram	  

A	  control	  system	  is	  a	  device	  or	  set	  of	  devices	  used	  to	  manage,	  command,	  direct,	  or	  
regulate	  the	  behavior	  of	  other	  devices	  or	  systems.	  In	  this	  case	  we	  are	  examining	  the	  
network	  boundary	  devices	  and	  the	  supporting	  systems	  such	  as	  authentication	  servers,	  
two-factor	  authentication	  systems,	  network	  monitoring	  systems,	  and	  network	  proxy	  
devices.	  The	  following	  list	  of	  the	  steps	  in	  the	  above	  diagram	  shows	  how	  the	  entities	  
work	  together	  to	  meet	  the	  business	  goal	  defined	  in	  this	  control.	  The	  list	  also	  delineates	  
each	  of	  the	  process	  steps	  in	  order	  to	  help	  identify	  potential	  failure	  points	  in	  the	  overall	  
control.	  	  

 

Step 1: Hardened device configurations applied to production devices 

73	  

	  

Step 2: Two-factor authentication systems required for administrative access to production 

devices 

Step 3: Production network devices send events to log management and correlation system 

Step 4: Network monitoring system analyzes network traffic 

Step 5: Network monitoring system sends events to log management and correlation system 

Step 6: Outbound traffic passes through and is examined by network proxy devices 

Step 7: Network systems scanned for potential weaknesses.	  

74	  

	  

CSC	  14:	  	  Maintenance,	  Monitoring,	  and	  Analysis	  of	  Audit	  Logs	  

Collect,	  manage,	  and	  analyze	  audit	  logs	  of	  events	  that	  could	  help	  detect,	  
understand,	  or	  recover	  from	  an	  attack.	  	  

Why	  Is	  This	  Control	  Critical?	  

Deficiencies	  in	  security	  logging	  and	  analysis	  allow	  attackers	  to	  hide	  their	  location,	  
malicious	  software,	  and	  activities	  on	  victim	  machines.	  Even	  if	  the	  victims	  know	  that	  
their	  systems	  have	  been	  compromised,	  without	  protected	  and	  complete	  logging	  records	  
they	  are	  blind	  to	  the	  details	  of	  the	  attack	  and	  to	  subsequent	  actions	  taken	  by	  the	  
attackers.	  Without	  solid	  audit	  logs,	  an	  attack	  may	  go	  unnoticed	  indefinitely	  and	  the	  
particular	  damages	  done	  may	  be	  irreversible.	  
Sometimes	  logging	  records	  are	  the	  only	  evidence	  of	  a	  successful	  attack.	  Many	  
organizations	  keep	  audit	  records	  for	  compliance	  purposes,	  but	  attackers	  rely	  on	  the	  fact	  
that	  such	  organizations	  rarely	  look	  at	  the	  audit	  logs,	  so	  they	  do	  not	  know	  that	  their	  
systems	  have	  been	  compromised.	  Because	  of	  poor	  or	  nonexistent	  log	  analysis	  
processes,	  attackers	  sometimes	  control	  victim	  machines	  for	  months	  or	  years	  without	  
anyone	  in	  the	  target	  organization	  knowing,	  even	  though	  the	  evidence	  of	  the	  attack	  has	  
been	  recorded	  in	  unexamined	  log	  files.	  
CSC	  14-1	  
CSC	  14-2	  

Include	  at	  least	  two	  synchronized	  time	  sources	  (i.e.,	  
Network	  Time	  Protocol	  	  NTP)	  from	  which	  all	  servers	  and	  
network	  equipment	  retrieve	  time	  information	  on	  a	  regular	  
basis	  so	  that	  timestamps	  in	  logs	  are	  consistent,	  and	  are	  set	  
to	  UTC	  (Coordinate	  Universal	  Time).	  	  
Validate	  audit	  log	  settings	  for	  each	  hardware	  device	  and	  
the	  software	  installed	  on	  it,	  ensuring	  that	  logs	  include	  a	  
date,	  timestamp,	  source	  addresses,	  destination	  addresses,	  
and	  various	  other	  useful	  elements	  of	  each	  packet	  and/or	  
transaction.	  Systems	  should	  record	  logs	  in	  a	  standardized	  
format	  such	  as	  syslog	  entries	  or	  those	  outlined	  by	  the	  
Common	  Event	  Expression	  initiative.	  If	  systems	  cannot	  
generate	  logs	  in	  a	  standardized	  format,	  log	  normalization	  
tools	  can	  be	  deployed	  to	  convert	  logs	  into	  such	  a	  format.	  	  

How	  to	  Implement	  This	  Control	  

Category	  
Quick	  win	  

Quick	  win	  	  	  

ID	  #	  

Description	  

75	  

	  
CSC	  14-3	  
CSC	  14-4	  
CSC	  14-5	  
CSC	  14-6	  
CSC	  14-7	  
CSC	  14-8	  

CSC	  14-9	  

Ensure	  that	  all	  systems	  that	  store	  logs	  have	  adequate	  
storage	  space	  for	  the	  logs	  generated	  on	  a	  regular	  basis,	  so	  
that	  log	  files	  will	  not	  fill	  up	  between	  log	  rotation	  intervals.	  	  
The	  logs	  must	  be	  archived	  and	  digitally	  signed	  on	  a	  
periodic	  basis.	  
Develop	  a	  log	  retention	  policy	  to	  make	  sure	  that	  the	  logs	  
are	  kept	  for	  a	  sufficient	  period	  of	  time.	  	  Organizations	  are	  
often	  compromised	  for	  several	  months	  without	  detection.	  	  
The	  logs	  must	  be	  kept	  for	  a	  longer	  period	  of	  time	  than	  it	  
takes	  an	  organization	  to	  detect	  an	  attack	  so	  they	  can	  
accurately	  determine	  what	  occurred.	  
Have	  security	  personnel	  and/or	  system	  administrators	  
run	  biweekly	  reports	  that	  identify	  anomalies	  in	  logs.	  They	  
should	  then	  actively	  review	  the	  anomalies,	  documenting	  
their	  findings.	  
Configure	  network	  boundary	  devices,	  including	  firewalls,	  
network-based	  IPS,	  and	  inbound	  and	  outbound	  proxies,	  to	  
verbosely	  log	  all	  traffic	  (both	  allowed	  and	  blocked)	  
arriving	  at	  the	  device.	  
For	  all	  servers,	  ensure	  that	  logs	  are	  written	  to	  write-only	  
devices	  or	  to	  dedicated	  logging	  servers	  running	  on	  
separate	  machines	  from	  the	  hosts	  generating	  the	  event	  
logs,	  lowering	  the	  chance	  that	  an	  attacker	  can	  manipulate	  
logs	  stored	  locally	  on	  compromised	  machines.	  	  	  
Deploy	  a	  SIEM	  (Security	  Incident	  and	  Event	  Management)	  
or	  log	  analytic	  tools	  for	  log	  aggregation	  and	  consolidation	  
from	  multiple	  machines	  and	  for	  log	  correlation	  and	  
analysis.	  	  Using	  the	  SIEM	  tool,	  system	  administrators	  and	  
security	  personnel	  should	  devise	  profiles	  of	  common	  
events	  from	  given	  systems	  so	  that	  they	  can	  tune	  detection	  
to	  focus	  on	  unusual	  activity,	  avoid	  false	  positives,	  more	  
rapidly	  identify	  anomalies,	  and	  prevent	  overwhelming	  
analysts	  with	  insignificant	  alerts.	  	  	  
Monitor	  for	  service	  creation	  events	  and	  enable	  process	  
tracking	  logs.	  On	  Windows	  systems,	  many	  attackers	  use	  
PsExec	  functionality	  to	  spread	  from	  system	  to	  system.	  	  
Creation	  of	  a	  service	  is	  an	  unusual	  event	  and	  should	  be	  
monitored	  closely.	  Process	  tracking	  is	  valuable	  for	  
incident	  handling.	  

Quick	  win	  	  	  
Quick	  win	  	  	  
Quick	  win	  	  	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

Advanced	  

76	  

(NEW)	  

Advanced	  

CSC	  14	  Procedures	  and	  Tools	  

	  
Ensure	  that	  the	  log	  collection	  system	  does	  not	  lose	  events	  
CSC	  14-10	  
during	  peak	  activity,	  and	  that	  the	  system	  detects	  and	  
alerts	  if	  event	  loss	  occurs	  (such	  as	  when	  volume	  exceeds	  
the	  capacity	  of	  a	  log	  collection	  system).	  This	  includes	  
ensuring	  that	  the	  log	  collection	  system	  can	  accommodate	  
intermittent	  or	  restricted-bandwidth	  connectivity	  through	  
the	  use	  of	  handshaking	  /	  flow	  control.	  
	  
Most	  free	  and	  commercial	  operating	  systems,	  network	  services,	  and	  firewall	  
technologies	  offer	  logging	  capabilities.	  Such	  logging	  should	  be	  activated,	  with	  logs	  sent	  
to	  centralized	  logging	  servers.	  Firewalls,	  proxies,	  and	  remote	  access	  systems	  (VPN,	  dial-
up,	  etc.)	  should	  all	  be	  configured	  for	  verbose	  logging,	  storing	  all	  the	  information	  
available	  for	  logging	  in	  the	  event	  a	  follow-up	  investigation	  is	  required.	  Furthermore,	  
operating	  systems,	  especially	  those	  of	  servers,	  should	  be	  configured	  to	  create	  access	  
control	  logs	  when	  a	  user	  attempts	  to	  access	  resources	  without	  the	  appropriate	  
privileges.	  To	  evaluate	  whether	  such	  logging	  is	  in	  place,	  an	  organization	  should	  
periodically	  scan	  through	  its	  logs	  and	  compare	  them	  with	  the	  asset	  inventory	  
assembled	  as	  part	  of	  Critical	  Control	  1	  in	  order	  to	  ensure	  that	  each	  managed	  item	  
actively	  connected	  to	  the	  network	  is	  periodically	  generating	  logs.	  
Analytical	  programs	  such	  as	  SIM/SEM	  solutions	  for	  reviewing	  logs	  can	  provide	  value,	  
but	  the	  capabilities	  employed	  to	  analyze	  audit	  logs	  are	  quite	  extensive,	  even	  including,	  
importantly,	  just	  a	  cursory	  examination	  by	  a	  person.	  Actual	  correlation	  tools	  can	  make	  
audit	  logs	  far	  more	  useful	  for	  subsequent	  manual	  inspection.	  Such	  tools	  can	  be	  quite	  
helpful	  in	  identifying	  subtle	  attacks.	  However,	  these	  tools	  are	  neither	  a	  panacea	  nor	  a	  
replacement	  for	  skilled	  information	  security	  personnel	  and	  system	  administrators.	  
Even	  with	  automated	  log	  analysis	  tools,	  human	  expertise	  and	  intuition	  are	  often	  
required	  to	  identify	  and	  understand	  attacks.	  
In	  order	  to	  test	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  the	  automated	  implementation	  of	  this	  control,	  
organizations	  should	  measure	  the	  following:	  
1. Does	  each	  system	  log	  appropriately	  to	  a	  central	  log	  management	  system	  (yes	  or	  
no)?	  
2. Does	  each	  log	  event	  generated	  include	  a	  date,	  timestamp,	  source	  address,	  
destination	  address	  and	  other	  details	  about	  the	  packet	  (yes	  or	  no)?	  
3. If	  a	  system	  fails	  to	  log	  properly,	  how	  long	  does	  it	  take	  for	  an	  alert	  about	  the	  
failure	  to	  be	  sent	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  

CSC	  14	  Effectiveness	  Metrics	  

77	  

	  

CSC	  14	  Automation	  Metrics	  

4. If	  a	  system	  fails	  to	  log	  properly,	  how	  long	  does	  it	  take	  for	  enterprise	  personnel	  to	  
receive	  the	  alert	  about	  the	  failure	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
In	  order	  to	  automate	  the	  collection	  of	  relevant	  data	  from	  these	  systems,	  organizations	  
should	  gather	  the	  following	  information	  with	  automated	  technical	  sensors:	  
1. What	  percentage	  of	  the	  organizations	  systems	  do	  not	  currently	  have	  
comprehensive	  logging	  enabled	  in	  accordance	  with	  the	  organizations	  standard	  
(by	  business	  unit)?	  
2. What	  percentage	  of	  the	  organizations	  systems	  are	  not	  currently	  configured	  to	  
centralize	  their	  logs	  to	  a	  central	  log	  management	  system	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
3. How	  many	  anomalies	  /	  events	  of	  interest	  have	  been	  discovered	  in	  the	  
organizations	  logs	  recently	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
To	  evaluate	  the	  implementation	  of	  Control	  14	  on	  a	  periodic	  basis,	  an	  evaluation	  team	  
must	  review	  the	  security	  logs	  of	  various	  network	  devices,	  servers,	  and	  hosts.	  At	  a	  
minimum	  the	  following	  devices	  must	  be	  tested:	  two	  routers,	  two	  firewalls,	  two	  
switches,	  10	  servers,	  and	  10	  client	  systems.	  The	  testing	  team	  should	  use	  traffic-
generating	  tools	  to	  send	  packets	  through	  the	  systems	  under	  analysis	  to	  verify	  that	  the	  
traffic	  is	  logged.	  This	  analysis	  is	  done	  by	  creating	  controlled,	  benign	  events	  and	  
determining	  if	  the	  information	  is	  properly	  recorded	  in	  the	  logs	  with	  key	  information,	  
including	  a	  date,	  timestamp,	  source	  address,	  destination	  address,	  and	  other	  details	  
about	  the	  packet.	  The	  evaluation	  team	  must	  verify	  that	  the	  system	  generates	  audit	  logs	  
and,	  if	  not,	  an	  alert	  or	  e-mail	  notice	  regarding	  the	  failed	  logging	  must	  be	  sent	  within	  24	  
hours.	  It	  is	  important	  that	  the	  team	  verify	  that	  all	  activity	  has	  been	  detected.	  The	  
evaluation	  team	  must	  verify	  that	  the	  system	  provides	  details	  of	  the	  location	  of	  each	  
machine,	  including	  information	  about	  the	  asset	  owner.	  
Organizations	  will	  find	  that	  by	  diagramming	  the	  entities	  necessary	  to	  fully	  meet	  the	  
goals	  defined	  in	  this	  control,	  it	  will	  be	  easier	  to	  identify	  how	  to	  implement	  them,	  test	  the	  
controls,	  and	  identify	  where	  potential	  failures	  in	  the	  system	  might	  occur.	  

CSC	  14	  System	  Entity	  Relationship	  Diagram	  

CSC	  14	  Effectiveness	  Test	  

78	  

	  

A	  control	  system	  is	  a	  device	  or	  set	  of	  devices	  used	  to	  manage,	  command,	  direct,	  or	  
regulate	  the	  behavior	  of	  other	  devices	  or	  systems.	  In	  this	  case,	  we	  are	  examining	  audit	  
logs,	  the	  central	  log	  database	  system,	  the	  central	  time	  system,	  and	  log	  analysts.	  The	  
following	  list	  of	  the	  steps	  in	  the	  above	  diagram	  shows	  how	  the	  entities	  work	  together	  to	  
meet	  the	  business	  goal	  defined	  in	  this	  control.	  The	  list	  also	  delineates	  each	  of	  the	  
process	  steps	  in	  order	  to	  help	  identify	  potential	  failure	  points	  in	  the	  overall	  control.	  	  

 

Step 1: Production systems generate logs and send them to a centrally managed log database 

system 

Step 2: Production systems and log database system pulls synchronize time with central time 

management systems 

Step 3: Logs analyzed by a log analysis system 

Step 4: Log analysts examine data generated by log analysis system. 

	  

79	  

	  

CSC	  15:	  	  Controlled	  Access	  Based	  on	  the	  Need	  to	  Know	  

The	  processes	  and	  tools	  used	  to	  track/control/prevent/correct	  secure	  access	  to	  
critical	  assets	  (e.g.,	  information,	  resources,	  systems)	  according	  to	  the	  formal	  
determination	  of	  which	  persons,	  computers,	  and	  applications	  have	  a	  need	  and	  
right	  to	  access	  these	  critical	  assets	  based	  on	  an	  approved	  classification.	  

Why	  Is	  This	  Control	  Critical?	  

How	  to	  Implement	  This	  Control	  

Some	  organizations	  do	  not	  carefully	  identify	  and	  separate	  their	  most	  sensitive	  and	  
critical	  assets	  from	  less	  sensitive,	  publicly	  accessible	  information	  on	  their	  internal	  
networks.	  In	  many	  environments,	  internal	  users	  have	  access	  to	  all	  or	  most	  of	  the	  critical	  
assets.	  Sensitive	  assets	  may	  also	  include	  systems	  that	  provide	  management	  and	  control	  
of	  physical	  systems	  (e.g.,	  SCADA).	  Once	  attackers	  have	  penetrated	  such	  a	  network,	  they	  
can	  easily	  find	  and	  exfiltrate	  important	  information,	  cause	  physical	  damage,	  or	  disrupt	  
operations	  with	  little	  resistance.	  For	  example,	  in	  several	  high-profile	  breaches	  over	  the	  
past	  two	  years,	  attackers	  were	  able	  to	  gain	  access	  to	  sensitive	  data	  stored	  on	  the	  same	  
servers	  with	  the	  same	  level	  of	  access	  as	  far	  less	  important	  data.	  There	  are	  also	  examples	  
of	  using	  access	  to	  the	  corporate	  network	  to	  gain	  access	  to,	  then	  control	  over,	  physical	  
assets	  and	  cause	  damage.	  	  
CSC	  15-1	  
CSC	  15-3	  
CSC	  15-4	  
CSC	  15-5	  
	  

Locate	  any	  sensitive	  information	  on	  separated	  VLANS	  
with	  firewall	  filtering.	  	  All	  communication	  of	  sensitive	  
information	  over	  less-trusted	  networks	  should	  be	  
encrypted.	  
Enforce	  detailed	  audit	  logging	  for	  access	  to	  nonpublic	  
data	  and	  special	  authentication	  for	  sensitive	  data.	  
Segment	  the	  network	  based	  on	  the	  trust	  levels	  of	  the	  
information	  stored	  on	  the	  servers.	  	  Whenever	  
information	  flows	  over	  a	  network	  with	  a	  lower	  trust	  
level,	  the	  information	  should	  be	  encrypted.	  
Use	  host-based	  data	  loss	  prevention	  (DLP)	  to	  enforce	  
ACLs	  even	  when	  data	  is	  copied	  off	  a	  server.	  	  In	  most	  
organizations,	  access	  to	  the	  data	  is	  controlled	  by	  ACLs	  
that	  are	  implemented	  on	  the	  server.	  	  Once	  the	  data	  have	  
been	  copied	  to	  a	  desktop	  system,	  the	  ACLs	  are	  no	  longer	  
enforced	  and	  the	  users	  can	  send	  the	  data	  to	  whomever	  
they	  want.	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  
Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

Advanced	  	  	  

ID	  #	  

Description	  

Category	  
Quick	  win	  

80	  

CSC	  15	  Procedures	  and	  Tools	  

	  
It	  is	  important	  that	  an	  organization	  understand	  what	  its	  sensitive	  information	  is,	  where	  
it	  resides,	  and	  who	  needs	  access	  to	  it.	  	  To	  derive	  sensitivity	  levels,	  organizations	  need	  to	  
put	  together	  a	  list	  of	  the	  key	  types	  of	  data	  and	  the	  overall	  importance	  to	  the	  
organization.	  This	  analysis	  would	  be	  used	  to	  create	  an	  overall	  data	  classification	  scheme	  
for	  the	  organization.	  At	  a	  base	  level,	  a	  data	  classification	  scheme	  is	  broken	  down	  into	  
two	  levels:	  public	  (unclassified)	  and	  private	  (classified).	  	  Once	  the	  private	  information	  
has	  been	  identified,	  it	  can	  then	  be	  further	  subdivided	  based	  on	  the	  impact	  it	  would	  have	  
to	  the	  organization	  if	  it	  were	  compromised.	  
Once	  the	  sensitivity	  of	  the	  data	  has	  been	  identified,	  the	  data	  need	  to	  be	  traced	  back	  to	  
business	  applications	  and	  the	  physical	  servers	  that	  house	  those	  applications.	  The	  
network	  then	  needs	  to	  be	  segmented	  so	  that	  systems	  of	  the	  same	  sensitivity	  level	  are	  on	  
the	  same	  network	  and	  segmented	  from	  systems	  with	  different	  trust	  levels.	  	  If	  possible,	  
firewalls	  need	  to	  control	  access	  to	  each	  segment.	  	  If	  data	  are	  flowing	  over	  a	  network	  
with	  a	  lower	  trust	  level,	  encryption	  should	  be	  used.	  
Job	  requirements	  should	  be	  created	  for	  each	  user	  group	  to	  determine	  what	  information	  
the	  group	  needs	  access	  to	  in	  order	  to	  perform	  its	  jobs.	  	  Based	  on	  the	  requirements,	  
access	  should	  only	  be	  given	  to	  the	  segments	  or	  servers	  that	  are	  needed	  for	  each	  job	  
function.	  	  Detailed	  logging	  should	  be	  turned	  on	  for	  all	  servers	  in	  order	  to	  track	  access	  
and	  examine	  situations	  where	  someone	  is	  accessing	  data	  that	  they	  should	  not	  be	  
accessing.	  
In	  order	  to	  test	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  the	  automated	  implementation	  of	  this	  control,	  
organizations	  should	  measure	  the	  following:	  
1. Can	  the	  system	  detect	  all	  attempts	  by	  users	  to	  access	  files	  on	  local	  systems	  or	  
network-accessible	  file	  shares	  without	  the	  appropriate	  privileges	  (yes	  or	  no)?	  
2. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  the	  system	  to	  generate	  an	  alert	  or	  e-mail	  for	  
administrative	  personnel	  of	  a	  user	  inappropriately	  accessing	  the	  file	  shares	  
(time	  in	  minutes)?	  
In	  order	  to	  automate	  the	  collection	  of	  relevant	  data	  from	  these	  systems,	  organizations	  
should	  gather	  the	  following	  information	  with	  automated	  technical	  sensors:	  
1. What	  percentage	  of	  the	  organizations	  data	  sets	  have	  not	  been	  classified	  in	  
accordance	  with	  the	  organizations	  data	  classification	  standards	  (by	  business	  
unit)?	  

CSC	  15	  Effectiveness	  Metrics	  

CSC	  15	  Automation	  Metrics	  

81	  

	  

CSC	  15	  Effectiveness	  Test	  

2. What	  percentage	  of	  sensitive	  data	  sets	  are	  not	  configured	  to	  require	  logging	  of	  
access	  to	  the	  data	  set	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
3. What	  percentage	  of	  the	  organizations	  business	  systems	  are	  not	  utilizing	  host	  
based	  Data	  Loss	  Prevention	  (DLP)	  software	  applications	  (by	  business	  unit)?	  
To	  evaluate	  the	  implementation	  of	  Control	  15	  on	  a	  periodic	  basis,	  the	  evaluation	  team	  
must	  create	  two	  test	  accounts	  each	  on	  10	  representative	  systems	  in	  the	  enterprise:	  five	  
server	  machines	  and	  five	  client	  systems.	  For	  each	  system	  evaluated,	  one	  account	  must	  
have	  limited	  privileges,	  while	  the	  other	  must	  have	  privileges	  necessary	  to	  create	  files	  on	  
the	  systems.	  The	  evaluation	  team	  must	  then	  verify	  that	  the	  non-privileged	  account	  is	  
unable	  to	  access	  the	  files	  created	  for	  the	  other	  account	  on	  the	  system.	  The	  team	  must	  
also	  verify	  that	  an	  alert	  or	  e-mail	  is	  generated	  based	  on	  the	  attempted	  unsuccessful	  
access	  within	  24	  hours.	  Upon	  completion	  of	  the	  test,	  these	  accounts	  must	  be	  removed.	  
Organizations	  will	  find	  that	  by	  diagramming	  the	  entities	  necessary	  to	  fully	  meet	  the	  
goals	  defined	  in	  this	  control,	  it	  will	  be	  easier	  to	  identify	  how	  to	  implement	  them,	  test	  the	  
controls,	  and	  identify	  where	  potential	  failures	  in	  the	  system	  might	  occur.	  

CSC	  15	  System	  Entity	  Relationship	  Diagram	  

A	  control	  system	  is	  a	  device	  or	  set	  of	  devices	  used	  to	  manage,	  command,	  direct,	  or	  
regulate	  the	  behavior	  of	  other	  devices	  or	  systems.	  In	  this	  case,	  the	  data	  classification	  
system	  and	  permission	  baseline	  is	  the	  blueprint	  for	  how	  authentication	  and	  access	  of	  
data	  is	  controlled.	  The	  following	  list	  of	  the	  steps	  in	  the	  above	  diagram	  shows	  how	  the	  
entities	  work	  together	  to	  meet	  the	  business	  goal	  defined	  in	  this	  control.	  The	  list	  also	  

 

82	  

	  
delineates	  each	  of	  the	  process	  steps	  in	  order	  to	  help	  identify	  potential	  failure	  points	  in	  
the	  overall	  control.	  	  

Step 1: An appropriate data classification system and permissions baseline applied to 

production data systems  

Step 2: Access appropriately logged to a log management system 

Step 3: Proper access control applied to portable media/USB drives 

Step 4: Active scanner validates, checks access, and checks data classification 

Step 5: Host-based encryption and data-loss prevention validates and checks all access 

requests. 

83	  

	  

CSC	  16:	  	  Account	  Monitoring	  and	  Control	  

Actively	  manage	  the	  life-cycle	  of	  system	  and	  application	  accounts	  	  their	  
creation,	  use,	  dormancy,	  deletion	  -	  in	  order	  to	  minimize	  opportunities	  for	  
attackers	  to	  leverage	  them.	  	  

Quick	  win	  

ID	  #	  

Description	  

Category	  

Why	  Is	  This	  Control	  Critical?	  

How	  to	  Implement	  This	  Control	  

Attackers	  frequently	  discover	  and	  exploit	  legitimate	  but	  inactive	  user	  accounts	  to	  
impersonate	  legitimate	  users,	  thereby	  making	  discovery	  of	  attacker	  behavior	  difficult	  
for	  network	  watchers.	  Accounts	  of	  contractors	  and	  employees	  who	  have	  been	  
terminated	  and	  accounts	  formerly	  set	  up	  for	  Red	  Team	  testing	  (but	  not	  deleted	  
afterwards)	  have	  often	  been	  misused	  in	  this	  way.	  Additionally,	  some	  malicious	  insiders	  
or	  former	  employees	  have	  accessed	  accounts	  left	  behind	  in	  a	  system	  long	  after	  contract	  
expiration,	  maintaining	  their	  access	  to	  an	  organizations	  computing	  system	  and	  
sensitive	  data	  for	  unauthorized	  and	  sometimes	  malicious	  purposes.	  
Review	  all	  system	  accounts	  and	  disable	  any	  account	  that	  
CSC	  16-1	  
cannot	  be	  associated	  with	  a	  business	  process	  and	  owner.	   Quick	  win	  
Ensure	  that	  all	  accounts	  have	  an	  expiration	  date	  
CSC	  16-2	  
associated	  with	  the	  account.	  
Ensure	  that	  systems	  automatically	  create	  a	  report	  that	  
CSC	  16-3	  
includes	  a	  list	  of	  locked-out	  accounts,	  disabled	  accounts,	  
accounts	  with	  passwords	  that	  exceed	  the	  maximum	  
password	  age,	  and	  accounts	  with	  passwords	  that	  never	  
expire.	  This	  list	  should	  be	  sent	  to	  the	  associated	  system	  
administrator	  in	  a	  secure	  fashion.	  
CSC	  16-4	  
Establish	  and	  follow	  a	  process	  for	  revoking	  system	  
access	  by	  disabling	  accounts	  immediately	  upon	  
termination	  of	  an	  employee	  or	  contractor.	  Disabling	  
instead	  of	  deleting	  accounts	  allows	  preservation	  of	  audit	  
trails.	  
Regularly	  monitor	  the	  use	  of	  all	  accounts,	  automatically	  
CSC	  16-5	  
logging	  off	  users	  after	  a	  standard	  period	  of	  inactivity.	  	  
CSC	  16-6	  
Configure	  screen	  locks	  on	  systems	  to	  limit	  access	  to	  
unattended	  workstations.	  
CSC	  16-7	   Monitor	  account	  usage	  to	  determine	  dormant	  accounts,	  
notifying	  the	  user	  or	  users	  manager.	  Disable	  such	  
accounts	  if	  not	  needed,	  or	  document	  and	  monitor	  
exceptions	  (e.g.,	  vendor	  maintenance	  accounts	  needed	  

Quick	  win	  

Quick	  win	  

Quick	  win	  

Quick	  win	  

Quick	  win	  

(NEW)	  

84	  

	  
for	  system	  recovery	  or	  continuity	  operations).	  	  
CSC	  16-8	  
Require	  that	  all	  non-administrator	  accounts	  have	  strong	  
passwords	  that	  contain	  letters,	  numbers,	  and	  special	  
characters,	  be	  changed	  at	  least	  every	  90	  days,	  have	  a	  
minimal	  age	  of	  one	  day,	  and	  not	  be	  allowed	  to	  use	  the	  
previous	  15	  passwords	  as	  a	  new	  password.	  	  These	  
values	  can	  be	  adjusted	  based	  on	  the	  specific	  business	  
needs	  of	  the	  organization.	  
Use	  and	  configure	  account	  lockouts	  such	  that	  after	  a	  set	  
CSC	  16-9	  
number	  of	  failed	  login	  attempts	  the	  account	  is	  locked	  for	  
a	  standard	  period	  of	  time.	  	  
CSC	  16-10	   Require	  that	  managers	  match	  active	  employees	  and	  
contractors	  with	  each	  account	  belonging	  to	  their	  
managed	  staff.	  Security	  or	  system	  administrators	  should	  
then	  disable	  accounts	  that	  are	  not	  assigned	  to	  active	  
employees	  or	  contractors.	  
CSC	  16-11	   Monitor	  attempts	  to	  access	  deactivated	  accounts	  
through	  audit	  logging.	  
Configure	  access	  for	  all	  accounts	  through	  a	  centralized	  
CSC	  16-12	  
point	  of	  authentication,	  for	  example	  Active	  Directory	  or	  
LDAP.	  	  Configure	  network	  and	  security	  devices	  for	  
centralized	  authentication	  as	  well.	  
CSC	  16-13	   Profile	  each	  users	  typical	  account	  usage	  by	  determining	  
normal	  time-of-day	  access	  and	  access	  duration.	  Reports	  
should	  be	  generated	  that	  indicate	  users	  who	  have	  logged	  
in	  during	  unusual	  hours	  or	  have	  exceeded	  their	  normal	  
login	  duration.	  This	  includes	  flagging	  the	  use	  of	  the	  
users	  credentials	  from	  a	  computer	  other	  than	  
computers	  on	  which	  the	  user	  generally	  works.	  
Require	  multi-factor	  authentication	  for	  accounts	  that	  
CSC	  16-14	  	  
have	  access	  to	  sensitive	  data	  or	  systems.	  Multi-factor	  
authentication	  can	  be	  achieved	  using	  Smart	  cards	  with	  
certificates,	  One	  Time	  Password	  (OTP)	  tokens,	  or	  
biometrics.	  	  
For	  authenticated	  access	  to	  web	  services	  within	  an	  
CSC	  16-15	  
enterprise,	  ensure	  that	  account	  usernames	  and	  
passwords	  are	  passed	  over	  an	  encrypted	  channel	  and	  
(NEW)	  
associated	  password	  hash	  files	  are	  stored	  securely	  if	  a	  
centralized	  service	  is	  not	  employed.	  	  
Configure	  all	  systems	  to	  use	  encrypted	  channels	  for	  the	  
CSC	  16-16	  
transmission	  of	  passwords	  over	  a	  network.	  	  	  
(NEW)	  
CSC	  16-17	  
Verify	  that	  all	  password	  files	  are	  encrypted	  or	  hashed	  
and	  that	  these	  files	  cannot	  be	  accessed	  without	  root	  or	  
(NEW)	  
administrator	  privileges.	  	  Audit	  all	  access	  to	  password	  

(NEW)	  

(NEW)	  

85	  

Quick	  win	  

Quick	  win	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  
Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

Advanced	  

Advanced	  

Advanced	  

Advanced	  

CSC	  Procedures	  and	  Tools	  

files	  in	  the	  system.	  	  

	  
	  
Although	  most	  operating	  systems	  include	  capabilities	  for	  logging	  information	  about	  
account	  usage,	  these	  features	  are	  sometimes	  disabled	  by	  default.	  Even	  when	  such	  
features	  are	  present	  and	  active,	  they	  often	  do	  not	  provide	  fine-grained	  detail	  about	  
access	  to	  the	  system	  by	  default.	  Security	  personnel	  can	  configure	  systems	  to	  record	  
more	  detailed	  information	  about	  account	  access,	  and	  use	  home-grown	  scripts	  or	  third-
party	  log	  analysis	  tools	  to	  analyze	  this	  information	  and	  profile	  user	  access	  of	  various	  
systems.	  
Accounts	  must	  also	  be	  tracked	  very	  closely.	  	  Any	  account	  that	  is	  dormant	  must	  be	  
disabled	  and	  eventually	  removed	  from	  the	  system.	  	  All	  active	  accounts	  must	  be	  traced	  
back	  to	  authorized	  users	  of	  the	  system,	  and	  it	  must	  be	  ensured	  that	  their	  passwords	  are	  
robust	  and	  changed	  on	  a	  regular	  basis.	  	  Users	  must	  also	  be	  logged	  out	  of	  the	  system	  
after	  a	  period	  of	  no	  activity	  to	  minimize	  the	  possibility	  of	  an	  attacker	  using	  their	  system	  
to	  extract	  information	  from	  the	  organization.	  
In	  order	  to	  test	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  the	  automated	  implementation	  of	  this	  control,	  
organizations	  should	  measure	  the	  following:	  
1. Does	  the	  system	  audit	  and	  report	  on	  valid	  and	  invalid	  log-ins	  to	  user	  accounts?	  
2. Does	  the	  system	  audit	  and	  report	  on	  valid	  and	  invalid	  log-ins	  to	  network	  and	  
security	  device	  user	  accounts?	  
3. Does	  the	  system	  lock	  users	  out	  after	  five	  (5)	  invalid	  attempts?	  
4. Do	  user	  account	  passwords	  expire	  at	  least	  every	  90	  days?	  	  
5. Does	  the	  system	  report	  on	  dormant	  accounts	  that	  have	  not	  been	  used	  for	  a	  
configurable	  period	  of	  time?	  
6. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  to	  send	  an	  alert	  or	  e-mail	  to	  administrative	  personnel	  that	  
the	  comparison	  report	  has	  been	  created	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
	  In	  order	  to	  automate	  the	  monitoring	  and	  control	  of	  user	  accounts,	  organizations	  should	  
gather	  the	  following	  information	  with	  automated	  technical	  sensors:	  
1. How	  many	  invalid	  attempts	  to	  access	  user	  accounts	  have	  been	  detected	  within	  a	  
period	  of	  time?	  
2. How	  many	  accounts	  have	  been	  locked	  out	  within	  a	  period	  of	  time?	  
3. How	  many	  attempts	  to	  gain	  access	  to	  password	  files	  in	  the	  system	  have	  been	  

Control	  16	  Effectiveness	  Metrics 

Control	  16	  Automation	  Metrics	  

86	  

	  

CSC	  16	  Effectiveness	  Test	  

detected	  within	  a	  period	  of	  time?	  
4. Perform	  authorized	  password	  cracking	  against	  password	  files	  and	  identify	  the	  
number	  of	  administrator	  account	  passwords	  that	  are	  cracked	  during	  the	  
attempt.	  	  Remediate	  any	  compromised	  passwords	  immediately.	  	  
5. Is	  an	  automated	  list	  of	  user	  accounts	  on	  the	  system	  created	  daily	  &	  compared	  to	  
a	  baseline	  (yes	  or	  no)?	  
6. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  to	  send	  an	  alert	  or	  e-mail	  to	  administrative	  personnel	  that	  
the	  comparison	  report	  has	  been	  created	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
To	  evaluate	  the	  implementation	  of	  Control	  16	  on	  a	  periodic	  basis,	  the	  evaluation	  team	  
must	  attempt	  a	  variety	  of	  techniques	  to	  gain	  access	  to	  user	  accounts	  within	  the	  system.	  
Each	  of	  the	  following	  tests	  must	  be	  performed	  at	  least	  three	  times:	  
1. Attempt	  to	  configure	  weak	  user	  account	  passwords	  that	  are	  non-compliant	  with	  
established	  policy.	  	  Verify	  that	  the	  system	  does	  not	  allow	  weak	  passwords	  to	  be	  
used.	  	  
2. Attempt	  to	  re-use	  a	  user	  account	  password	  that	  was	  previously	  used	  for	  the	  
account.	  	  Verify	  that	  the	  system	  requires	  unique	  new	  passwords	  during	  each	  
update.	  	  
3. Attempt	  to	  capture	  passwords	  by	  monitoring	  network	  traffic	  to	  server	  
resources.	  	  Remediate	  any	  instances	  where	  passwords	  are	  transmitted	  in	  clear	  
text.	  	  
4. Attempt	  to	  gain	  access	  to	  password	  files	  stored	  on	  the	  system.	  	  If	  successful,	  
identify	  whether	  passwords	  are	  cryptographically	  secured.	  
Each	  of	  these	  tests	  must	  be	  performed	  from	  multiple,	  widely	  distributed	  systems	  on	  the	  
organization's	  network	  in	  order	  to	  test	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  user	  account	  controls.	  	  
Organizations	  will	  find	  that	  by	  diagramming	  the	  entities	  necessary	  to	  fully	  meet	  the	  
goals	  defined	  in	  this	  control,	  it	  will	  be	  easier	  to	  identify	  how	  to	  implement	  them,	  test	  the	  
controls,	  and	  identify	  where	  potential	  failures	  in	  the	  system	  might	  occur.	  

CSC	  16	  System	  Entity	  Relationship	  Diagram	  

87	  

	  

A	  control	  system	  is	  a	  device	  or	  set	  of	  devices	  used	  to	  manage,	  command,	  direct,	  or	  
regulate	  the	  behavior	  of	  other	  devices	  or	  systems.	  In	  this	  case,	  we	  are	  examining	  user	  
accounts	  and	  how	  they	  interact	  with	  the	  data	  systems	  and	  the	  log	  management	  systems.	  
Another	  key	  component	  of	  these	  systems	  is	  the	  reports	  generated	  for	  management	  of	  
user	  accounts.	  	  
The	  following	  list	  of	  the	  steps	  in	  the	  above	  diagram	  shows	  how	  the	  entities	  work	  
together	  to	  meet	  the	  business	  goal	  defined	  in	  this	  control.	  It	  also	  delineates	  each	  of	  the	  
process	  steps	  in	  order	  to	  help	  identify	  potential	  failure	  points	  in	  the	  overall	  control.	  	  

 

Step 1: User accounts are properly managed on production systems 

Step 2: User accounts are assigned proper permissions to production data sets 

Step 3: User account access is logged to log management system 

Step 4: Log management systems generate user account and access reports for management 

Step 5: Account baseline information is sent to log management system 

Step 6: Critical information is properly protected and encrypted for each user account. 

88	  

	  

CSC	  17:	  	  Data	  Protection	  

The	  processes	  and	  tools	  used	  to	  prevent	  data	  exfiltration,	  mitigate	  the	  effects	  of	  
exfiltrated	  data,	  and	  ensure	  the	  privacy	  and	  integrity	  of	  sensitive	  information.	  	  	  	  

Why	  Is	  This	  Control	  Critical?	  

Data	  resides	  in	  many	  places.	  	  Protection	  of	  that	  data	  is	  best	  achieved	  through	  the	  
application	  of	  a	  combination	  of	  encryption,	  integrity	  protection	  and	  data	  loss	  
prevention	  techniques.	  	  As	  organizations	  continue	  their	  move	  towards	  cloud	  computing	  
and	  mobile	  access,	  it	  is	  important	  that	  proper	  care	  be	  taken	  to	  limit	  and	  report	  on	  data	  
exfiltration	  while	  also	  mitigating	  the	  effects	  of	  data	  compromise.	  	  	  
The	  adoption	  of	  data	  encryption,	  both	  in	  transit	  and	  at	  rest,	  provides	  mitigation	  against	  
data	  compromise.	  	  This	  is	  true	  if	  proper	  care	  has	  been	  taken	  in	  the	  processes	  and	  
technologies	  associated	  with	  the	  encryption	  operations.	  	  An	  example	  of	  this	  is	  the	  
management	  of	  cryptographic	  keys	  used	  by	  the	  various	  algorithms	  that	  protect	  data.	  
The	  process	  for	  generation,	  use	  and	  destruction	  of	  keys	  should	  be	  based	  on	  proven	  
processes	  as	  defined	  in	  standards	  such	  as	  NIST	  SP	  800-57.	  
Care	  should	  also	  be	  taken	  to	  ensure	  that	  products	  used	  within	  an	  enterprise	  implement	  
well	  known	  and	  vetted	  cryptographic	  algorithms,	  as	  identified	  by	  NIST.	  	  Re-evaluation	  
of	  the	  algorithms	  and	  key	  sizes	  used	  within	  the	  enterprise	  on	  an	  annual	  basis	  is	  also	  
recommended	  to	  ensure	  that	  organizations	  are	  not	  falling	  behind	  in	  the	  strength	  of	  
protection	  applied	  to	  their	  data.	  
For	  organizations	  that	  are	  moving	  data	  to	  the	  cloud,	  it	  is	  important	  for	  organizations	  to	  
understand	  the	  security	  controls	  applied	  to	  data	  in	  the	  cloud	  multi-tenant	  environment,	  
and	  determine	  the	  best	  course	  of	  action	  for	  application	  of	  encryption	  controls	  and	  
security	  of	  keys.	  	  When	  possible,	  keys	  should	  be	  stored	  within	  secure	  containers	  such	  as	  
Hardware	  Security	  Modules	  (HSMs).	  
Encrypting	  data	  provides	  a	  level	  of	  assurance	  that	  even	  if	  data	  is	  compromised,	  it	  is	  
impractical	  to	  access	  the	  plaintext	  without	  significant	  resources,	  however	  controls	  
should	  also	  be	  put	  in	  place	  to	  mitigate	  the	  threat	  of	  data	  exfiltration	  in	  the	  first	  place.	  	  
Many	  attacks	  occurred	  across	  the	  network,	  while	  others	  involved	  physical	  theft	  of	  
laptops	  and	  other	  equipment	  holding	  sensitive	  information.	  	  Yet,	  in	  most	  cases,	  the	  
victims	  were	  not	  aware	  that	  the	  sensitive	  data	  were	  leaving	  their	  systems	  because	  they	  
were	  not	  monitoring	  data	  outflows.	  	  The	  movement	  of	  data	  across	  network	  boundaries	  
both	  electronically	  and	  physically	  must	  be	  carefully	  scrutinized	  to	  minimize	  its	  
exposure	  to	  attackers.	  	  	  
The	  loss	  of	  control	  over	  protected	  or	  sensitive	  data	  by	  organizations	  is	  a	  serious	  threat	  
to	  business	  operations	  and	  a	  potential	  threat	  to	  national	  security.	  	  While	  some	  data	  are	  
leaked	  or	  lost	  as	  a	  result	  of	  theft	  or	  espionage,	  the	  vast	  majority	  of	  these	  problems	  

89	  

How	  to	  Implement	  This	  Control 	  

ID	  #	  

Description	  

	  
result	  from	  poorly	  understood	  data	  practices,	  a	  lack	  of	  effective	  policy	  architectures,	  
and	  user	  error.	  	  Data	  loss	  can	  even	  occur	  as	  a	  result	  of	  legitimate	  activities	  such	  as	  e-
Discovery	  during	  litigation,	  particularly	  when	  records	  retention	  practices	  are	  
ineffective	  or	  nonexistent.	  	  	  
Data	  loss	  prevention	  (DLP)	  refers	  to	  a	  comprehensive	  approach	  covering	  people,	  
processes,	  and	  systems	  that	  identify,	  monitor,	  and	  protect	  data	  in	  use	  (e.g.,	  endpoint	  
actions),	  data	  in	  motion	  (e.g.,	  network	  actions),	  and	  data	  at	  rest	  (e.g.,	  data	  storage)	  
through	  deep	  content	  inspection	  and	  with	  a	  centralized	  management	  framework.	  	  Over	  
the	  last	  several	  years,	  there	  has	  been	  a	  noticeable	  shift	  in	  attention	  and	  investment	  from	  
securing	  the	  network	  to	  securing	  systems	  within	  the	  network,	  and	  to	  securing	  the	  data	  
itself.	  	  DLP	  controls	  are	  based	  on	  policy,	  and	  include	  classifying	  sensitive	  data,	  
discovering	  that	  data	  across	  an	  enterprise,	  enforcing	  controls,	  and	  reporting	  and	  
auditing	  to	  ensure	  policy	  compliance.	  	  	  
CSC	  17-1	  
CSC	  17-2	  
CSC	  17-3	  
(NEW)	  
CSC	  17-4	  
(NEW)	  
CSC	  17-5	  
CSC	  17-6	  

Deploy	  approved	  hard	  drive	  encryption	  software	  to	  
mobile	  devices	  and	  systems	  that	  hold	  sensitive	  data.	  
Verify	  that	  cryptographic	  devices	  and	  software	  are	  
configured	  to	  use	  publicly-vetted	  algorithms.	  	  	  
Perform	  an	  assessment	  of	  data	  to	  identify	  sensitive	  
information	  that	  requires	  the	  application	  of	  encryption	  
and	  integrity	  controls	  
Review	  cloud	  provider	  security	  practices	  for	  data	  
protection.	  
Deploy	  an	  automated	  tool	  on	  network	  perimeters	  that	  
monitors	  for	  certain	  sensitive	  information	  (i.e.,	  
personally	  identifiable	  information),	  keywords,	  and	  other	  
document	  characteristics	  to	  discover	  unauthorized	  
attempts	  to	  exfiltrate	  data	  across	  network	  boundaries	  
and	  block	  such	  transfers	  while	  alerting	  information	  
security	  personnel.	  	  	  
Conduct	  periodic	  scans	  of	  server	  machines	  using	  
automated	  tools	  to	  determine	  whether	  sensitive	  data	  (i.e.,	  
personally	  identifiable	  information,	  health,	  credit	  card,	  
and	  classified	  information)	  is	  present	  on	  the	  system	  in	  
clear	  text.	  These	  tools,	  which	  search	  for	  patterns	  that	  
indicate	  the	  presence	  of	  sensitive	  information,	  can	  help	  
identify	  if	  a	  business	  or	  technical	  process	  is	  leaving	  
behind	  or	  otherwise	  leaking	  sensitive	  information.	  
Move	  data	  between	  networks	  using	  secure,	  

CSC	  17-7	  

Category	  
Quick	  win	  

Quick	  win	  

Configuration/

(NEW)	  

Quick	  win	  

Quick	  Win	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

90	  

Hygiene	  
Configuration/
Hygiene	  

Configuration/
Hygiene	  

Configuration/
Hygiene	  

	  
CSC	  17-8	  

authenticated,	  and	  encrypted	  mechanisms.	  
If	  there	  is	  no	  business	  need	  for	  supporting	  such	  devices,	  
configure	  systems	  so	  that	  they	  will	  not	  write	  data	  to	  USB	  
tokens	  or	  USB	  hard	  drives.	  If	  such	  devices	  are	  required,	  
enterprise	  software	  should	  be	  used	  that	  can	  configure	  
systems	  to	  allow	  only	  specific	  USB	  devices	  (based	  on	  
serial	  number	  or	  other	  unique	  property)	  to	  be	  accessed,	  
and	  that	  can	  automatically	  encrypt	  all	  data	  placed	  on	  
such	  devices.	  An	  inventory	  of	  all	  authorized	  devices	  must	  
be	  maintained.	  
Use	  network-based	  DLP	  solutions	  to	  monitor	  and	  control	  
CSC	  17-9	  
the	  flow	  of	  data	  within	  the	  network.	  Any	  anomalies	  that	  
exceed	  the	  normal	  traffic	  patterns	  should	  be	  noted	  and	  
appropriate	  action	  taken	  to	  address	  them.	  
Only	  allow	  approved	  Certificate	  Authorities	  (CAs)	  to	  
CSC	  17-10	  
issue	  certificates	  within	  the	  enterprise;	  Review	  and	  verify	  
each	  CAs	  Certificate	  Practices	  Statement	  (CPS)	  and	  
(NEW)	  
Certificate	  Policy	  (CP).	  	  
Perform	  an	  annual	  review	  of	  algorithms	  and	  key	  lengths	  
CSC	  17-11	  
in	  use	  for	  protection	  of	  sensitive	  data.	  	  	  
(NEW)	  
CSC	  17-12	   Monitor	  all	  traffic	  leaving	  the	  organization	  and	  detect	  any	  
unauthorized	  use	  of	  encryption.	  Attackers	  often	  use	  an	  
encrypted	  channel	  to	  bypass	  network	  security	  devices.	  
Therefore	  it	  is	  essential	  that	  organizations	  be	  able	  to	  
detect	  rogue	  connections,	  terminate	  the	  connection,	  and	  
remediate	  the	  infected	  system.	  
CSC	  17-13	   Block	  access	  to	  known	  file	  transfer	  and	  e-mail	  exfiltration	  
websites.	  
Define	  roles	  and	  responsibilities	  related	  to	  management	  
CSC	  17-14	  
of	  encryption	  keys	  within	  the	  enterprise;	  define	  
(NEW)	  
processes	  for	  lifecycle.	  
CSC	  17-15	  
Where	  applicable,	  implement	  Hardware	  Security	  
Modules	  (HSMs)	  for	  protection	  of	  private	  keys	  (e.g.,	  for	  
(NEW)	  
sub	  CAs)	  or	  Key	  Encryption	  Keys.	  	  	  
	  
Commercial	  tools	  are	  available	  to	  support	  enterprise	  management	  of	  encryption	  and	  
key	  management	  within	  an	  enterprise	  and	  include	  the	  ability	  to	  support	  
implementation	  of	  encryption	  controls	  within	  cloud	  and	  mobile	  environments.	  	  
Definition	  of	  lifecycle	  processes	  and	  roles	  and	  responsibilities	  associated	  with	  key	  
management	  should	  be	  undertaken	  by	  each	  organization.	  

CSC	  17	  Procedures	  and	  Tools	  

Advanced	  

Advanced	  

Advanced	  

Configuration/
Hygiene	  

Advanced	  

91	  

CSC	  17	  Effectiveness	  Metrics 

	  
Commercial	  DLP	  solutions	  are	  available	  to	  look	  for	  exfiltration	  attempts	  and	  detect	  
other	  suspicious	  activities	  associated	  with	  a	  protected	  network	  holding	  sensitive	  
information.	  	  Organizations	  deploying	  such	  tools	  should	  carefully	  inspect	  their	  logs	  and	  
follow	  up	  on	  any	  discovered	  attempts,	  even	  those	  that	  are	  successfully	  blocked,	  to	  
transmit	  sensitive	  information	  out	  of	  the	  organization	  without	  authorization.	  	  	  
In	  order	  to	  test	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  the	  automated	  implementation	  of	  this	  control,	  
organizations	  should	  measure	  the	  following:	  
1. Does	  the	  system	  identify	  and	  report	  on	  unauthorized	  data	  being	  exfiltrated,	  
whether	  via	  network	  file	  transfers	  or	  removable	  media?	  	  
2. Does	  the	  system	  identify	  the	  attachment	  of	  unencrypted	  USB	  tokens	  and	  require	  
encryption	  of	  tokens?	  
3. Does	  the	  system	  store	  cryptographic	  key	  material	  securely?	  
4. Does	  the	  system	  use	  only	  NIST	  approved	  encryption	  algorithms?	  
5. Within	  one	  hour	  of	  a	  data	  exfiltration	  event	  or	  attempt,	  enterprise	  
administrative	  personnel	  must	  be	  alerted	  by	  the	  appropriate	  monitoring	  system.	  
6. Do	  alerts	  notifying	  of	  data	  exfiltration	  also	  note	  the	  system	  and	  location	  where	  
the	  event	  or	  attempt	  occurred?	  	  
7. Are	  the	  systems	  able	  to	  identify	  the	  location,	  department,	  and	  other	  critical	  
details	  about	  where	  the	  sensitive	  data	  originated	  from	  (yes	  or	  no)?	  
8. How	  long	  does	  it	  take	  before	  a	  data	  leakage	  risk	  has	  been	  remediated	  from	  the	  
time	  it	  was	  detected	  (time	  in	  minutes)?	  
In	  order	  to	  automate	  the	  protection	  of	  data	  using	  cryptography	  and	  DLP	  functions,	  
organizations	  should	  gather	  the	  following	  information	  with	  automated	  technical	  
sensors:	  
1. How	  many	  unauthorized	  data	  exfiltration	  attempts	  have	  been	  detected	  within	  a	  
period	  of	  time	  by	  DLP	  software?	  
2. How	  many	  plaintext	  instances	  of	  sensitive	  data	  have	  been	  detected	  within	  a	  
period	  by	  automated	  scanning	  software?	  
3. How	  many	  attempts	  to	  access	  known	  file	  transfer	  and	  e-mail	  exfiltration	  
websites	  have	  been	  detected	  within	  a	  period	  of	  time?	  
To	  evaluate	  the	  implementation	  of	  Control	  17	  on	  a	  periodic	  basis,	  the	  evaluation	  team	  
must	  attempt	  to	  move	  test	  data	  sets	  that	  trigger	  DLP	  systems	  but	  do	  not	  contain	  
sensitive	  data	  outside	  of	  the	  trusted	  computing	  environment	  via	  both	  network	  file	  

CSC	  17	  Automation	  Metrics	  

CSC	  17	  Effectiveness	  Test	  

92	  

	  
transfers	  and	  removable	  media.	  Each	  of	  the	  following	  tests	  must	  be	  performed	  at	  least	  
three	  times:	  
  Attempt	  to	  transfer	  large	  data	  sets	  across	  network	  boundaries	  from	  an	  internal	  
system.	  
  Attempt	  to	  transfer	  plaintext	  test	  data	  sets	  of	  personally	  identifiable	  information	  
(that	  trigger	  DLP	  systems	  but	  do	  not	  contain	  sensitive	  data)	  across	  network	  
boundaries	  from	  an	  internal	  system	  (using	  multiple	  keywords	  specific	  to	  the	  
business).	  
  Attempt	  to	  transfer	  encrypted	  test	  data	  sets	  across	  network	  boundaries	  from	  an	  
internal	  system	  to	  identify	  if	  the	  exfiltration	  is	  reported.	  
  Attempt	  to	  maintain	  a	  persistent	  network	  connection	  for	  at	  least	  10	  hours	  across	  
network	  boundaries	  between	  an	  internal	  and	  external	  system,	  even	  though	  little	  
data	  may	  be	  exchanged.	  
  Attempt	  to	  maintain	  a	  network	  connection	  across	  network	  boundaries	  using	  an	  
anomalous	  service	  port	  number	  between	  an	  internal	  and	  external	  system.	  
Insert	  a	  USB	  token	  into	  an	  organization	  system	  and	  attempt	  to	  transfer	  example	  
test	  data	  to	  the	  USB	  device.	  	  
	  Each	  of	  these	  tests	  must	  be	  performed	  from	  multiple,	  widely	  distributed	  systems	  on	  the	  
organization's	  network	  in	  order	  to	  test	  the	  effectiveness	  of	  the	  monitoring	  systems.	  
Once	  each	  of	  these	  events	  has	  occurred,	  the	  time	  it	  takes	  for	  enterprise	  staff	  to	  respond	  
to	  the	  event	  must	  be	  recorded.	  
	  
Organizations	  will	  find	  that	  by	  diagramming	  the	  entities	  necessary	  to	  fully	  meet	  the	  goals	  
defined	  in	  this	  control,	  it	  will	  be	  easier	  to	  identify	  how	  to	  implement	  them,	  test	  the	  controls,	  
and	  identify	  where	  potential	  failures	  in	  the	  system	  might	  occur.	  

CSC	  17	  Entity	  Relationship	  Diagram	  	  

 

93	  

	  

A	  control	  system	  is	  a	  device	  or	  set	  of	  devices	  used	  to	  manage,	  command,	  direct,	  or	  regulate	  
the	  behavior	  of	  other	  devices	  or	  systems.	  In	  this	  case,	  we	  are	  examining	  the	  flow	  of	  
information	  in	  and	  out	  of	  the	  organization	  in	  an	  attempt	  to	  limit	  potential	  data	  loss	  via	  
network	  or	  removable	  media	  sources.	  The	  following	  list	  of	  the	  steps	  in	  the	  above	  diagram	  
shows	  how	  the	  entities	  work	  together	  to	  meet	  the	  business	  goal	  defined	  in	  this	  control.	  It	  
also	  delineates	  each	  of	  the	  process	  steps	  in	  order	  to	  help	  identify	  potential	  failure	  points	  in	  
the	  overall	  control.	  

 

Step 1: Data encryption system ensures that appropriate hard disks are encrypted 

Step 2: Sensitive network traffic encrypted 

Step 3: Data connections monitored at the networks perimeter by monitoring systems 

Step 4: Stored data scanned to identify where sensitive information is stored 

Step 5: Offline media encrypted.	  

94	  

	  

CSC	  18:	  Incident	  Response	  and	  Management	  

Protect	  the	  organizations	  information,	  as	  well	  as	  its	  reputation,	  by	  developing	  and	  
implementing	  an	  incident	  response	  infrastructure	  (e.g.,	  plans,	  defined	  roles,	  
training,	  communications,	  management	  oversight)	  for	  quickly	  discovering	  an	  attack	  
and	  then	  effectively	  containing	  the	  damage,	  eradicating	  the	  attackers	  presence,	  
and	  restoring	  the	  integrity	  of	  the	  network	  and	  systems.	  	  

Why	  Is	  This	  Control	  Critical?	  

How	  to	  Implement	  This	  Control	  

Cyber	  incidents	  are	  now	  just	  part	  of	  our	  way	  of	  life.	  Even	  large,	  well-funded,	  and	  technically	  
sophisticated	  enterprises	  struggle	  to	  keep	  up	  with	  the	  frequency	  and	  complexity	  of	  attacks.	  
The	  question	  of	  a	  successful	  cyber-attack	  against	  an	  enterprise	  is	  not	  if	  but	  when.	  	  
When	  an	  incident	  occurs,	  it	  is	  too	  late	  to	  develop	  the	  right	  procedures,	  reporting,	  data	  
collection,	  management	  responsibility,	  legal	  protocols,	  and	  communications	  strategy	  that	  
will	  allow	  the	  enterprise	  to	  successfully	  understand,	  manage,	  and	  recover.	  Without	  an	  
incident	  response	  plan,	  an	  organization	  may	  not	  discover	  an	  attack	  in	  the	  first	  place,	  or,	  if	  
the	  attack	  is	  detected,	  the	  organization	  may	  not	  follow	  good	  procedures	  to	  contain	  damage,	  
eradicate	  the	  attackers	  presence,	  and	  recover	  in	  a	  secure	  fashion.	  Thus,	  the	  attacker	  may	  
have	  a	  far	  greater	  impact,	  causing	  more	  damage,	  infecting	  more	  systems,	  and	  possibly	  
exfiltrate	  more	  sensitive	  data	  than	  would	  otherwise	  be	  possible	  were	  an	  effective	  incident	  
response	  plan	  in	  place.	  
CSC	  18-1	  
CSC	  18-2	  
CSC	  18-3	  
CSC	  18-4	  

Ensure	  that	  there	  are	  written	  incident	  response	  procedures	  
that	  include	  a	  definition	  of	  personnel	  roles	  for	  handling	  
incidents.	  The	  procedures	  should	  define	  the	  phases	  of	  
incident	  handling.	  	  
Assign	  job	  titles	  and	  duties	  for	  handling	  computer	  and	  
network	  incidents	  to	  specific	  individuals.	  	  
Define	  management	  personnel	  who	  will	  support	  the	  
incident	  handling	  process	  by	  acting	  in	  key	  decision-making	  
roles.	  	  
Devise	  organization-wide	  standards	  for	  the	  time	  required	  
for	  system	  administrators	  and	  other	  personnel	  to	  report	  
anomalous	  events	  to	  the	  incident	  handling	  team,	  the	  
mechanisms	  for	  such	  reporting,	  and	  the	  kind	  of	  information	  
that	  should	  be	  included	  in	  the	  incident	  notification.	  This	  
reporting	  should	  also	  include	  notifying	  the	  appropriate	  
Community	  Emergency	  Response	  Team	  in	  accordance	  with	  
all	  legal	  or	  regulatory	  requirements	  for	  involving	  that	  

Quick	  win	  

Quick	  win	  

ID	  #	  

Description	  

Category	  
Quick	  win	  

Quick	  win	  

95	  

Quick	  win	  

Quick	  win	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

organization	  in	  computer	  incidents.	  	  
Assemble	  and	  maintain	  information	  on	  third-party	  contact	  
information	  to	  be	  used	  to	  report	  a	  security	  incident	  (i.e.,	  
maintain	  an	  e-mail	  address	  of	  security@organization.com	  or	  
have	  a	  web	  page	  http://organization.com/security).	  
Publish	  information	  for	  all	  personnel,	  including	  employees	  
and	  contractors,	  regarding	  reporting	  computer	  anomalies	  
and	  incidents	  to	  the	  incident	  handling	  team.	  Such	  
information	  should	  be	  included	  in	  routine	  employee	  
awareness	  activities.	  	  
Conduct	  periodic	  incident	  scenario	  sessions	  for	  personnel	  
associated	  with	  the	  incident	  handling	  team	  to	  ensure	  that	  
they	  understand	  current	  threats	  and	  risks,	  as	  well	  as	  their	  
responsibilities	  in	  supporting	  the	  incident	  handling	  team.	  

	  
CSC	  18-5	  
CSC	  18-6	  
CSC	  18-7	  
	  
After	  defining	  detailed	  incident	  response	  procedures,	  the	  incident	  response	  team	  should	  
engage	  in	  periodic	  scenario-based	  training,	  working	  through	  a	  series	  of	  attack	  scenarios	  
fine-tuned	  to	  the	  threats	  and	  vulnerabilities	  the	  organization	  faces.	  These	  scenarios	  help	  
ensure	  that	  team	  members	  understand	  their	  role	  on	  the	  incident	  response	  team	  and	  also	  
help	  prepare	  them	  to	  handle	  incidents.	  
A	  full	  treatment	  of	  this	  topic	  is	  beyond	  the	  scope	  of	  the	  Critical	  Security	  Controls.	  However,	  
the	  actions	  in	  CSC	  18	  provide	  specific,	  high-priority	  steps	  that	  can	  improve	  enterprise	  
security,	  and	  should	  be	  a	  part	  of	  any	  comprehensive	  incident	  and	  response	  plan.	   
None	  
None	  
None 

CSC	  18	  Procedures	  and	  Tools	  

CSC	  18	  Effectiveness	  Metrics	  

CSC	  18	  Automation	  Metrics	  

CSC	  18	  Effectiveness	  Test	  

96	  

	  
Organizations	  will	  find	  that	  by	  diagramming	  the	  entities	  necessary	  to	  fully	  meet	  the	  goals	  
defined	  in	  this	  control,	  it	  will	  be	  easier	  to	  identify	  how	  to	  implement	  them,	  test	  the	  controls,	  
and	  identify	  where	  potential	  failures	  in	  the	  system	  might	  occur.	  

Control	  18	  System	  Entity	  Relationship	  Diagram	  

A	  control	  system	  is	  a	  device	  or	  set	  of	  devices	  used	  to	  manage,	  command,	  direct,	  or	  regulate	  
the	  behavior	  of	  other	  devices	  or	  systems.	  In	  this	  case,	  we	  are	  examining	  the	  incident	  
handling	  process	  and	  how	  prepared	  organizations	  are	  in	  the	  event	  that	  an	  incident	  occurs.	  
The	  following	  list	  of	  the	  steps	  in	  the	  above	  diagram	  shows	  how	  the	  entities	  work	  together	  
to	  meet	  the	  business	  goal	  defined	  in	  this	  control.	  The	  list	  also	  delineates	  each	  of	  the	  process	  
steps	  in	  order	  to	  help	  identify	  potential	  failure	  points	  in	  the	  overall	  control.	  

 

Step 1: Incident handling policies and procedures educate workforce members as to their 

responsibilities during an incident 

Step 2: Some workforce members designated as incident handlers 

Step 3: Incident handling policies and procedures educate management as to their 

responsibilities during an incident 

Step 4: Incident handlers participate in incident handling scenario tests 

Step 6: The organizations management reports incidents to outside law enforcement and the 

Step 5: Incident handlers report incidents to management 

appropriate computer emergency response team, if necessary.	  
	  

97	  

	  

CSC	  19:	  	  Secure	  Network	  Engineering	  

Make	  security	  an	  inherent	  attribute	  of	  the	  enterprise	  by	  specifying,	  designing,	  and	  
building-in	  features	  that	  allow	  high	  confidence	  systems	  operations	  while	  denying	  or	  
minimizing	  opportunities	  for	  attackers.	  .	  

Why	  Is	  This	  Control	  Critical?	  

How	  to	  Implement	  This	  Control	  

ID	  #	  

Description	  

System	  or	  security	  designers	  rarely	  get	  to	  start	  from	  scratch	  and	  build	  in	  all	  of	  the	  security	  
features	  they	  might	  want.	  And	  even	  if	  they	  did,	  systems	  constantly	  evolve,	  new	  business	  
imperatives	  appear,	  attackers	  develop	  new	  techniques,	  and	  new	  technologies	  emerge	  to	  
complicate	  the	  security	  problem.	  In	  such	  an	  environment,	  attackers	  take	  advantage	  of	  
missing	  security	  features,	  time	  gaps	  in	  deploying	  new	  defenses	  or	  moving	  information,	  and	  
the	  seams	  between	  defensive	  controls.	  Defenders	  are	  quickly	  overwhelmed	  with	  new	  
operational	  requirements,	  managing	  tools	  and	  changes,	  new	  information,	  and	  fire-
fighting.	  	  	  
CSC	  19-1	  

Design	  the	  network	  using	  a	  minimum	  of	  a	  three-tier	  
architecture	  (DMZ,	  middleware,	  and	  private	  network).	  	  Any	  
system	  accessible	  from	  the	  Internet	  should	  be	  on	  the	  DMZ,	  
but	  DMZ	  systems	  should	  never	  contain	  sensitive	  data.	  	  Any	  
system	  with	  sensitive	  data	  should	  reside	  on	  the	  private	  
network	  and	  never	  be	  directly	  accessible	  from	  the	  Internet.	  	  
DMZ	  systems	  should	  communicate	  with	  private	  network	  
systems	  through	  an	  application	  proxy	  residing	  on	  the	  
middleware	  tier.	  
To	  support	  rapid	  response	  and	  shunning	  of	  detected	  attacks,	  
engineer	  the	  network	  architecture	  and	  its	  corresponding	  
systems	  for	  rapid	  deployment	  of	  new	  access	  control	  lists,	  
rules,	  signatures,	  blocks,	  blackholes,	  and	  other	  defensive	  
measures.	  	  
Deploy	  domain	  name	  systems	  (DNS)	  in	  a	  hierarchical,	  
structured	  fashion,	  with	  all	  internal	  network	  client	  machines	  
configured	  to	  send	  requests	  to	  intranet	  DNS	  servers,	  not	  to	  
DNS	  servers	  located	  on	  the	  Internet.	  These	  internal	  DNS	  
servers	  should	  be	  configured	  to	  forward	  requests	  they	  
cannot	  resolve	  to	  DNS	  servers	  located	  on	  a	  protected	  DMZ.	  
These	  DMZ	  servers,	  in	  turn,	  should	  be	  the	  only	  DNS	  servers	  
allowed	  to	  send	  requests	  to	  the	  Internet.	  	  
Segment	  the	  enterprise	  network	  into	  multiple,	  separate	  trust	  
zones	  to	  provide	  more	  granular	  control	  of	  system	  access	  and	   Configuration/

CSC	  19-2	  
CSC	  19-3	  

CSC	  19-4	  

Configuration/
Hygiene	  

Category	  
Quick	  win	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

Hygiene	  

98	  

CSC	  19	  Procedures	  and	  Tools	  

additional	  intranet	  boundary	  defenses.	  

	  
	  
To	  help	  ensure	  a	  consistent,	  defensible	  network,	  the	  architecture	  of	  each	  network	  should	  
be	  based	  on	  a	  template	  that	  describes	  the	  networks	  overall	  layout	  and	  the	  services	  it	  
provides.	  Organizations	  should	  prepare	  diagrams	  for	  each	  of	  their	  networks	  that	  show	  
network	  components	  such	  as	  routers,	  firewalls,	  and	  switches,	  along	  with	  significant	  servers	  
and	  groups	  of	  client	  machines.	  
Although	  the	  Critical	  Security	  Controls	  overall	  provide	  many	  specific,	  high-priority	  steps	  
that	  will	  improve	  enterprise	  security,	  a	  comprehensive	  treatment	  of	  Secure	  Network	  
Engineering	  is	  beyond	  the	  scope	  of	  this	  document.	  	  In	  CSC	  19,	  we	  describe	  capabilities	  that	  
should	  be	  built-in	  to	  any	  security	  architecture.	  	  
None	  
None	  

CSC	  19	  Effectiveness	  Metrics	  

CSC	  19	  Automation	  Metrics	  

CSC	  19	  Effectiveness	  Test	  

None	  	  

CSC	  19	  Entity	  Relationship	  Diagram	  	  

Organizations	  will	  find	  that	  by	  diagramming	  the	  entities	  necessary	  to	  fully	  meet	  the	  goals	  
defined	  in	  this	  control,	  it	  will	  be	  easier	  to	  identify	  how	  to	  implement	  them,	  test	  the	  controls,	  
and	  identify	  where	  potential	  failures	  in	  the	  system	  might	  occur.	  

99	  

	  

A	  control	  system	  is	  a	  device	  or	  set	  of	  devices	  used	  to	  manage,	  command,	  direct,	  or	  regulate	  
the	  behavior	  of	  other	  devices	  or	  systems.	  In	  this	  case,	  we	  are	  examining	  the	  network	  
engineering	  process	  and	  evaluating	  the	  controls	  that	  work	  together	  in	  order	  to	  create	  a	  
secure	  and	  robust	  network	  architecture.	  The	  following	  list	  of	  the	  steps	  in	  the	  above	  
diagram	  shows	  how	  the	  entities	  work	  together	  to	  meet	  the	  business	  goal	  defined	  in	  this	  
control.	  The	  list	  also	  delineates	  each	  of	  the	  process	  steps	  in	  order	  to	  help	  identify	  potential	  
failure	  points	  in	  the	  overall	  control.	  

 

Step 1:  Network engineering policies and procedures dictate how network systems function to 

include dynamic host configuration protocol (DHCP) servers 

Step 2: DHCP servers provide IP addresses to systems on the network 

Step 3: Network devices perform DNS lookups to internal DNS servers 

Step 4: Internal DNS servers perform DNS lookups to external DNS servers 

Step 5: Network engineering policies and procedures dictate how a central network management 

Step 6: Central network management systems configure network devices.	  

system functions 

100	  

	  

CSC	  20:	  	  Penetration	  Tests	  and	  Red	  Team	  Exercises	  

Test	  the	  overall	  strength	  of	  an	  organizations	  defenses	  (the	  technology,	  the	  
processes,	  and	  the	  people)	  by	  simulating	  the	  objectives	  and	  actions	  of	  an	  attacker.	  	  

Why	  Is	  This	  Control	  Critical?	  

Attackers	  often	  exploit	  the	  gap	  between	  good	  defensive	  designs	  and	  intentions	  and	  
implementation	  or	  maintenance.	  Examples	  include:	  the	  time	  window	  between	  
announcement	  of	  a	  vulnerability,	  the	  availability	  of	  a	  vendor	  patch,	  and	  actual	  installation	  
on	  every	  machine;	  well-intentioned	  policies	  which	  have	  no	  enforcement	  mechanism	  
(especially	  those	  intended	  to	  restrict	  risky	  human	  actions);	  failure	  to	  apply	  good	  
configurations	  and	  other	  practices	  to	  the	  entire	  enterprise,	  or	  to	  machines	  that	  come	  in-
and-out	  of	  the	  network;	  and	  failure	  to	  understand	  the	  interaction	  among	  multiple	  defensive	  
tools,	  or	  with	  normal	  system	  operations	  that	  have	  security	  implications.	  	  
In	  addition,	  successful	  defense	  requires	  a	  comprehensive	  program	  of	  technical	  defenses,	  
good	  policy	  and	  governance,	  and	  appropriate	  action	  by	  people.	  In	  a	  complex	  environment	  
where	  technology	  is	  constantly	  evolving,	  and	  new	  attacker	  tradecraft	  appears	  regularly,	  
organizations	  should	  periodically	  test	  their	  defenses	  to	  identify	  gaps	  and	  to	  assess	  their	  
readiness.	  	  
Penetration	  testing	  starts	  from	  the	  identification	  and	  assessment	  of	  vulnerabilities	  that	  can	  
be	  identified	  in	  the	  enterprise.	  It	  complements	  this	  by	  designing	  and	  executing	  tests	  that	  
demonstrate	  specifically	  how	  an	  adversary	  can	  either	  subvert	  the	  organizations	  security	  
goals	  (e.g.,	  the	  protection	  of	  specific	  Intellectual	  Property)	  or	  achieve	  specific	  adversarial	  
objectives	  (e.g.,	  establishment	  of	  a	  covert	  Command	  and	  Control	  infrastructure).	  The	  result	  
provides	  deeper	  insight,	  through	  demonstration,	  into	  the	  business	  risks	  of	  various	  
vulnerabilities.	  
Red	  Team	  exercises	  take	  a	  comprehensive	  approach	  at	  the	  full	  spectrum	  of	  organization	  
policies,	  processes,	  and	  defenses	  in	  order	  to	  improve	  organizational	  readiness,	  improve	  
training	  for	  defensive	  practitioners,	  and	  inspect	  current	  performance	  levels.	  Independent	  
Red	  Teams	  can	  provide	  valuable	  and	  objective	  insights	  about	  the	  existence	  of	  
vulnerabilities	  and	  the	  efficacy	  of	  defenses	  and	  mitigating	  controls	  already	  in	  place	  and	  
even	  of	  those	  planned	  for	  future	  implementation.	  
CSC	  20-1	  

Conduct	  regular	  external	  and	  internal	  penetration	  tests	  to	  
identify	  vulnerabilities	  and	  attack	  vectors	  that	  can	  be	  used	  to	  
exploit	  enterprise	  systems	  successfully.	  Penetration	  testing	  
should	  occur	  from	  outside	  the	  network	  perimeter	  (i.e.,	  the	  

How	  to	  Implement	  This	  Control	  

ID	  #	  

Description	  

Category	  
Quick	  win	  

101	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

Attribution	  

Visibility/	  
Attribution	  

Internet	  or	  wireless	  frequencies	  around	  an	  organization)	  as	  
well	  as	  from	  within	  its	  boundaries	  (i.e.,	  on	  the	  internal	  
network)	  to	  simulate	  both	  outsider	  and	  insider	  attacks.	  	  
Any	  user	  or	  system	  accounts	  used	  to	  perform	  penetration	  
testing,	  should	  be	  controlled	  and	  monitored	  to	  make	  sure	  
they	  are	  only	  being	  used	  for	  legitimate	  purposes,	  and	  are	  
removed	  or	  restored	  to	  normal	  function	  after	  testing	  is	  over.	   Quick	  win	  
Perform	  periodic	  Red	  Team	  exercises	  to	  test	  organizational	  
readiness	  to	  identify	  and	  stop	  attacks	  or	  to	  respond	  quickly	  
and	  effectively.	  	  
Include	  tests	  for	  the	  presence	  of	  unprotected	  system	  
information	  and	  artifacts	  that	  would	  be	  useful	  to	  attackers,	  
including	  network	  diagrams,	  configuration	  files,	  older	  
penetration	  test	  reports,	  e-mails	  or	  documents	  containing	  
passwords	  or	  other	  information	  critical	  to	  system	  operation.	  	   Visibility/	  
Plan	  clear	  goals	  of	  the	  penetration	  test	  itself	  with	  blended	  
attacks	  in	  mind,	  identifying	  the	  goal	  machine	  or	  target	  asset.	  	  
Many	  APT-style	  attacks	  deploy	  multiple	  vectorsoften	  social	  
engineering	  combined	  with	  web	  or	  network	  exploitation.	  	  
Red	  Team	  manual	  or	  automated	  testing	  that	  captures	  pivoted	  
and	  multi-vector	  attacks	  offers	  a	  more	  realistic	  assessment	  of	  
security	  posture	  and	  risk	  to	  critical	  assets.	  
Use	  vulnerability	  scanning	  and	  penetration	  testing	  tools	  in	  
concert.	  	  The	  results	  of	  vulnerability	  scanning	  assessments	  
should	  be	  used	  as	  a	  starting	  point	  to	  guide	  and	  focus	  
penetration	  testing	  efforts.	  
Devise	  a	  scoring	  method	  for	  determining	  the	  results	  of	  Red	  
Team	  exercises	  so	  that	  results	  can	  be	  compared	  over	  time.	  	  
Create	  a	  test	  bed	  that	  mimics	  a	  production	  environment	  for	  
specific	  penetration	  tests	  and	  Red	  Team	  attacks	  against	  
elements	  that	  are	  not	  typically	  tested	  in	  production,	  such	  as	  
attacks	  against	  supervisory	  control	  and	  data	  acquisition	  and	  
other	  control	  systems.	  

	  
CSC	  20-2	  
CSC	  20-3	  
CSC	  20-4	  
CSC	  20-5	  
CSC	  20-6	  
CSC20-7	  
CSC	  20-8	  
	  
Penetration	  testing	  and	  Red	  Teaming	  only	  provide	  significant	  value	  when	  basic	  defensive	  
measures	  have	  already	  been	  put	  into	  place,	  and	  when	  they	  are	  performed	  as	  part	  of	  a	  
comprehensive,	  ongoing	  program	  of	  security	  management	  and	  improvement.	  These	  are	  
often	  specified	  and	  required	  by	  formal	  Risk	  Management	  Frameworks	  and	  processes.	  	  
Each	  organization	  should	  define	  a	  clear	  scope	  and	  rules	  of	  engagement	  for	  penetration	  
testing	  and	  Red	  Team	  analyses.	  The	  scope	  of	  such	  projects	  should	  include,	  at	  a	  minimum,	  
systems	  with	  the	  organizations	  highest	  value	  information	  and	  production	  processing	  

CSC	  20	  Procedures	  and	  Tools	  

Advanced	  

Advanced	  

Configuration/	  
Hygiene	  

102	  

CSC	  20	  Effectiveness	  Metrics	  

	  
functionality.	  Other	  lower-value	  systems	  may	  also	  be	  tested	  to	  see	  if	  they	  can	  be	  used	  as	  
pivot	  points	  to	  compromise	  higher-value	  targets.	  The	  rules	  of	  engagement	  for	  penetration	  
tests	  and	  Red	  Team	  analyses	  should	  describe,	  at	  a	  minimum,	  times	  of	  day	  for	  testing,	  
duration	  of	  tests,	  and	  the	  overall	  test	  approach.	  
A	  full	  treatment	  of	  this	  topic	  is	  beyond	  the	  scope	  of	  the	  Critical	  Security	  Controls.	  However,	  
the	  actions	  in	  CSC	  20	  provide	  specific,	  high-priority	  steps	  that	  can	  improve	  enterprise	  
security,	  and	  should	  be	  a	  part	  of	  any	  comprehensive	  penetration	  testing	  and	  Red	  Team	  
program.	  	  
None	  
None	  
None	  
Organizations	  will	  find	  that	  by	  diagramming	  the	  entities	  necessary	  to	  fully	  meet	  the	  goals	  
defined	  in	  this	  control,	  it	  will	  be	  easier	  to	  identify	  how	  to	  implement	  them,	  test	  the	  controls,	  
and	  identify	  where	  potential	  failures	  in	  the	  system	  might	  occur.	  

CSC	  20	  Entity	  Relationship	  Diagram	  	  

CSC	  20	  Automation	  Metrics	  

CSC	  20	  Effectiveness	  Test	  

 

103	  

	  
A	  control	  system	  is	  a	  device	  or	  set	  of	  devices	  used	  to	  manage,	  command,	  direct,	  or	  regulate	  
the	  behavior	  of	  other	  devices	  or	  systems.	  In	  this	  case,	  we	  are	  examining	  red	  team	  and	  
penetration	  exercises	  and	  how	  those	  efforts	  can	  be	  valuable	  to	  enterprise	  personnel	  when	  
identifying	  which	  vulnerabilities	  are	  present	  in	  the	  organization.	  The	  following	  list	  of	  the	  
steps	  in	  the	  above	  diagram	  shows	  how	  the	  entities	  work	  together	  to	  meet	  the	  business	  goal	  
defined	  in	  this	  control.	  The	  list	  also	  delineates	  each	  of	  the	  process	  steps	  in	  order	  to	  help	  
identify	  potential	  failure	  points	  in	  the	  overall	  control.	  

Step 1: Penetration testers perform penetration tests of production systems 

Step 2: Automated pen-testing tools perform penetration tests of production systems 

Step 3: Automated pen-testing tools inform penetration tester of vulnerabilities discovered 

Step 4: Penetration testers perform more extensive penetration tests of test lab systems 

Step 5: Auditors evaluate and inspect the work performed by automated pen-testing tools 

Step 6: Auditors evaluate and inspect the work performed by penetration testers 

Step 7: Penetration testers generate reports and statistics about the vulnerabilities that have 

been discovered. 

	  

104	  

	  

Appendix	  A:	  	  Attack	  Types	  

The following Attack Types were the primary ones considered when developing the Critical 
Security Controls. Each is listed with the most relevant and direct Critical Security Controls (by 
number) to help block, detect, or manage this problem.  

Attack Summary 
Attackers continually scan for new, unprotected systems, including test or 
experimental systems, and exploit such systems to gain control of them. 
Attackers distribute hostile content on Internet-accessible (and sometimes internal) 
websites that exploit unpatched and improperly secured client software running on 
victim machines. 
Attackers continually scan for vulnerable software and exploit it to gain control of 
target machines. 
Attackers use currently infected or compromised machines to identify and exploit 
other vulnerable machines across an internal network. 
Attackers exploit weak default configurations of systems that are more geared to 
ease of use than security. 
Attackers exploit new vulnerabilities on systems that lack critical patches in 
organizations that do not know that they are vulnerable because they lack 
continuous vulnerability assessments and effective remediation. 
Attackers compromise target organizations that do not exercise their defenses to 
determine and continually improve their effectiveness. 
Attackers use malicious code to gain and maintain control of target machines, 
capture sensitive data, and then spread it to other systems, sometimes wielding 
code that disables or dodges signature-based anti-virus tools. 
Attackers scan for remotely accessible services on target systems that are often 
unneeded for business activities, but provide an avenue of attack and compromise 
of the organization. 
Attackers exploit weak application software, particularly web applications, 
through attack vectors such as SQL injection, cross-site scripting, and similar 
tools. 
Attackers exploit wireless access points to gain entry into a target organizations 
internal network, and exploit wireless client systems to steal sensitive information. 
Attackers exploit users and system administrators via social engineering scams 
that work because of a lack of security skills and awareness. 
Attackers exploit and infiltrate through network devices whose security 
configuration has been weakened over time by granting, for specific short-term 
business needs, supposedly temporary exceptions that are never removed. 

105	  

Critical 
Security 
Control 

1 

2, 3 

2, 4 

2, 10 

3, 10 

4, 5 

4, 5, 11, 20 

5, 15, 17 

5, 10, 11 

6, 20 

7 

9, 12, 16 

10, 13 

	  

Attackers trick a user with an administrator-level account into opening a phishing-
style e-mail with an attachment or surfing to the attackers content on an Internet 
website, allowing the attackers malicious code or exploit to run on the victim 
machine with full administrator privileges. 
Attackers exploit boundary systems on Internet-accessible DMZ networks, and 
then pivot to gain deeper access on internal networks. 

Attackers	  exploit	  poorly	  designed	  network	  architectures	  by	  locating	  
unneeded	  or	  unprotected	  connections,	  weak	  filtering,	  or	  a	  lack	  of	  separation	  
of	  important	  systems	  or	  business	  functions.	  
Attackers	  operate	  undetected	  for	  extended	  periods	  of	  time	  on	  compromised	  
systems	  because	  of	  a	  lack	  of	  logging	  and	  log	  review.	  
Attackers	  gain	  access	  to	  sensitive	  documents	  in	  an	  organization	  that	  does	  not	  
properly	  identify	  and	  protect	  sensitive	  information	  or	  separate	  it	  from	  non-
sensitive	  information.	  
Attackers	  compromise	  inactive	  user	  accounts	  left	  behind	  by	  temporary	  
workers,	  contractors,	  and	  former	  employees,	  including	  accounts	  left	  behind	  
by	  the	  attackers	  themselves	  who	  are	  former	  employees.	  
Attackers	  escalate	  their	  privileges	  on	  victim	  machines	  by	  launching	  password	  
guessing,	  password	  cracking,	  or	  privilege	  escalation	  exploits	  to	  gain	  
administrator	  control	  of	  systems,	  which	  is	  then	  used	  to	  propagate	  to	  other	  
victim	  machines	  across	  an	  enterprise.	  
Attackers	  gain	  access	  to	  internal	  enterprise	  systems	  and	  gather	  and	  exfiltrate	  
sensitive	  information	  without	  detection	  by	  the	  victim	  organization.	  
Attackers	  compromise	  systems	  and	  alter	  important	  data,	  potentially	  
jeopardizing	  organizational	  effectiveness	  via	  polluted	  information.	  
Attackers	  operate	  undiscovered	  in	  organizations	  without	  effective	  incident-
response	  capabilities,	  and	  when	  the	  attackers	  are	  discovered,	  the	  
organizations	  often	  cannot	  properly	  contain	  the	  attack,	  eradicate	  the	  
attackers	  presence,	  or	  recover	  to	  a	  secure	  production	  state.	  
	  	  

9, 12 

13, 19 

13, 19 

14 

15, 17 

16 

12, 16 

17 

15, 17 

18 

106	  

