CHAPTER 13 

Deterrence of Cyber Attacks 

Richard L. Kugler 

 

 
CAN THE UNITED STATES hope to deter major cyber attacks on itself, its  military 

forces, and its allies? Creating a cyber deterrence strategy is important  because such attacks are 
becoming increasingly likely, because they could cause serious damage to Americas 
information networks and beyond, and because  fully defending against them is problematic. If 
adversaries could be deterred  from launching them, the United States would face fewer risks 
from them. 

Although the U.S. Government is well aware of the dangers posed by cyber attacks, 

currently it does not have a well-developed or publicly articulated strategy  for deterring them. 
Most likely, not all cyber attacks can be deterred, but if the biggest and most dangerous attacks 
could be prevented, this alone would be an important accomplishment. Exactly how can cyber 
attacks be deterred? What would be the key components and calculations of  a cyber deterrence 
strategy? What capabilities and action agendas would it require? These important questions are 
addressed here. 

This chapter offers a perspective that rejects the view, held by some  observers, that the 

attribution problemthe difficulty of  identifying actual or potential attackerswholly 
paralyzes any attempt to think fruitfully about a  cyber deterrence strategy. To be sure, there will 
be cases in which some cyber  attackers  successfully  conceal  their  identities  and  thereby 
frustrate  attempts  to apply deterrent and retaliatory mechanisms against them. But they do not 
constitute the entire universe, or even the most important subset, of  potential cyber attackers. In 
the coming years, there is likely to be a growing number of important casesones, for 
example, involving big powers such as China and other nation-statesin which adversaries 
use the threat of cyber attacks (or actual attacks) as a means to a larger political end or to exert 
coercive leverage on  the United States. In these circumstances, the adversaries will be willing to 
make  their identities known, or alternatively, their identities can be reliably inferred from the 
surrounding strategic circumstances. Deterrence mechanisms can be applied to such 
attributable attackers. This chapter focuses on how to develop and apply a deterrence strategy to 
this category of cyber attackers. 

The following pages advance several core arguments. First, the prospect  of  major 
cyber attacks should not be seen in isolation, but in the context of larger global security 
affairs. Although some cyber attacks might be mounted purely for the purpose of  damaging 
the United States, other attacks could be launched by adversaries whose political and strategic 
agenda extends beyond the cyber domain; in addition to allowing their identities to be 
determined, this larger context can set the stage for determining how multifaceted U.S. efforts to 
deter them can be forged. Second, endeavoring to deter cyber attacks is a matter both of 
assembling the physical capabilities for defending against them and of employing  offensive 
capabilitiescyber,  diplomatic,  economic,  and military  toolsfor inflicting unacceptable 
damage in retaliation. Equally important, cyber deterrence also involves a psychological and 
cognitive component: like  other forms of deterrence, it requires the capacity to influence the 
motives, cost-benefit  calculations,  and  risk-taking  propensities  of adversaries,  in  order  to 
convince them that launching a cyber attack would not serve their interests and  objectives and 
that the costs and risks would outweigh any sensible calculation  of benefits. Assembling a 

proper combination of motivational instruments and physical capabilities to serve this purpose 
lies at the heart of forging a modern-day strategy for cyber deterrence. A one-size-fits-all 
approach to deterrence will  not work because of  the multiplicity and diversity of  potential 
adversaries and  cyber attacks, and because U.S. goals and actions may shift from one situation to 
the next. As a result, the United States will need a strategy of  tailored cyber deterrence that 
treats each category of  potential adversary, type of  attack, and type of U.S. response on its own 
merits. 

This chapter begins by portraying how official U.S. Government documents treat cyber 

threats and the role of deterrence in dealing with them. Then it briefly discusses the ways in 
which the United States is vulnerable to cyber attacks and how contemporary global security 
affairs are giving rise to cyber threats. Against  the background of lessons from how deterrence 
theory evolved during the Cold  War and how it operates today, the chapter then develops a 
general model for  deterring  cyber  threats,  based  on  deterrence  that  is  tailored  to  influence 
the motivations and psychology of different cyber adversaries. An analytical section  reviews the 
key strategic requirements of  cyber deterrence strategy, including declaratory policy, situational 
awareness, command and control, defensive cyber  security, a wide spectrum of  offensive 
capabilities for retaliation, interagency  cooperation, cooperation with allies and partners, and 
cyber deterrence metrics.  Issues that will require further research and analysis are identified. 
The chapter  concludes by presenting a spectrum of options for pursuing cyber deterrence. 

Overall, this material articulates an underlying theme: that the United States can 

realistically hope to create a cyber deterrence strategy that works, perhaps not perfectly, but well 
enough to make a big difference and that offers considerably greater security from cyber threats 
than exists today. Creating such a rewarding and affordable strategy, however, will require 
concerted thought and coordinated  actions of the sort that have characterized deterrence since it 
first appeared as a  strategic concept over 50 years ago. 
 
Cyber Deterrence Strategy in Official U.S. Documents 

 
Deterrence of cyber attacks is discussed in some key U.S. strategy documents. The National 

Strategy to Secure Cyberspace, issued by the White House in February 2003 in  response to the 
prospect of growing cyber threats, articulates three broad goals: to prevent cyber attacks, to 
reduce U.S. vulnerability to them, and to minimize damage and recovery time.1 However, it 
contains little on how to prevent cyber  attacks. In terms of deterrence, it only says briefly that a 
U.S. response might not be limited to criminal prosecution of  cyberspace criminals and that the 
United States reserves the right to respond in an appropriate manner. A companion document, 
The National Strategy for the Physical Protection of Critical Infrastructures  and Key Assets 
(issued in February 2003), articulates a similar focus on physical protection of the U.S. 
homeland from new-era threats, not deterrence of cyber threats.2 The same applies to the 
National Strategy for Homeland Security.3 

Among other U.S. strategy documents, the most important is the National Security 

Strategy of the United States of America, issued by the White House most recently in March 
2006.4 It outlines nine strategic goals ranging from defeating terrorism and preventing 
proliferation of weapons of mass destruction (WMD)  to working with allies and partners while 
supporting the spread of  democracy and a prosperous world economy, but it devotes little 
discussion to cyber threats.  Discussing  institutional  reforms  to  the  Department  of Defense 
(DOD),  it notes that U.S. security faces traditional, irregular, catastrophic, and disruptive 

challenges; cyber threats are classified as disruptive threats, along with threats from space, 
biotechnology, and directed energy weapons. The document instructs  DOD to build a transformed 
military force posture that will provide tailored  deterrence of  a wide spectrum of  future 
threats, including terrorist attacks in  the physical and information domains, but it provides no 
guidance for shaping  such deterrence. 

The National Defense Strategy of  the United States of  America released in March 2005 
identifies four broad goals: assurance, dissuasion, deterrence, and defeat of adversaries for the 
purpose of protecting the U.S.  homeland;  securing global freedom of  action; strengthening 
alliances; and fostering favorable security conditions.5 In order to achieve these goals, it calls for 
an active, layered defense rather than a passive or reactive strategy against traditional, 
irregular,  catastrophic, and disruptive challenges, including cyber threats. It states that the  top 
U.S. security priority is to dissuade, deter, and defeat those who seek to harm the United 
States directly, especially extremists who use WMD. It briefly mentions cyber threats but 
provides no guidance on how to deter them. Neither does The National Military Strategy of the 
United States of America issued by the Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff in 2004.6 This 
document is meant to provide strategic principles and operational guidelines for using and 
building U.S. military capabilities, including ones for homeland defense. While calling for high- 
technology, networked, and modular forces for full-spectrum dominance, it gives  only cursory 
attention to cyber threats or to strategy for deterring them. 

The 2006 Quadrennial Defense Review (QDR) charts future directions for improving 

U.S. military forces, under the rubric of capability-based planning, for  a wide variety of 
situations.7 It mandates agility, responsiveness, and battlefield  domination. It does provide some 
useful guidance on dealing with cyber threats. In its section on homeland defense, it notes that 
the populace, territory, infrastructure, and space assets of  the United States are increasingly 
vulnerable, not only to WMD, but also to electronic or cyber attacks. It declares that DOD 
will maintain a deterrent posture to persuade potential aggressors that their objectives in 
attacking would be denied and that any attack on U.S. territory,  people, critical infrastructure 
or forces could result in an overwhelming response.  This  statement  was  intended  to 
underscore  deterrence  of new-era threats  in  general;  cyber  deterrence  is  explicitly  part  of the 
overall  strategic calculus.  However,  the  QDR  provided  no  specific  guidance  on  how  cyber 
deterrence could be achieved, or on how requirements for U.S. forces and other instruments of 
power might be affected. 
Current planning for U.S. military operations is greatly influenced by Joint  Operating 
Concepts (JOCs), such as the one on deterrence operations.8 This 2006 JOC presents a rich 
conceptual framework for thinking about deterrence in  general, and therefore figures prominently 
in the discussion below of  a general model  for  cyber  deterrence.  Although  it  clearly 
acknowledges  cyber  threats,  however, it says less about deterring them than about deterring 
use of  WMD and similar threats from rogue powers, terrorists, or near-peer competitors. 
An official document with specific relevance is the 2007 National Military Strategy to Secure 
Cyberspace.9 This document is still classified, but official DOD  statements  have  indicated  
that  it  calls  upon  national  security  planners  to:  
 

 
 

 

improve capabilities for attack attribution and response;  
improve coordination for responding to cyber attacks within the U.S. national security 
community; and  
foster the establishment of  national and international watch-and-warning  networks to 

detect and prevent cyber attacks as they emerge.  

 
Although these statements identify required capabilities for national strategy, they do not amount 
to a cyber deterrence strategy in themselves. 

This brief  review of  official U.S. documents shows that the dangers posed by potential 
cyber attacks are officially acknowledged, along with the need for  responsive capabilities and 
the desirability of deterring such attacks. However, a  cyber deterrence strategy has not yet been 
articulated and released, at least publicly.  A great deal of  effort has been devoted to preparing 
strategic frameworks for  defense and security planning, and therefore many of  the basic 
ingredients for a cyber deterrence strategy already exist. The task is to bring them together to 
create a cyber deterrence strategy. The next section suggests why. 

 

Growing Vulnerability to Cyber Attacks in a Globalizing World 

 
The cyber attack that was launched on Estonia in spring 2007, which allegedly 

originated in Russia (which its government denied), helped put the threat of cyber attacks on 
the front pages of  newspapers everywhere. With help from the United States and Europe, 
Estonia recovered relatively quickly from that  attack. But there is no guarantee that future 
cyber attacks will be confined to small countries such as Estonia or will inflict only transitory 
damage. Indeed, the United States is vulnerable to such attacks, and they potentially could cause 
widespread damage. 

The damage from cyber attacks could extend far beyond the information  systems that 

they principally affect, because so many spheres of national life depend heavily on modern 
information systems.10 The U.S. military, for example, relies  upon information networks, 
including the global information grid, to conduct  modern-era combat operations.11 Many 
civilian institutions, infrastructures, and  essential government services are also highly 
dependent on the Internet and  other information networks. Police, firefighters, and other 
emergency services  providers, public health, education, transportation, banking and finance, 
water supply, sanitation, and energy systems all depend on computers and information  networks, 
as do the air traffic control system, hydroelectric dams, nuclear power  plants, traffic lights, water 
treatment facilities, and key private sector institutions such as colleges and universities, hospitals, 
stock markets, business corporations,  shopping malls, and credit card companies. An attack on 
one vulnerable sector  could seriously damage other sectors. 

Other  regions,  such  as  Europe  and  democratic  Asia  similarly  rely  upon information 

networks   and   are   vulnerable   to   their   disruption.   Countries embarked upon economic 
modernization are also beginning to use cyberspace  at growing rates. The entire global economy 
is becoming increasingly dependent upon modern information systems. Imports, exports, and 
other international  transactions empower growth in many modern national economies, and 
these rely upon global networks. Modern multinational businesses employ information  networks 
to integrate central headquarters, production lines, and distribution  systems that are often 
scattered across multiple countries and continents. The huge flow of global finance that takes 
place daily is directly dependent upon the Internet and other systems. Disruption of these 
activities and their information  systems could damage the operations of  the world economy, 
contributing to financial panics, recessions, and even depressions. 

Cyber vulnerabilities are thus growing, while cyber attack tools and methodologies are 

becoming more available, and the technical capacity of  malicious actors is improving. 

 
Emerging Cyber Threats 
 
An issue critical to cyber deterrence is understanding what kinds of  actors are likely to 

pose cyber threats, especially threats of major disruptive attacks, to the  United States, its 
military forces, and its allies in coming years. The ability to use cyberspace to create 
advantages and to influence events in other operational environments and across multiple 
instruments of power is spreading. Many view  cyber attackers today as mainly individual hackers 
with purely malicious intent, or  perhaps criminal groups intending to use information networks for 
profit-seeking.  In addition,  however,  actors  with political  or  ideological agendasincluding 
terrorist groups, rogue countries, and even big powers such as China and Russiawill also pursue 
cyberpower and will play roles of  growing importance. They  may seek to use cyber threats or 
attacks to pursue strategic and political goals in geopolitical competition with the United States 
and its allies. Such cyber attacks likely would not be ends in themselves, but rather instruments of 
persuasion and  coercion in pursuit of agendas that extend well beyond cyberspace. These actors 
and their activities may present bigger cyber threats than we have seen before and thus may 
require the attention of a U.S. cyber deterrent strategy. 

Emerging trends in global security affairs will set the stage on which new and  bigger 
threats  may  multiply  in  future  years.  During  the  Cold  War,  the global security structure was 
static and bipolar, pitting the United States and its  democratic allies against the Soviet Union and 
its communist allies. That period  was one of great danger, but bipolarity made the task of 
designing U.S. national  security policy  fairly  straightforward. Waging the  Cold  War  was 
difficult  and  costly, but it was an exercise in clarity and steadfastness rather than uncertainty, 
adaptability, and endless recalculation about policy basics. Americas enemies  were militarily 
powerful, but they were limited in number, their identities were firmly established, and their 
goals and actions were predictableall of  which facilitated the evolution of U.S. deterrence 
policies. 

Compared to the Cold War, todays world is highly complex. Bipolarity is gone, and no 

permanent structure has taken its place. Instead, the world is changing  rapidly in response to 
globalization and other information-era dynamics, which bring once-distant parts of  the world 
into close contact with each other and draw the United States into distant regions that once 
were considered outside its geostrategic perimeter. The changing roles of nation-states and other 
actors,  new political ideologies, shifting security conditions, the hotly competitive world 
economy, the emergence of new technologies, and transformed military forces all  add to the global 
environment of fast-paced changes and amorphous conditions.  Surprises occur frequently, major 
developments leap suddenly out of a dense fog  of uncertainty, and even experts are unable to 
predict the future. 

To the extent that todays international security system has a structure, its most 
important components have, loosely speaking, three parts. The first part is the wealthy 
democratic community, composed of the United States, Europe,  and democratic parts of Asia, 
plus much of Latin America, which is mainly democratic albeit not wealthy. For the most part, 
this democratic community  is  prosperous,  secure,  and  stable.  The  second  part  comprises  the 
strategic  challengers, including big powers such as China, Russia, and India. With nearly  one-
half  of  the worlds population and a growing share of  economic wealth,  these three big 
powers are redefining their identities on the world stage and the imprint that they want to make 
on global security affairs. India, a democracy with a traditionally independent foreign policy, has 

recently begun to draw closer to the  United States and to play a constructive role in South Asian 
affairs. Both Russia  and China are asserting themselves in global politics, but it is unclear whether 
they will emerge as partners or rivals of the United States, or something in between. The third 
part of  the global structure is the southern arc of  instability from the greater Middle East to 
East Asia. This huge zone is a seething cauldron of  chaotic troubles, authoritarian regimes, 
unstable societies, poverty, turmoil,  angry Islamic fundamentalism, and violence. Todays threats 
of terrorism, WMD  proliferation, and rogue countries emerge from this zone, whose future is a 
big question mark. The difficult wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, 
and the U.S. search for an effective diplomacy in the region add to the uncertainty. 

Given this global structure, the dominant security agenda facing the United States is to 
preserve the cohesion of the democratic community, to keep relations  with the big powers on an 
even keel, and to muster friends and allies in an effort  to quell threats and turbulence along the 
southern arc, especially in the Middle East. In this endeavor, the United States can hope to 
influence events but, despite its superpower status, it cannot control the future. Todays world is 
being heavily shaped by two global dynamics: 10 or 15 years ago, many observers focused on 
hopeful neo-Kantian trends promising progress in the form of democratization,  economic 
prosperity, and peace. Since then, however, dangerous neo-Hobbesian  trendsstrife, conflict, 
turmoil, and stalled progresshave asserted themselves  in many places, especially along the 
southern arc of instability. While neo-Kantian  trends are still operating in many ways and places, 
neo-Hobbesian trends have risen to equal importance. A decade or two from now, the future 
could witness a world enjoying greater stability if neo-Kantian trends take precedence or one 
descending into instability and struggle if neo-Hobbesian trends dominate. 

Meanwhile, a third trend, empowerment, has gained force in recent years. Economic 

globalization and the information age give previously weak actors more power to act 
independently and influentially on the world stage, including by using cyberpower. China, for 
example, once poverty-stricken and inward-  looking, is now on its way to becoming an 
economic powerhouse, able to build modern military forces and to cultivate ambitious political 
and strategic appetites  in Asia. Some small and mid-sized countries, such as South Korea and 
Iran, are also deriving greater strategic power from economic growth. Also significant is  that 
nongovernmental actors, including terrorist groups, have been empowered  by the Internet and 
information networks to spread their influence worldwide. Such empowerment trends can help 
peace-minded countries to become wealthier and more stable and to play increasingly 
constructive roles on the world scene,  but  they  also  enable  rogues,  aggressors,  dictators,  and 
terrorists  to  pursue  troublesome agendas in increasingly potent ways. For example, empowered 
by access to oil profits, Iran has begun to pursue a more assertive agenda, as has Hugo 
Chavezs Venezuela. The United States is in no danger of  being eclipsed  any  time  soon,  but 
new  actors  will  be  able  to  play  more  influential  roles  in global security affairs; geopolitical 
dramas promise to be correspondingly more complex, and perhaps more dangerous. 

 
Role of Cyberpower 
 
Cyberpower  contributes  to  the  growing  strength  of many  actors  in  global politics;  it 

is  a  significant  reason  why  a  number  of previously  impoverished countries are becoming 
wealthier. As many countries acquire greater economic strength, owing partly to cyberpower, 
they will acquire greater diplomatic and political influence, allowing them to pursue more 
assertive strategic agendas in  their regions and beyond. Mastery of  modern networks will also 

enable some  countries to acquire greater military strength by equipping their forces with tools for 
modern doctrine and operations, even without the expensive ground, air,  and naval platforms 
used by the United States. The enhanced strategic clout of these countries may motivate them to 
seek greater influence in pursuit of  their national interests. 

Some countries might also pursue cyberpower as an offensive instrument  of 

intimidation and coercion against neighbors and adversaries. As a strategic  tool,  cyberpower  is 
attractive  and  advantageous  because  it  can  be  acquired  inexpensively and can be used in 
concert with other tools or on its own. It does not  require  expensive  military  forces  to  be 
influential  and  effective.  Because cyberpower can provide poor countries with potential 
leverage that far exceeds their strength as traditionally assessed, the future may see a proliferation 
of cyber predators and of cyber victims too. 

Since September 11, 2001, the public literature has commonly viewed major cyber attacks 
on the United States as most likely to be launched by terrorist  groups, perhaps in combination 
with physical acts of  destruction. Al Qaeda, Hamas, and Hizballah are seen as posing cyber 
threats, as are other terrorist groups that harbor grievances against the United States.12 Nation-
states are not  yet widely feared as potential sources for such attacks, even though they are well 
situated to develop the tools needed to carry out sophisticated cyber attacks. Countries  that 
are  adversaries  of the  United  States  might  decide  to  pursue this avenue in order to influence 
American diplomacy and military activity in their regions. Medium-sized powers that might 
use attacks or threats of  attack  as instruments of deterrence or compellence include Iran and 
North Korea;  numerous other countries, especially across the greater Middle East, similarly 
view the United  States as  an adversary.  Among the big powers, China is  an obvious potential 
source of cyber danger. If it begins pursuing an assertive, anti-American agenda in East Asia, it 
might employ cyber threats or even attacks as strategic instruments. Russia also falls into this 
category because in recent years its government has become more authoritarian and its foreign 
policy more assertive and bullying. Its threats in 2007 and earlier to deny natural gas to its 
neighbors, such as Ukraine, suggests a growing willingness to employ techniques  of  coercion and 
intimidation that, as former Russian President Vladimir Putin said, could be expanded to include 
military power, including nuclear weapons, if  Russia perceives a threat to its vital security 
interests. 

A significant issue for deterrence is that because such cyber attacks can be launched 

largely in secret, the identities of  the actors carrying them out often cannot readily be 
determined. For example, a cyber attack seemingly originating in  China might have been launched 
by the Chinese government, by some unofficial group of hackers in China or elsewhere, or by 
terrorists in the Middle East who  disguise their identities.  The  alleged but  ambiguous Russian 
cyber  attack on  Estonia is another obvious example.13 

Although attribution will remain a serious problem, the fear that the attribution problem 

wholly cripples any hope of detection and deterrence is misplaced. Many, if not most, big 
cyber threats or actual attacks on the United States, its military forces, or its allies are not likely 
to be conducted in a political vacuum. Rather, they will be conducted with an explicit political or 
strategic goal: as a means to an end rather than an end in themselves. They are most likely to  be 
conducted to exert pressure, intimidation, and coercion on the United States  to induce it to 
acquiesce in the larger agenda being pursued by the attacker.  Such an attacker likely would not 
want to conceal its identity, because that would  prevent delivery of the message and thereby 
dilute prospects for an acquiescent  response. How could the United States be expected to buckle 
to such coercion if it is unable to determine the identity of the attacker and the concessions it is 

seeking? If  the attacker makes its identity known in order to pursue its larger political and 
strategic agenda, it opens itself  to U.S. deterrent mechanisms and retaliatory steps. 

Beyond this, a U.S. cyber deterrent strategy would be a construct meant  to be applied 
not only during actual crises, but in peacetime as well. The U.S.  preparedness agenda  during 
peacetime merely mandates that  it knows  the nation-states and other actors that could launch 
cyber attacks in future crises. Knowledge  of potential  future  adversaries  does  not  require  real-
time  crisis  attribution, and it could suffice to help the United States develop many core 
ingredients of a cyber deterrence strategy aimed at them. During the Cold War,  after all, the 
United States possessed enough evidence of  the Soviet Unions potential uses of military 
forces in a war to justify, in the American governments  mind, creation of a deterrent strategy 
against the Soviet Union even though that  country restrained itself from committing actual 
aggression. The same logic can apply to potential future cyber attackers. Yes, the United States 
needs concrete attribution to launch retaliatory measures in an actual crisis, but in developing 
peacetime cyber deterrence mechanisms and plans, its standards of  proof  of culpability are 
less demanding. It merely must decide who the potential sources of cyber attacks are, and how to 
pursue its deterrence agenda accordingly. 

 
Illustrative Crisis Scenarios 
 
Credible prospects for determining attribution of responsibility during many actual 

cyber  attacks  can  be  illuminated  by  illustrative  scenarios.  In  the  first hypothetical scenario, 
Iran threatens or actually uses cyber attacks to advance its  interests in the Middle East, seeking to 
compel U.S. military withdrawal from the Persian Gulf, to assert control over the Strait of 
Hormuz, or to intimidate Saudi Arabia and Israel. Such an Iranian effort would not be limited to 
cyberpower: instead, cyber threats or attacks would probably be part of a larger campaign that 
would employ other instruments, such as use of declaratory policy, diplomacy, or  military forces, 
or control of access to oil. In this scenario, the Iranian government  might  try  to conceal its 
identity  as  a  cyber  attacker,  but  equally plausible, it might openly threaten use of cyber tools 
in order to strengthen its leverage and bargaining power. Even if  the attacker tried to conceal its 
identity in the cyber realm, the source of its cyber attacks probably would not be formidably 
difficult to determine. Intelligence information about attacker identities can be gathered  from 
sources beyond the cyber activities themselves: the strategic context would  reveal a great deal 
about the attacker, and U.S. officials would be able to use technical data, all-source 
intelligence, and logical inference. 

The second illustrative scenario is that of a North Korean effort to intimidate  the Republic 

of  Korea (ROK) into making major concessions, or even to set  the stage for a military invasion 
of the ROK. North Korea might, for example,  launch cyber attacks on the United States, Japan, 
and South Korea in an effort to gain leverage over all three countries. Such cyber attacks would not 
be conducted in isolation of other events, but would be part of North Koreas overall efforts  to 
use diplomacy, its possession of nuclear weapons and missile delivery systems,  its conventional 
military power, and other instruments at its disposal. If  North  Korea intended to conduct a 
military invasion of South Korea, its cyber attacks  might try to blind ROK forces, delay the 
deployment of  U.S. reinforcements from the continental United States, and degrade the combat 
effectiveness of U.S. military forces. Here too, North Korea might not want to conceal its identity 
as a cyber attacker, but might choose instead to broadcast it clearly in order to  strengthen  its 
leverage  and  bargaining power.  Even  if it  tried  to  conceal  its identity, the source of  its 

activity in the cyber realm most likely could be determined. In such a crisis, it is unlikely that 
any other potential cyber attacker  would choose this particular pattern of activity. 

A third scenario is a hypothetical East Asian crisis in which China seeks a showdown 
over Taiwan in order to intimidate or even to conquer it. In such  a crisis, China might resort 
to major cyber attacks directed against the United States, Taiwan, and Japan. Its cyber attack on 
the United States might be intended to deter Washington from intervention in the crisis, to prevent 
it from deploying air and naval reinforcements  to the area, and to prevent U.S. military forces 
from defending Taiwan and from attacking China in event of  hostilities. Here again, Chinas 
cyber attacks would not be conducted in isolation, but would be a component of its overall 
strategy and use of its political, diplomatic, and military  power. China would have no special 
incentive to conceal its cyber identity at a time when it is provoking a grand showdown over 
Taiwan and the future of the  entire East Asia security order. Instead, it would be more likely to 
make its cyber identity known to all of its adversaries in order to enhance its leverage over them. 
Even if it sought to conceal its cyber identity, it would not have much hope of success under the 
prying eyes of U.S. all-source intelligence. 

As these three scenarios suggest, in the event of  major cyber attacks by nation-states 
on the United States, attribution during crises might be less of a crippling problem than it is 
commonly presumed to be. Some cyber attacks by  terrorists might  also  fall  into  this 
category.  To  be  sure, some  terrorist attacks might be conducted purely for vengeance and 
destruction and there-  fore  might  not  be  directly  linked  to  a  specific  political-strategic 
agenda  that  would  motivate  the  attackers  to  proclaim  responsibility  for  their  actions,  or  that 
would  make  them  obvious  suspects.  Yet  even  terrorist  groups  tend  to  have explicit political 
agendas such as, for example, driving the United States out  of Iraq,  Afghanistan,  or  the  entire 
Middle  East.  Such  an  agenda  could not be readily pursued by leaving the United States blind to 
the cyber attackers strategic intent and demands and thus to its identity. The bottom line is 
that, while attribution will remain a problem that mandates development of  better technical 
capabilities, many potentially big cyber attacks on the United States are likely to arise out of a 
specific strategic context, aimed at concrete goals such as altering U.S. foreign policy and defense 
strategy, and therefore will be possible to  attribute to specific attackers. Cyber attacks of this sort 
fall into the category of events that can be treated by the familiar logic of deterrence. 

What the United States must avoid is a crisis situation in which it is confronted by a potential 
or actual cyber attacker whose identity is known, but for whom the American government does 
not already possess a well-conceived deterrent strategy  showing  how  it  can  best  respond.  In 
such  a  situation,  the  United States could be compelled to resort to improvisation, but without 
the time to think through the details of response mechanisms or to make the necessary 
preparations. As a result, it might act incorrectly or weakly in ways that produce  serious 
reversals. By drawing upon deterrence theory, whose components are discussed below, it can 
reduce the dangers arising from such crisis situations and from cyber threats more generally. 
 
Contributions from Deterrence Theory: Past and Present 

 
What would an effective cyber deterrence theory require? A simple answer would be: 

strong defenses that can rebuff cyber attacks, and potent cyber offenses that  can  inflict 
massive  retaliatory  damage  in  return.  Such  a  capability-based approach would presume, 
however, that cyber wars would occur in isolation  from larger surrounding events and could be 
treated as self-contained, subject to  their own logic and requirements. However, the greater 

likelihood is that many  major cyber attacks are likely to appear as one instrument among several 
aimed at achieving political and strategic goals, not just inflicting damage for its own sake. 
They would be intended as instruments of  bargaining and coercion, to  deter the United States 
from taking actions the attackers do not want, or to  compel the United States to acquiesce in the 
attackers political-strategic agendas. Dealing with cyber attacks of this sort requires not just 
offensive and defensive capabilities to deter them in some mechanical sense; it requires, above 
all, the capacity to influence the motivations and psychology of the attacker, as well as a capacity 
to integrate U.S. cyber responsesdefensive and offensivewith other  instruments of national 
power and crisis response. For these reasons, the issue  of cyber deterrence strategy cannot be 
separated from the rest of U.S. national  security policy. 

 
Deterrence during the Cold War 
 
The ingredients for constructing a cyber deterrence strategy can be illustrated  by briefly 

reviewing how deterrence operated during the Cold War and how it operates today. To be sure, 
the experience of the Cold War cannot be grafted onto the different realities of today, including in 
the cyber realm. Even so, the process by which Cold War deterrence theory was adoptedfor 
example, awareness  of  the larger strategic context and adversary motives, the systematic 
creation of clear strategic concepts, the evolutionary development of new requirements as 
events changed, and the careful efforts to assemble capabilities that fulfilled these 
requirementsprovides lessons that can be adopted if  a credible cyber deterrence strategy is to 
be built today. 

The concept of deterrence first emerged during the 1950s, when  the Cold War with the 

Soviet Union was heating up and rapidly acquiring military  components. Some observers, in 
hindsight, view Cold War deterrence strategy as largely shaped by the U.S. effort to build 
nuclear offensive forces that could  inflict massive retaliation in response to a Soviet nuclear 
attack on the United States. This is an oversimplification: deterrence was embedded in a more 
nuanced  approach that was entirely focused neither on military nor nuclear calculations.  As it 
evolved during the 1950s and beyond, deterrence became anchored in  political calculations 
aimed at influencing Soviet motivations, underpinning U.S. national defense strategy in Europe, 
and controlling nuclear escalation. It was  isolated from neither larger strategic considerations nor 
the need to deal with the Soviet adversary in political terms. 

Deterrence theory first appeared as part of the Wests containment strategy in Europe, 
which aspired to keep the Soviet Union confined to Eastern  Europe  and  to  prevent  it  from 
gaining  control  of Western  Europe.  When  the  United  States  and  its  European  allies  created 
the  North  Atlantic  Treaty Organization (NATO) in 1949 to  strengthen  their  defense 
capabilities  for countering Soviet forces,  their new  alliance  faced a  precarious imbalance of 
military power in Central Europe. The Soviet Union commanded a massive army  that was 
permanently stationed in Eastern Europe, with easy access to exposed  West Germany. NATO, by 
contrast, was able to field only a few combat divisions  and air wings. It therefore turned to 
Americas growing fleet of strategic bombers,  built to carry nuclear weapons. If the Soviet Army 
invaded Western Europe with  the intent of  driving to the English Channel, the United States 
could launch a devastating nuclear attack not only on Soviet military forces, but also on the 
Soviet homeland itself. In the mid-1950s, this strategy was, in fact, based on  massive nuclear 
retaliation, but it was not aimed at responding to a nuclear attack  on the United States: although 
the Soviets possessed nuclear weapons, they had few long-range bombers capable of 

intercontinental attack. The strategy was aimed at deterring conventional attack on Western 
Europe by convincing the  Soviet government that an invasion would not succeed and that the 
Soviet Union  faced unacceptable risks: if it made such an attack, it would suffer losses that far 
exceeded any benefits that it might hope to gain. 

Even at this early stage, then, deterrence theory did not exist in a political vacuum:  it 
took  account of the  motives  and  risk-taking  propensities  of the adversary. Deterrence theory 
presumed that the Soviet Union would act rationally in a crisis, that it would be motivated by self-
preservation as well as cost-benefit calculations, and that it would not launch a war in which it 
would inevitably suffer devastating losses. Moreover, deterrence theory, as well as the containment 
doctrine that was its umbrella political rationale, cautioned the United States to be careful not to 
threaten an unprovoked western offensive aimed at dislodging  the  Soviet  Union  from  its 
stranglehold  control  over  Eastern  Europe.  As  a  result, the U.S. deterrence strategy offered the 
Soviet Union a dual rationale for exercising restraint: whereas military aggression would result in 
punishing losses,  maintaining the peace would allow the Soviets to preserve their principal gain 
from World War II, their strategic buffer in Eastern Europe. Containment and  deterrence thus 
offered the Soviets a political and strategic bargain. They could retain de facto control of 
Eastern Europe if  they kept their military hands off  Western Europe, but if they invaded 
Western Europe, they would lose both  Eastern Europe and their own homeland to nuclear 
destruction. As events would  show, the Soviets were prepared to accept this bargain, and peace 
was preserved  during a period of  intense political rivalry and ideological incompatibility that 
easily could have erupted into full-scale war. 

The U.S. deterrence strategy began to change in the 1960s. The Soviet Union  started to 

deploy nuclear-tipped intercontinental ballistic missiles (ICBMs) that could reach U.S. targets 
within 30 minutes, destroying the U.S.-based bomber  force on the ground. This could 
undermine the precarious logic of  deterrence by diminishing the threat that the Soviets would 
face nuclear punishment if they invaded Western Europe. The United States therefore embarked 
on an expensive  effort to deploy a large force of ICBMs and submarine-launched ballistic missiles 
(SLBMs) that could survive a surprise Soviet missile attack. The goal was to  create a 
survivable second-strike retaliatory force so as to restore the credibility  of retaliatory deterrence. 
At the same time, the United States began backing away from its earlier emphasis on 

massive retaliation in the form of  all-out nuclear obliteration of the Soviet Union. A main 
reason was that, as the Soviets deployed a survivable, second-strike missile force of  their own, 
the United States could not hope to disarm them in a surprise attack. Mutual nuclear 
vulnerability had arrived. The  United States therefore began crafting new nuclear warfighting 
doctrines that contemplated limited nuclear strikes in the early stages of  a war but sought to 
control subsequent escalation. The threat of nuclear retaliation remained the backbone of 
deterrence, but ideas for actually waging nuclear war were now  developed, along with theories 
of limiting escalation. The goal would be to halt fighting by political means before the two 
countries had obliterated each other. 

American nuclear theorists therefore outlined a so-called ladder of escalation  to 

guide  how  the  United  States  should  prepare  to  fight  at  each rung, so as to offer multiple 
options and flexibility and avoid domination by the Soviet Union at any step. It postulated that 
the escalatory process would be  characterized on both sides by strategic intentions and political 
bargaining: each  side would employ military strikes to coerce the other into submission to its 
political objectives. The goal of  climbing the ladder gradually and purposefully  was to compel 
the other side to back down, while keeping escalation from spiraling  out of  control and resulting in 

massive devastation on both sides. Whether an  actual  military  conflict  would  have  conformed 
to  this  hypothetical  ladder  is  uncertain. Many critics doubted that the escalation process, once 
started, could be controlled at all, let alone in finely tuned ways, but U.S. strategy endeavored to 
do everything possible to bring escalation under control. 

As Cold War deterrence theory matured, it was accompanied by efforts to  define its 
military requirements and to pursue the defense programs mandated by them. In preparing its 
nuclear offensive forces, the United States created a triad doctrine in the 1960s and 1970s. The 
triad doctrine specified that the U.S. force posture should be composed of three legs1,000 
ICBMs, 656 SLBMs carried by submarines, and about 350 B52 strategic bomberseach of 
which could  survive a surprise attack and retaliate with sufficient force to devastate Soviet 
urban areas, so as to deter any Soviet inclination to wage a full-scale nuclear war. Beyond 
this, the quest for flexibility and options led to decisions to equip all three legs of  the triad 
with accurate warheads that could be used against a  range of  targets other than cities. As a 
consequence, the U.S. triad eventually  was armed with 12,000 warheads or more, enough to 
meet almost any need for  strike options and target coverage. Meanwhile, the Soviet Union 
deployed its  own version of a triad.14 

While nuclear forces could deter nuclear attack, they could not reliably deter a 

conventional attack because the Soviets might judge that if  NATO found its  conventional 
defenses buckling, it would not risk nuclear escalation even to save  Western Europe.15 In 1967, 
therefore, NATO adopted a strategy of forward  defense and flexible response that mandated a 
stronger conventional defense posture. During the 1970s and 1980s, the United States and its 
European allies invested major sums in conventional defenses. The Cold War ended with Western 
nuclear and conventional forces stronger than ever, with deterrence solidified,  and with the 
Soviet Union facing bankruptcy partly due to its huge investments in a military buildup that 
brought fruitless strategic returns. 

 
Cold War Lessons 
 
Deterrence was a risky proposition during the Cold War, but it worked: major war with 
the Soviet Union was averted, and Western security was safeguarded.  It worked for reasons that 
yield lessons for cyber deterrence. First, it worked because it was credible, and because the 
United States made efforts to maintain, improve, and adjust it. Second, nuclear war was not 
viewed in isolation from  larger events, but took into account the political and diplomatic 
motivations of  both sides. Third, U.S. deterrence strategy denied the Soviet Union any favorable 
prospects from aggression, while offering it reasons to conclude that remaining at peace with the 
West was preferable to war. As deterrence theory matured, it balanced the need of warning the 
adversary against the imperative of minimizing  the  risks  of unwarranted  escalation.  Its 
emphasis  on  flexibility  and  options allowed it to respond to a range of  situations. Its success 
was also due to the fact that the United States and its NATO allies took care to meet its 
military requirements, and because it was crafted to protect not only the United States,  but 
vulnerable allies as well. 

All of these lessons provide valuable insights for thinking about deterrence today, 

including cyber deterrence. The general principles it yields for the contemporary era include 
the need for focus on the political motivations and risk-taking propensities of  potential 
adversaries, for credible deterrent mechanisms that will work even under great stress, for well-
integrated capabilities that are  guided by carefully crafted deterrence doctrines and that address 

the spectrum of challenges likely to be confronted, for flexibility and options, for integration of 
doctrines of  retaliation and compellence with the necessity to control escalation, and for 
policies that protect allies along with the United States. 

 
Modern-day Problems 
 
What are the implications of contemporary nuclear deterrence theory for deterring  cyber 

attacks? Deterrence theory today continues to focus on influencing the  motivations and 
aspirations of potential adversaries by persuading them that  aggression cannot succeed. The 
principal target of  U.S. deterrence strategy has  switched, however, from the defunct Soviet Union 
to rogue countries, terrorists,  and other adversaries that menace U.S. and allied interests. While 
the strategy  still is aimed at nuclear attacks and big conventional invasions, such as a North 
Korean  attack  on  South  Korea,  it  also  seeks  to  deter  lesser  provocations,  including 
terrorism. This emphasis on multiple adversaries and provocations has given rise to the concept of 
tailored deterrence:16 deterrence must take into  account the specific predilections of  each 
individual adversary and its conduct. The U.S. nuclear triad is now composed of  offensive 
forces, defensive forces,  and infrastructure. Today, bombers and missiles carrying precision 
conventional  (nonnuclear) warheads figure importantly in the deterrence equation. The entire 

U.S. conventional military posture is viewed as a major contributor to deterrence,  as well 
as to the other key activities, spelled out in the National Defense Strategy,  including assurance of 
allies, dissuasion of potential rivals from competitive provocative conduct, and defeat of 
adversaries in wartime. 

Since the Cold War ended in 1990, deterrence has continued to work in some places but 
seems to have failed in others. It failed to prevent Iraq from invading Kuwait in 1990, Serbia 
from invading Kosovo in 1999, or al Qaeda from using  Afghanistan to launch its attack on the 
United States in 2001. Deterrence has not prevented North Korea and Iran from pursuing 
nuclear weapons, nor has  the presence of large U.S. military forces in Iraq and Afghanistan 
prevented adversaries from waging guerrilla wars aimed at destabilizing both countries. 

Such problems have led many observers to conclude that deterrence theory  is inadequate 
against present-day U.S. adversaries that range from rogue countries  to terrorists. Is the problem 
that the United States does not have a properly conceived deterrence theory, or is it that todays 
adversaries are more willing to take dangerous risks, and pay heavy prices, than was the Soviet 
Union during the Cold War? If  the success of  deterrence could be taken for granted during the 
Cold War, it cannot be taken for granted today. It has become a variable, not a constant, in the 
strategic equation. Some threats are harder to deter than others. Recognition of  this disturbing 
reality makes the task of  designing an effective  cyber deterrence strategy both more necessary 
and more difficult. 
 
Towards a General Model of Tailored Cyber Deterrence 

 
Given the troubled track record of recent years, can deterrenceincluding cyber 

deterrencebe accomplished against multiple potential adversaries with assertive  agendas? Some 
observers argue that modern-era aggressors cannot be deterred, on the grounds that they are not 
rational: that they are not influenced by the same cautionary mechanisms that motivate 
normally sensible actors. However,  rationality is a relative term: while some of todays actors 
may not be rational by U. S. standards, this does not mean that they are wholly irrational. 

Although they may perceive high potential payoffs in a confrontation with the United States, 
and this may lead them to think and act boldly, they are not necessarily oblivious  to potential 
damage and the pain that they may suffer in return. Even todays  actors with malevolent 
agendas tend to be governed by explicit motives, goals, and awareness of  costs and risks. This is 
certainly true of  nation-states, and it  also applies, to varying degrees, to nonstate actors. Even 
terrorist groups are  motivated not just by ideology and hatred, but also by strategic goals and 
self-  preservation. The decision calculus of  such actors may be influenced by U.S. deterrence 
mechanisms, even cyber deterrence. Cyber attacks are often regarded  as not deterrable because 
they are free ridesthe attacker has an expectation of  impunitybut this calculus could be 
changed by creating expectations that cyber aggression might be an uncertain or costly act. 
No cyber deterrence strategy can hope to be airtight to prevent all minor attacks. 

However, a strategy can increase the chances that major cyber attacks  can be prevented; this 
could protect the United States and its allies not only from a single major attack but also from 
serial cyber aggressions and resulting damage. A worthwhile goal of a cyber deterrence strategy 
would be to transform  medium-sized attacks into low-probability events and to provide 
practically 100  percent deterrence of major attacks. 

A cyber deterrence strategy could contribute to other key defense activities and  goals, 
including  assurance  of allies,  dissuasion,  and  readiness  to  defeat adversaries in the event of 
actual combat. The goal of dissuading adversaries is  crucially important. Thus far, the United 
States has not been noticeably forceful in  stating its intentions to deter major cyber attacks and, if 
necessary, to respond to them with decisive force employing multiple instruments of power. 
Meanwhile,  several countries and terrorist  groups are reportedly developing cyber  attack 
capabilities. Dissuasion of such activities is not an easy task: it requires investment in technical 
capabilities as well as building an internal consensus to employ these capabilities. If some of 
these actors can be dissuaded from entering into cyber competition with the United States and 
its allies, the dangers of  actual cyber aggression will diminish. 

How would a cyber deterrence strategy operate, and how can its potential  effectiveness 

 
Ends, Ways, and Means 
 

be judged? Deterrence depends on the capacity of the United States  to project an image of 
resolve, willpower, and capability in sufficient strength  to convince a potential adversary to 
refrain from activities that threaten U.S.  and allied interests. As recent experience shows, 
deterrence can be especially difficult in the face of adversaries who are inclined to challenge the 
United States and otherwise take dangerous risks. In cases of  failure, deterrence might well 
have been sound in theory but not carried out effectively enough to work. The aggressions of 
Saddam Hussein, Slobodan Milosevic, and al Qaeda might not have been carried out had these 
actors been convinced that the United States would respond with massive military force. These 
aggressions resulted because of a failure to communicate U.S. willpower and resolve, not because 
the attackers  were wholly oblivious to any sense of restraint or self-preservation, nor because  the 
logic of deterrence had lost its relevance. 

A general model of  cyber deterrence provides a strategic framework for thinking about 

tailored deterrence. Such a model is the DOD JOC for deterrence operations, which emphasizes 
employing instruments of deterrence to affect  not only the physical capacities of  potential 
adversaries, but their psychology  and motivations as well. The model specifies ends, ways, 
means, and analytical  procedures. 

The goal of a cyber deterrence strategy would be to influence an adversarys 

decisionmaking calculus so decisively that it will not launch cyber attacks against the United 
States, its military forces, or its allies. Coordinated actions reduce the chances for attacker 
success, so that the dangers, costs, risks, and uncertainties  of  a cyber attack are perceived to 
outweigh any expected success, benefits, or rewards. In the case of  an adversary who seeks to 
use threats of  cyber attacks, or actual attacks, to coerce the United States into conduct that 
would serve its larger interests and goals, a cyber deterrence strategy will work if the adversary 
judges that this attempted coercion would not succeed and that the attack would provoke U.S. 
retaliation, resulting in a net strategic setback for the would-be attacker. For example, if Iran 
were to contemplate cyber attacks to try to coerce the United States into making political 
concessions in the Persian Gulf and Middle East, it might be deterred from this course if its 
decisionmakers were to  judge that the cyber attack would not physically succeed in inflicting the 
desired  damage; that even if  the attack succeeded, the United States would not make the 
desired concessions; or that the United States would be likely to retaliate in ways that inflict 
unacceptable damage on Iran in return, in the cyber realm or elsewhere. 

The same strategic calculus applies to Chinese use of cyber threats and attacks, as 

well as actions by other plausible adversaries in the cyber domain. Potential U.S. 
counteractions in such situations are encapsulated in the three principal ways of pursuing 
deterrence articulated in the JOC model: deterrence by denying benefits, deterrence by 
imposing costs, and deterrence by offering  incentives for adversary restraint. 

Deterrence by denying benefits entails credibly threatening to deprive the attacker of 

the benefits or gains being sought: convincing it that a cyber attack will  not achieve its goals. 
Deterrence by imposing costs entails credibly threatening to impose costs, losses, and risks that are 
too painful to accept, thus convincing the  adversary that punishment would outweigh any 
expected successes. Deterrence by encouraging restraint means convincing the adversary that not 
attacking will  result in an acceptable, attractive outcome. 

These three deterrence mechanisms can be employed singly, but they are likely to work 
best when they are combined in mutually reinforcing ways. Potential cyber  adversaries  may  not  be 
unitary  actors  dominated  by  a  single  strategic calculus; decisionmaking may be influenced by 
multiple actors, such as different parts of a foreign government or terrorist network, that have 
differing priorities  and tolerance for risk. Together, these three mechanisms can influence 
multiple  actors in different ways and to different degrees, enhancing the prospects that the 
decision will be to reject cyber attacks. 

Deterrence by denial or by imposing costs can, in principle, both be carried out purely 

within cyberspace. For example, the United States could seek to deter cyber attacks both by 
building strong cyber defenses and by employing cyber offensive capability for retaliatory 
attack on the information networks of  the  adversary. This narrow focus may not, however, be 
appropriate for most strategic  confrontations in which cyber attacks are used to pursue larger 
political and strategic objectives. In such cases, the U.S. strategic calculus of cyber deterrence 
will need to be broader, too. Efforts to deny benefits will need to focus not only on protecting 
U.S. cyber networks, but also on ensuring that cyber attacks, even  if physically successful, could 
not compel the United States into making the political concessions being sought. In other 
words, U.S. cyber defenses must be not only technical but strategic as well. 

The same calculation applies to deterrence by imposing costs: the United States  might 
choose  to  retaliate  purely  in  the  cyber  realm  by  taking  down enemy  information  networks, 
but  it  can  maximize  deterrence  by  applying  a  full set of  other mechanismspolitical, 

diplomatic, economic, and military  to increase the strategic pressures, costs, and risks to 
adversaries. Indeed, these  other instruments may be more potent than cyber retaliation against 
adversaries  that lack sophisticated information networks and thus would not be especially 
bothered by cyber counterattacks. Retaliatory options must be more than purely  cyber; they 
should be multifaceted and strategic in character. 

Encouraging adversary restraint necessitates sophisticated handling of strategic 

confrontations and crisis management. As a general proposition, cyber deterrence will not work 
if  the adversary is faced with the imminent prospect of total defeat and destruction regardless of 
whether it launches a cyber attack.  For example, a rogue country faced with the imminent 
prospect of U.S. invasion  and conquest has little incentive to refrain from a cyber attack, while it 
has many incentives to launch one in order to deter, hamper, or exact retaliation for a 
U.S.invasion. Such  an  adversary  has  something to  gain  and  nothing to  lose  by 

pursuing offensive cyber warfare. An adversary that may judge itself  better  off  by refraining 
from cyber warfare, even if  it is involved in strategic rivalry,  competition, or outright warfare 
with the United States, can be deterred. Just as deterrence theory during the Cold War required 
the United States to contemplate  how  to  give  the  Soviet  Union  better  options  than  initiating 
or escalating a nuclear war, cyber deterrence theory requires awareness of adversary interests, and 
offering adversaries more attractive options than engaging in a  mutual effort to destroy each 
others information networks and infrastructures.  This will be easiest where strategic conflicts 
are limited and subject to diplomatic resolution. It will be harder to carry out with implacable 
adversaries that are pursuing duels to the death with the United States. 

A cyber deterrence strategy will also need to be aware of thresholds. Cyber attacks can 
come in many different shapes and sizes, and they will not all merit the same response. Some 
attacks may be too minor to worry about. Others may merit a retaliatory response, but the degree 
of  that response will depend upon  the degree of provocation. 

What about the meansthe instrumentsfor pursuing cyber deterrence?  A cyber 

deterrence strategy aimed at handling multiple threats and differing  situations cannot rely 
primarily on any single instrument. It must be able to employ multiple instruments that offer a 
wide range of  response options, that  can be packaged and repackaged to serve the specific 
goals being pursued, and that allow  the  United  States  to deal  with  dynamically  evolving 
situations of complexity. Multiple instruments might be used singly or in combination. Single 
instruments may be effective against weak adversaries, but multiple instruments  are likely to be 
needed against ambitious, assertive opponents. For each situation,  the instruments of retaliation 
must enable the United States to act credibly and powerfully. 

Both cyber defenses and cyber offenses are part of deterrence strategy, but they are not 
the whole solution or even the most important component of  it. In some situations, U.S. cyber 
defenses may be ineffective, but the United States might choose not to respond with a cyber 
counterattack. The most effective  response to some cyber attacks may be political and economic, 
perhaps isolating the attacker from the global community, mobilizing nation-states to treat it as 
a  pariah,  or  imposing  economic  sanctions.  These  could  inflict  more  painful penalties than 
any cyber counterattack. U.S. military strikes might even be carried  out, perhaps  in  retaliation  for 
a  truly  devastating  attack  on  U.S. information  networks, or as part of major combat operations 
against enemies. Much depends  on the identity of the attacker, the nature of the potential attacks, 
and the nature of  a proper response. The United States needs to be able to respond flexibly, to 
have a portfolio of  options that provide adaptability, and to be capable of  employing multiple 
instruments in whatever combination makes best sense for  the situation at hand. 

 
Analytical Procedures 
 
The general deterrence model, as derived from the JOC on deterrence operations, offers 

six analytical steps for pursuing each case of  cyber deterrence in peace, crisis, and war: 

 

1.  specify the deterrence objectives and the strategic context 
2.  assess the strategic calculus of adversary decisionmakers 
3.  identify desired deterrence effects on adversary conduct 
4.  develop and assess courses of action designed to achieve desired effects 
5.  develop plans to execute deterrence courses of  action and to monitor and assess 

adversary responses 

6.  develop  capacities  to  respond  flexibly  and  effectively  as  the  deterrence situation 

evolves. 
 
These six steps reflect the demands and challenges of achieving tailored deterrence of 

cyber attacks. Tailored deterrence recognizes that U.S. goals and objectives may vary 
considerably from one situation to the next, necessitating different  types  of responses.  Thus, 
step  1  defines  U.S.  purposes  for  cyber situations.  Step  2  recognizes  that,  because  not  all 
adversaries  are  the  same,  the United States must specify the adversary being encountered, the 
strategic context  of the  encounter,  and  the  decision  calculus  being  employed  by  the 
adversary. Each of  the three types of  adversaries likely to be facednear-peer  rivals, middle-
sized rogue countries, and terrorist groupswould bring different  psychologies and motives to 
confrontations with the United States, as well as different attitudes toward goals, stakes, 
actions, perceptions of  U.S. willpower  and resolve, risk-taking propensities, and handling of 
uncertainties. 

Steps 3 and 4 are both critical and challenging. Step 3 entails identifying the desired 
effects of deterrence on adversary conduct; in step 4, then, courses of action  to  produce these 
effects  are  developed  and  assessed. Generally, when deterrence has succeeded in the past, the 
United States was skillful at identifying how its courses of action would produce effects that 
could influence the motivations and behavior of adversary governments in the desired ways. 
When deterrence has failed, it was usually because the U.S. Government failed to assemble a 
portfolio of declaratory policies and actions that strongly influenced the perceptions and motives 
of the adversaries. In these cases, the problem was  not that the United States was blind to the need 
to send strong deterrence signals,  but that it sent the wrong signals, which failed to have the desired 
effects because they did not credibly signal the will and the capability of the United States. 

Because  many  cyber  attack  situations  will  be  part  of larger  geopolitical 

confrontations, determining how to send credible cyber deterrence signals will  entail carrying 
out multiple actions that, in turn, will need to be embedded in broader  U.S.  activities  aimed  at 
achieving  other  purposes.  When  the  United  States acts weakly in the eyes of  adversaries, it 
may unintentionally signal that cyber attacks can be carried out with impunity or will not be met 
with a decisive response. However, when the United States acts powerfully in handling a larger 
crisis that goes beyond the cyber realm, it could risk burying its cyber deterrence signals in a 
plethora of other activities, thus leading the adversary to overlook or  misinterpret them. Beyond 
this, U.S. actions that powerfully influence one set of adversaries may have little impact on other 
adversaries, who might be influenced by an entirely different set of measures. For some 

adversaries, a simple warning  might be deterrent enough; for others, a cyber response, or 
powerful use of other instruments as well as a cyber response, might be appropriate. For some, 
however, the only effective response might be the use of military power or other  non-cyber 
instruments.  For  such  reasons,  cyber  deterrence  requires  that  the  United States develop its 
skills in figuring out how to influence each adversary and how to act accordingly. 

Step 5, developing plans, and step 6, developing capacities (discussed  below), are also 
important. Plans determine the crucial details of how multiple  instruments are to be blended 
together in a cyber crisis; they also reduce the risks of serious errors in judgment if complex 
actions had to be cobbled together on the fly. Execution plans are needed for precrisis situations 
and the initial stages of  actual crises, and also for the various stages in which a cyber crisis 
might  unfold, such as a small probing cyber attack, a larger but still limited attack, and so on up 
the ladder of  escalation. This cyber escalation, in turn, might be part of  a sequence of  political 
and military steps aimed at bringing pressure on the  United States. Thus, a cyber deterrence 
strategy needs to master the ladder of  cyber escalation as well as the other ingredients of cyber 
crisis management. 

Tailored cyber deterrence requires more than realizing that potential adversaries will 
differ from each other, will harbor different perceptions and motivations, and will employ 
cyber attacks with differing agendas in mind. It  also requires realizing that U.S. goals and 
objectives will vary from one adversary  and situation to the next, that diverse responses may 
be needed in order to have different types of  effects, and that crisis response plans must 
provide the capacity to act both strongly and effectively. Many cyber attacks will not occur in  a 
vacuum, but instead will arise in a larger context that necessitates multiple U.S.  responses in 
addition to those aimed at ensuring cyber deterrence. Because each cyber situation is likely to be 
unique, applying tailored deterrence to the cyber domain promises to be complex and 
challenging. 
 
Strategic Requirements for Cyber Deterrence Assets and Capabilities 

 
Because a cyber strategy of  tailored deterrence must deal with diverse threats, multiple 
assets and capabilities will be needed. This necessitates a persistent, wide-ranging U.S. Government 
effort. Key requirements and priorities for achieving  an effective capability to carry out a cyber 
deterrent strategy include: 

 

  a clear and firm declaratory policy spelling out the U.S. intention to deter cyber attacks 
  high global situational awareness that is attuned to the full spectrum of potential cyber 

threats and the circumstances in which they might arise 

  good command and control systems that permit coordinated multiregional and homeland 

responses to cyber threats 

  effective cyber defenses that protect both U.S. military forces and the U.S. homeland 

with a high priority for defending key infrastructure 

  a wide spectrum of  countercyber offensive capabilities, including cyber attack and 

other instruments for asserting U.S. power in order to enforce  deterrence before, during, 
and after crises 

  well-developed U.S. interagency cooperation and collaboration with allies and partners 

including those in Europe, Asia, and elsewhere 

  cyber deterrence methodologies, metrics, and experiments that can help guide the 

planning process. 
 
Each of these requisites of an effective cyber deterrence policy is examined in this 

section. 
 
Strong Declaratory Policy 
 
The goal of  deterrence of  cyber attacks is already stated in some official U.S. 

documents, but a case can be made for a stronger and clearer U.S. declaratory policy. A good 
place to present it would be in the next National Security Strategy.  The declaratory  policy  should 
provide  a  credible, convincing  explanation of  why the United States takes cyber threats 
seriously, why it would regard a major cyber attack as potentially an act of  war against it, and 
the intention of  the  United States to respond with decisive actions, possibly including force. 
The declaratory policy should leave no doubt in the minds of  potential adversaries  that any 
cyber attacks on the United States would fail to achieve their goals and that the attackers would 
suffer unacceptable costs, damages, and risks in return.  A U.S. declaratory policy for cyber 
deterrence needs to be firm, but it also needs to be balanced, sending the right messages 
regarding possible responses to  cyber  attack  and  avoiding  inflammatory  statements  that  could 
contribute to escalation of  cyber conflicts. The QDR of  2006 asserts that the deterrent 
posture should be capable of mounting an overwhelming response. While this statement 
clearly is appropriate for major cyber attacks that could cause massive disruption, not all cyber 
attacks will fall into this category. Some might be smaller, yet still large enough to merit a U.S. 
response of  some magnitude. Above all, the U.S. response should be tailored to the situation. 
Based on this principle, U.S. declaratory policy could endorse a cyber deterrence strategy of 
tailored, decisive, and proportional response. 

 
High Global Situational Awareness 
 
Global situational awareness will be a key requirement for a cyber deterrence strategy. 
In particular, five types of  knowledge are necessary: identification of  potential cyber threats 
around the world, including state and nonstate actors; assessment of the motives, value 
structures, goals, perceptions, and calculations  that different adversaries might bring to the use of 
cyber attacks, including attacks that are part of  broader strategic campaigns aimed at damaging 
U.S. interests; appraisal of the calculations, judgments, and external pressures that might lead 
potential adversaries to refrain from launching cyber attacks; awareness of  the  cyber  assets, 
capabilities,  and  vulnerabilities  that  potential  adversaries  might possess or acquire; and use of 
all-source intelligence for attributing the source of cyber attacks in crisis situations where 
attribution is possible. 

Especially important for carrying out deterrence is situational awareness of  the 

psychology and motivations that might lead potential adversaries to launch  cyber attacks; their 
attitudes toward benefits, costs, and risk-taking propensities;  and the calculations that might 
lead them to refrain from such attacks. This requires gathering intelligence on the adversaries 
and developing awareness of  how U.S. deterrent actions might affect others behavior in peace, 
crisis, or war. The U.S. Intelligence Community must be involved in gathering this information, 
and it must work closely with U.S. policy agencies in order to evaluate the likely  consequences of 
various courses of action for convincing adversaries to exercise  restraint by refraining from 

 
Effective Command and Control 
 
Preparedness is critical to an effective cyber deterrence strategy and to crisis 

management. A cyber attack on the United States, especially during an ongoing  regional crisis 
with strategic interests at stake, could impose significant demands on the U.S. command and 
control system. Simultaneously, the United States would need to orchestrate its cyber defenses 
at home, to employ countercyber  actions against the adversary, and to coordinate its cyberspace 
activities with other instruments of  power and actions to manage events that could be taking 
place  anywhere in the world. Beyond this, the United States might have to coordinate its 
responses to two cyber adversaries at the same time. For example, multiple  combatant 
commands within DOD would need to coordinate their actions, inside as well as outside of  the 
cyber realm, along with homeland defense agencies, the national security interagency 
community, and U.S. diplomatic activity abroad. Improvements in this arena seem necessary. 

 
Stronger Cyber Defenses 
 
Cyber  defenses  capable  of protecting  U.S.  information  networks  are  needed both to 

committing cyber aggression and from escalating in a crisis. Accurate intelligence on the 
cyber attack capabilities and activities  of  potential adversaries is also necessary, to gauge U.S. 
vulnerabilities, as well  as  adversary vulnerabilities  to  U.S.  counteraction.  Determining  the 
identity  of potential attacks requires both technical means  and  human sources  of intelligence. 

reduce potential vulnerabilities to cyber attack and to help deter potential attackers. If adversaries 
conclude that cyber attacks cannot attain their goals of damaging U.S. information networks, they 
will be less inclined to incur the costs  and risks of launching them. Many observers judge that the 
United States is too vulnerable to cyber attacks. This weakens U.S. hopes for effective 
deterrence. Improvements in U.S.  cyber defenses  are  thus needed for both  defense and 
deterrence. 

The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace of 2003 sought to foster a partnership 

between government and the private sector. It outlined five major priorities for strengthening 
U.S. cyber defenses, along with specific recommendations in each  area, many of  which remain 
current. First, it called for a national cyberspace security  and  response  program,  establishing 
the  Department  of Homeland Security as the main point of contact for cyberspace security efforts 
with industry. It recommended improvements to cyberspace analysis, warning, information- 
sharing, major incident management, and national-level recovery efforts. 

As  a  second  priority,  it  called  for  a  program  for  reducing  the  national cyberspace 

security threat and vulnerability. Major recommendations included  improved criminal 
prosecution of cyber attackers, the adoption of  improved security  protocols  and  more  secure 
router  technology  for  the  Internet,  and improved computer software security. 

The third priority identified was a national cyberspace security awareness and training 

program. It recommended improved Federal, state, and local efforts  to promote awareness of 
cyber security, education programs in elementary and  secondary schools, and efforts to improve 
awareness by small businesses and  home computer users regarding antivirus software and 
firewalls. 

A fourth priority was to secure government cyberspace with Federal efforts  to strengthen 
the security of  computers, software, and information networks,  coupled with parallel efforts by 

state and local governments. 

The strategy called, fifth, for national security and international cyberspace security 

cooperation. Recommendations included improving countercyber intelligence and attribution 
capabilities as well as closer cooperation with foreign governments and multinational 
organizations in pursuing cyber security. 

Preferential defense of the most crucial information networks is  a high  priority for 
enhancing cyber deterrence. Safeguarding the information networks  of the U.S. military, along 
with U.S. Government information networks, is clearly  critical. Priority  efforts  to  safeguard 
networks  that  operate  key  areas  of the domestic infrastructure make sense, too. An example is 
the electrical power grid,  loss of which could have a cascading effect in damaging other key 
parts of the U.S. economy.17 

 
Multifaceted CounterCyber Offensive Capabilities 
 
Because Americas defenses cannot realistically  be made impregnable against major 

cyber attacks any time soon, creation of  offensive retaliatory capabilities is an essential 
component of  a cyber deterrence strategy. Retaliation could be needed to help deter bolt-out-
of-the-blue attacks confined to cyberspace, or threats of cyber attack during periods of rising 
political tensions, or major cyber attacks during intense crises or actual shooting wars. Retaliation 
could take many forms. It could mainly take the form of  cyber retaliation against an adversarys 
networks; this might be launched quickly after an attack began, or later if  time  is needed to 
identify the attacker or to create the proper conditions for acting effectively.  Retaliation  might 
also  include  diplomatic,  political,  or  economic  responses, or the use of  military force. As a 
general rule, confrontations with  adversaries that  are  strategic  in  nature,  and  are  focused  on 
regional  security  affairs elsewhere in the world, are especially likely to require a blend of 
retaliatory  instruments that are embedded in a larger framework of  U.S. actions and that extend 
well beyond the cyber domain. 

A major challenge will be to tailor responses to help achieve the specific deterrence 

goals being sought. A cyber deterrent strategy will require developing  a portfolio of  capabilities 
and actions that can be combined to form effective offensive responses tailored to the 
situations at hand. This requires not only creation of physical capabilities but also development 
of a wide spectrum of offensive response plans to avoid the risks associated with improvising in a 
crisis. 

 
Interagency Cooperation and Collaboration with Allies and Partners 
 
A cyber deterrence strategy would be carried out in multiple domains, requiring  careful 
coordination. Strong U.S. interagency cooperation is therefore needed, especially among the 
intelligence agencies, which are responsible for identifying cyber threats; the homeland security 
agencies, which handle domestic priorities; and the national security community, which handles 
external policies. Within the national security community, close cooperation between DOD and 
the State Department would be needed at home and abroad. The more such agencies 
collaborate, the stronger the cyber deterrence strategy will be. 

Collaboration with allies and partners is also important. Because they are  potentially 
vulnerable to cyber attacks, cooperation in pursuing a cyber deterrence strategy can help reduce 
their vulnerabilities, as well as the risk that threats of attack against them could be used by 

effort to create a cyber deterrence strategy of  tailored response. The  essence of cyber 
deterrencethe ability to influence the motives and calculations of potential  cyber  attackers
requires  subjective  evaluations  and  qualitative  techniques, but that does not mean that 
assessment is impossible. Analytical studies might endeavor to calibrate the likely deterrence 
effects of  alternative strategies and capabilities on different types of potential cyber attackers 
and the situations in which their attacks might occur. Simulation exercises and other experiments 
could also help build usable knowledge. 
 

Issues for Further Analysis 

adversaries to pressure the United States  to make strategic concessions. Multinational 
cooperation can also increase the pool of assets and capabilities that could be mobilized to deal 
with cyber attacks. Cooperation  with  European  allies,  which  already  is  starting  to  take  place, 
is especially important.1818 An issue worth examining is whether security collaboration for a 
cyber deterrence strategy can take place within NATO, which provides  the best transatlantic 
institution for handling threats to its members. It could be argued that a major cyber attack 
against the United States or its European allies could qualify as an Article 5 contingency that 
would mandate a strong NATO response in the cyber realm or outside it. If such a judgment is 
reached,  the likelihood of being able to employ NATO increases significantly, but much  would 
depend upon the attitudes of Britain, Germany, France, and other major  European allies. 
Multilateral collaboration with such key Asian allies as Japan, South Korea, and Australia also 
makes strategic sense. Indeed, collaboration for the purpose of  creating a strong cyber 
deterrence strategy might help set the stage for pursuing broader Asian collective defense and 
security planning. 

 
Metrics and Experiments 
 
Development of analytical methods and metrics for assessment should be part of  any 

 
Efforts to develop an effective cyber deterrence strategy will require further  analysis 
of  a number of  thorny issues, including developing declaratory policy  for  multiple  audiences; 
providing  better  net  assessments  of adversary  cyber  capabilities and U.S. vulnerabilities; 
addressing the attribution problem; learning to deal with nonstate actors; addressing the 
threshold problem; dealing with intrawar deterrence and control of escalation; and providing 
extended deterrence coverage and dealing with attacks on third parties. This section briefly 
outlines each of these issues. 

 
Declaratory Policy for Multiple Audience 
 
During the Cold War, shaping declaratory policy was relatively easy because the  United 
States was dealing mainly with one audience, the Soviet Union, whose motives and aspirations 
were relatively well known. In the current era, the United  States will need to deal with multiple 
adversaries and wider audiences as it shapes a cyber deterrence strategy. These actors possess 
differing perceptions, motives,  and calculations, and they are likely to be influenced by 
differing types of  U.S.  deterrent actions. Thus, the types of U.S. policies to deter one type of 
adversary  may differ from those needed to deter another adversary, with varying degrees of soft 
and hard rhetoric or of positive incentives and punishing responses. This  challenge cannot readily 

be solved by trying to fine-tune each public declaratory statement so that it somehow addresses 
all potential adversaries. Instead, the  United States will need to use a combination of  public 
and private diplomacy to convey tailored, focused messages to each adversary. Doing so will 
require Washington to develop a better capacity to communicate with foreign audiences,  a 
challenge that applies to many issues far beyond the cyber realm. 

 
Providing Better Net Assessments of Capabilities and Vulnerabilities 
 
An essential issue is knowing how capable adversaries are of  launching major  cyber 

attacks and how vulnerable the United States is to such attacks. Many observers postulate that 
multiple actors are developing expert attack capabilities  in this arena, and that U.S. information 
networks are highly vulnerable to them. Embracing this assumption is a prudent response to an 
issue clouded by many technicalities. However, the fact that the United States has not yet been 
subjected  to a major crippling cyber attack may indicate that adversary capabilities and 
U.S. vulnerabilities are not so great as many fear. Further analysis of  this issue is 

needed because it affects not only future threats, but also how future U.S. cyber deterrence 
strategy and response options should take shape. During the Cold War, U.S. deterrence strategy 
did not fully take shape until sophisticated net assessments of  the nuclear and conventional 
military capabilities of  both sides  had been done. For example, a combination of  static 
techniques and dynamic computer models helped shed analytical light on both nuclear 
competition and the conventional military balance in Europe. Comparable analyses of capabilities 
and vulnerabilities in the cyber domain will be needed for a mature and effective U.S. cyber 
deterrence strategy. 

 
Addressing the Attribution Problem 
 
Earlier, this chapter argued that the perpetrators of  many major cyber attacks  would 

likely be identifiable through use of  all-source intelligence and strategic reasoning. While this 
judgment suffices to justify initial efforts to establish a cyber deterrence strategy, it does not 
mean that we can ignore the critical need to develop better technical attribution capabilities so that 
the sources of all attacks can be identified. In the cyber realm, attribution is far more difficult 
than in the realms of  nuclear and conventional forces. Perhaps this problem will lessen as  better 
technical means are developed, and as the United States becomes better at employing all-source 
intelligence to sort out the identity of  attackers promptly.  Pursuing improved capabilities in this 
arena is a high-priority goal. 

 
Learning to Deal with Nonstate Actors 
 
Although nation-states seem likely to be the main source of major cyber attacks on the 

United States, major or minor attacks might also come from nonstate actors, such as al Qaeda, 
Hamas, Hizballah, and other terrorist groups, or ethnic  groups and other political actors whose 
memberships cut across state boundaries. Their motives and aspirations could be quite different 
from those of  nation- states: they might be more influenced by ideology and anger, and they 
might be more willing to take risks and to engage in provocations. Whether such groups can be 
deterred from employing cyber attacks is an open question, but it is not a  hopeless proposition: 
they will typically be pursuing political agendas in order to advance their interests, and they will 

therefore be vulnerable to counterpressures.  In order to carry out a tailored cyber deterrence 
strategy, the United States will need to learn how to influence such actors. Further research and 
analysis in this  area are an important requirement. 

 
Addressing the Threshold Problem 
 
Cyber attacks can range from small attacks that cause minor damage to very large 

attacks that can inflict massive damage. It is hard to point to any specific threshold of potential 
cyber damage below which U.S. strategy should discount  an attack, but  above which  an attack 
should trigger  concern for  deterrence,  coupled with the possibility of  retaliatory response. 
The ladder of  escalation  contains many rungs of ascending provocation and damage, each of 
which could merit a response, of increasing intensity. A U.S. cyber deterrence strategy might be 
shaped to identify decisive, proportional responses at each rung of the ladder,  rather than trying to 
specify a single threshold that separates nonresponses from strong responses. 

 
Dealing with Intrawar Deterrence and Control of Escalation 
 
While deterring the launching of  cyber attacks is a critical imperative, equally 

important is deterring escalation once a cyber conflict has begun. Some adversaries, for 
example, might start with a small attack and then gradually scale  up to the point at which the 
United States comes under intense pressure to buckle to the attackers wishes. Such escalation 
could happen if  U.S. responses at the low rungs of  the escalatory ladder are not strong or 
decisive enough to  convince the adversary to desist. If  control of  cyber escalation is lost, 
major damage could be inflicted on the United States and its allies. To a degree, this risk can 
be reduced by preferential defenses aimed at thoroughly safeguarding critical military and 
governmental networks and by building redundancy into  other important networks whose 
temporary loss could be a calamity. Even so,  taking steps such as offensive countermeasures 
and otherwise holding enemy  targets at risk to discourage adversaries from escalating seems likely 
to be critically important. While no rules exist that guide cyber escalation, a balance will need to 
be continually struck between responding too lightly, in ways that do not persuade  the enemy to 
desist, and responding too harshly, such as with a massive U.S. retaliation that might provoke a 
similar counterstrike. U.S. responses, including military responses, might take place in the cyber 
realm or outside it. The United  States will need to learn how to wage cyber conflicts that are 
strongly affected by escalation dynamics and by the need to preserve deterrence in settings short 
of all-out war. 

 
Achieving Extended Cyber Deterrence 
 
A final thorny issue is determining how to achieve extended cyber deterrence  coverage 

of allies, and how to deal with other third parties that might be menaced by cyber attacks. 
Adversaries might choose to attack U.S. allies in Europe and  Asia either to coerce them into 
altering their foreign policies or to exert indirect pressure on the United States to modify its 
policies. To reduce this risk while preserving alliance cohesion, extended deterrence coverage 
of  these allies, as well as a measure of  protection for other friendly countries, may well 
become an important priority for a U.S. cyber deterrence strategy. Whether this goal can  be 
achieved, and how it can best be pursued, are crucial questions. What types  of  U.S. 

and its allies are vulnerable to major attacks against information networks.  Such  a  strategy 
should  employ  a  general  model  or  framework  from  which tailored actions can be created in 
response to differing threats, situations, and U. S. objectives. As it assesses the need for a cyber 
deterrence strategy, the United States has a range of  options. A limited cyber deterrence 
strategy would rely mainly on security and defensive measures to achieve its goals, seeking 
only a gradual, evolutionary improvement in its offensive capabilities. This would be  the least 
demanding and easiest to execute but offers the lowest promise of success. A more ambitious 
strategy would make robust use of both defenses and offenses and would seek major, rapid 
improvements in its offensive capabilities.  This option is more demanding and harder to 
execute but could offer better results by combining emphasis on defensive and offensive 
capabilities. A highly ambitious strategy would not only strengthen U.S. capabilities quickly, but 
also pursue major improvements in integrated, collaborative planning with allies and partners. 
This option would be the most demanding and hardest to execute,  especially because 
mobilizing broad international collaboration would be  difficult, but it would offer the biggest 
payoffs because it involves greater U.S.  collaboration with allies and partners. 

Deciding which of  these options to choose requires an appraisal of  desirability and 

feasibility: what the emerging strategic situation mandates, which of the options does the best 
job of  producing an effective strategy, and what the traffic will bear in terms of political 
consensus and budgetary affordability. 

The United States cannot afford to risk drift in this arena. The alternative to a thoughtfully 
crafted strategy of deterrence is growing vulnerability of Americas vital information networks. 
By contrast, the potential payoff of a well-conceived  cyber deterrence strategy is considerably 
greater security than exists today. 

 

commitments might become necessary? Apart from calling for closer multilateral 
collaboration,  answering  these  questions  is  not  easy,  but  further  research, analysis, and 
thinking will help produce answers, just as they helped  forge extended nuclear deterrence 
coverage during the Cold War. 
 

Toward a Spectrum of Cyber Deterrence Options 

 
A cyber deterrence strategy is needed because the United States, its military  forces, 

                                                           
1 The White House, The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace (Washington, DC: The White  House, February 
2003). 
2 The White House, The National Strategy for the Physical Protection of  Critical Infrastructures and  Key Assets 
(Washington, DC: The White House, February 2003). 
3 The White House, The National Strategy for Homeland Security (Washington, DC: The White  House, February 
2003). 
4 The White House, The National Security Strategy of  the United States of  America (Washington,  DC: The White 
House, March 2006). 
5 Department  of  Defense,  The  National  Defense  Strategy  of   the  United  States  of   America (Washington, DC: 
The Pentagon, March 2005). 
6 Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, The National Military Strategy of  the United States of  America: A Strategy 
for Today; A Vision for Tomorrow (Washington, DC: The Joint Chiefs of  Staff, 2004). 
7 Department of  Defense, 2006 Quadrennial Defense Review Report (Washington, DC:  Department of Defense, 
February 2006). 
8 Department of  Defense, Deterrence Operations, Joint Operating Concept (Washington, DC:  Department of 
Defense, December 2006). 

                                                                                                                                                                                           
9 The  National  Military  Strategy  to  Secure  Cyberspace  (classified),  issued  by  Department  of Defense in early 
2007. 
10 See, in this volume, chapter 7, Information Security Issues in Cyberspace, and chapter  23, Cyberspace and 
Critical Information Protection: A Critical Assessment of  Federal  Efforts. 
11 See, in this volume, chapters 1013 on military uses of cyberpower. 
12 For analysis of the motivations and actions of terrorist groups, see Jessica Stern, Terror in  the Name of  God: Why 
Religious Militants Kill (New York: Ecco, 2003). 
13 The cyber attack on Estonia in May 2007 was attributed, but not with certainty, to hackers  within Russia: The 
Russian government has denied any involvement in the attacks, which came close  to  shutting  down  the  countrys 
digital  infrastructure,  clogging  the  Web  sites  of the  president, the prime minister, Parliament and other 
government agencies, staggering  Estonias biggest bank and overwhelming the sites of several daily newspapers. 
Mark Landler and John Markoff, Digital Fears Emerge After Data Siege in Estonia, The  New York Times, May 29, 
2007, available at <www.nytimes.com/2007/05/29/technology/  29estonia.html>. 
14 The Soviet Union had more ICBMs and SLBMs than the U.S. force posture, but fewer  strategic  bombers; 
ultimately  it  deployed  about  2,400  launchers  and  10,00012,000 warheads. 
15 For details, see Richard L. Kugler, Commitment to Purpose: How Alliance Partnership Won the  Cold War (Santa 
Monica, CA: RAND, 1993). 
16 Tailored deterrence is a central concept of current U.S. deterrent strategy, and is discussed in detail in the Deterrence 
Operations, Joint Operating Concept. 
17 See chapter 23 in this volume, Cyberspace and Critical Infrastructure Protection: A  Critical Assessment of 
Federal Efforts. 
18 The official NATO Web site provides a valuable source for tracking NATO activities across the full spectrum of 
preparedness measures. 

