CYBER ALERT

A Publication of the Security Incident Management & Response Team

www.ALsTon.Com  

   

JAnuARY 11, 2013

Legal Issues with Emerging Active Defense  
Security Technologies

By:  Kim Peretti and Todd McClelland 
Contributors:  Jarrett Ellis and Maki DePalo

Introduction
Ten years ago, a typical cybercrime case involved a solo hacker gaining unauthorized access into one or a small number of 
systems for idle curiosity.  The crime was detected quickly (usually by intruder bragging) and fixed with relative ease.  Todays 
brand of cybercrime, however, has evolved, producing threat groups and actors that are a world apart from the prototypical 
attack of a decade ago.  While some groups and actors are believed to be backed by foreign governments, others are backed 
by organized crime, are acting for a quasi-political purpose (e.g., hacktivists) or are entirely independent.  No common set of 
facts or descriptions can be garnered about these groups and individuals since their motives and means vary widely.

These advanced groups have the capability to conduct targeted, well-orchestrated, sophisticated, prolonged and repeat-
ed attacks on businesses and government entities.  These incidents are often not detected until monthssometimes even 
yearsafter the initiation of the attack, and the response can take days, weeks or months to contain and remediate.  On top 
of this, once the attack is thought to be contained or eradicated, there is no promise that the intruders wont return.   

Current Technologies and Strategies
Todays most deployed defensive strategies and technologies, including passive (host-based) countermeasures, have a va-
riety of limitations that substantially limit a companys ability to identify or take meaningful actions against their assailants, 
creating what is known in the information security industry as the problem of attribution. Attribution allows individuals or 
groups to be held responsible for their criminal acts.  It also potentially provides the victim with valuable information about 
the motives and acts of the intruders in their system, and how to get them out and keep them out.  Without attribution, a 
victim is left with few practical means to prevent, with a high degree of confidence, the reoccurrence of a successful attack 
by a determined group or individual.  

Without question, corporate victims are growing increasingly frustrated with the few defensive options at their disposal.  
They are also not satisfied with the new defensive mantra, advocated by the Pentagon and other industry leaders, that com-
panies should act as if and with the assumption that the new normal is a state of constant and ongoing infiltration.1  Instead, 
the general approach is to bolster perimeter defenses, harden application security, increase network traffic monitoring, scan 
for malware, respond when something is detected . . . and hope for the best. 

1  See Joseph Menn, Hacked Companies Fight Back with Controversial Steps,  Reuters, June 17, 2012, http://www.reuters.com/ar-

ticle/2012/06/17/us-media-tech-summit-cyber-strikeback-idUSBRE85G07S20120617 (noting that many large security providers no 
longer advocate that keeping intruders out is paramount.  Instead, they adopt the more recent line taken by the Pentagon, which is 
to assume that hackers have gotten inside and will again.).

Cyber Alert | January 11, 2013 | Page 1 

Next Generation Defense Technologies
Recognizing the limitations of todays defensive technologies, new technologies and methods are emerging that are more 
active, cunning and aggressive in defending against attacks and identifying the intruder.  These technologies, however, are 
pushing the bounds of what is commonly understood as legal.  Indeed, some emerging technologies have rekindled a 
heated debate around what actions a nongovernmental entity can take on its own to identify the perpetrator, stop an ongo-
ing attack and ultimately protect the entitys systems.

These new technologies deploy concepts that have been used by governments since the beginning of the spy-counterspy 
businesscounterintelligence,  and  to  an  extent,  counterespionage.2    Preferably3  referred  to  as active  defense,  but  also 
called strike-back or hack back, these new technologies represent a range of activities such as:

  honey pots  decoy systems designed to lure intruders to a controlled environment from which to observe their be-

havior;

  disinformation campaigns and data obfuscation  distributing false information in ways in which the perpetrator is 

likely to obtain it;

  altering malicious code used in an attack to assist the victim; and

  offensive cyber hacks into the intruders computer to identify stolen digital assets and the intruder.

A Legal Gray Area?
As noted above, there is considerable ongoing debate as to whether an individual or company can legally deploy many of 
these active defense technologies.4  These legal issues are not new, but are resurfacing because of the recent surge in active 
defense security offerings and their expanding use.

The primary federal statute applicable to computer-related offenses is the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (CFAA).5  The CFAA 
lists seven categories of computer-related offenses, two of which, Sections (a)(2)(C) and (a)(5), are most pertinent to active 
defense technologies.6 

2  Collectively, these technologies employ mechanisms that both identify, penetrate or neutralize intruder operations and use cyber 
means as the primary tradecraft methodology. See Jason Andress and Steve Winterfeld, Cyber Warfare: Techniques, Tactics and Tools 
for Security Pracitioners, 3945 (2001). 

3  At least by those who are trying to sell or use these technologies.  The optics for the term hack back has obviously negative con-

notations.  

4  This article does not attempt to address the ethical or legal issues with regard to a government entities ability to deploy these same 

technologies.  The U.S. governments actions to date assume that such means are properly within its powers.

5  18 U.S.C.  1030.  The statute was originally enacted in 1984 as part of the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984.  Two years later, 
the statute was amended and enacted as the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1986 and has since been amended eight times, with 
the most recent set of amendments in 2008.  

6  18 U.S.C.  1030(a)(2)(C), (5).
 

(a)(2)(C) whoever . . . intentionally accesses a computer without authorization or exceeds authorized access, and thereby obtains . .  
information from any protected computer;
(a)(5) whoever
(A) knowingly causes the transmission of a program, information, code, or command, and as a result of such conduct, intentionally 
causes damage without authorization, to a protected computer; 
(B) intentionally accesses a protected computer without authorization, and as a result of such conduct, recklessly causes damage; or 
(C) intentionally accesses a protected computer without authorization, and as a result of such conduct, causes damage and loss.

 
 

 
 

Cyber Alert | January 11, 2013 | Page 2 

In general terms, the CFAA is an anti-trespass law.  A person or company7 who intentionally accesses a computer or who 
knowingly or intentionally causes damage8 to protected computers,9 without authorization, violates the statute and can be 
subject to both criminal and civil recourse.  

Much of the analysis and debate as to whether active defense technologies are prohibited by the CFAA centers on the mean-
ing of the term authorization.  Unlike the activities of law enforcement personnel, there is no carve-out in the statute that 
expressly allows private parties to access a third partys computer for some other legally recognized purpose.  There is abso-
lutely no authorization expressly recognized in the statute for a private party to access a third-party computer for self-defense 
purposes or to identify, pursue or retrieve stolen property.  In addition, while several cases have interpreted the statute in the 
context of prosecuting criminal hackers10 and employees and others who exceed their authorized access to systems,11 none 
have interpreted this statute in the context of a person who is a victim of a hack and deployed active defense technology.  Un-
der a strict reading of this statute, an individual who traces his/her stolen property to a server and accesses the server without 
authorization to view this information would appear to violate the statute.  

Of course, the analysis does not end there.  While the heavy tendency is to view the CFAA in real property terms, applying 
trespass and similar concepts, this statute applies to cyber assets, an entirely different paradigm that requires flexible and 
evolving consideration.  Taking away the real property concepts and considering the policy implications of this law, a num-
ber of interpretation opportunities arise that might allow some of the more questionable active defense technologies.   For 
example, even though there is no Castle Doctrine-type exception in the statute, does a hacker nonetheless implicitly grant 
authorization to a hack back when that person infiltrates a victims systems and exfiltrates digital assets?  Is authorization a 
binary concept, for which permission is or is not granted?  If a person truly has control over the code in his/her systems, can 
a tripwire be written and deployed that sends a beacon back to the attacker who steals that code?  Recognizing the many 
potential policy benefits of allowing for limited and targeted active defenses,12 does authorization somehow otherwise arise?   

Todays typical cyber incident often touches systems located in multiple jurisdictions.  For example, an attacker may be lo-
cated in one country, may use one or more command and control computers in other countries (often being innocent and 
unaware third parties), and may access the victims systems in yet another country.  Accordingly, any analysis of active defense 
technologies must take on a global compliance perspective that considers foreign laws and treaties, not to mention the 
possibility of an international incident, regardless of the legality of a given activity.  For example, close to 50 countries have 
signed and/or ratified the Council of Europes Cybercrime Convention, which calls for similar criminal offenses to the CFAA.13  

As  described  above,  the  current  challenges  posed  by  sophisticated  threat  actors  have  renewed  the  ongoing  debate  on 
whether and to what extent certain activities by the victim may be legally permissible.  The debate largely centers on the 
definition of authorization (which is not defined in the CFAA) and its application/interpretation to both data and computers, 

7 

8 

Importantly, the statute excludes from coverage lawfully authorized activities of law enforcement and intelligence agencies.  18 
U.S.C.  1030(f).
Damage is broadly defined to include any impairment to the integrity or availability of data, a program, a system, or information. 
18 U.S.C.  1030(e)(8).

9  A protected computer includes any computer used in or affecting interstate or foreign commerce, which is easily satisfied if a com-
puter is connected to the Internet.  See U.S. Department of Justice, Prosecuting Computer Crimes, 4, http://www.justice.gov/criminal/ 
cybercrime /docs/ccmanual.pdf.

10  See United States v. Morris, 928 F.2d 504 (2d Cir. 2001); Sony Computer Entmt Am LLC v.  Hotz, No. CV11-0167, 2011 WL 347147 (N.D.Cal. 

Jan. 27, 2011); and T-Mobile USA, Inc. v. Terry, 862 F.Supp.2d 1121 (W.D. Wash. 2012).

11  See Intl Airport Ctrs, L.L.C. v. Citrin, 440 F.3d 418 (7th Cir. 2006); LVRC Holdings LLC v. Brekka, 581 F.3d 1127 (9th Cir. 2009); and United 

States v. Alfred-Adekeye, [2011] No, 25416 (Can. B.C).

12  While these questions assume a certain bit of discretion and surgical precision in the hack back activities of the victim, scorched 
earth and system-wide disabling strike-backs would seem to exceed the authority in any reasonable interpretation that might im-
plicitly arise.

13  Council of Europe Convention on Cybercrime, Nov. 23, 2011, http://Conventions.coe.int/Treaty/en/Treaties/Html/185.htm.

Cyber Alert | January 11, 2013 | Page 3 

and whether there may be a common law defense of property right, like the Castle Doctrine, available in some forms of hack 
back activities.  Private entities considering active defense technologies or activities, however, should be well aware that 
there are no cases to date that have interpreted the CFAA in a manner desirable to those who would engage in such activi-
ties.  While these novel legal theories on how authorization could be stretched are compelling (at least from a public policy 
perspective) and remain mostly academic at this point, no company and no individual wants to have their liberty and criminal 
and civil liability hinge on these unproven theories.  Clearly, this is not an area to tread lightly upon.

Conclusion
Companies caught, or that reasonably could be caught, in the unfortunate position of being targeted by sophisticated cyber 
threat actors should embrace the creativity that some of these technologies can afford in protecting their systems and re-
moving the threat.  However, due to the relative uncertainty of some of these technologies, both in and outside the United 
States, we suggest the following in your approach to these new technologies:

  Dont assume these technologies are legal.  Just because a company, perhaps even a reputable and established com-
pany, offers the technology, dont assume it complies with all applicable laws.  You dont want to be the company or 
the individual a prosecutor chooses to make an example out of for the rest.

  Remember that what may be legal in the United States is not necessarily legal outside the United States.  Multiple 

legal regimes may apply to your analysis.

  Involve counsel early, preferably before signing up to the technology, but absolutely before deploying the technol-

ogy.  

  Make sure to fully understand how a technology works before it is deployed. 

  Recall that the legal analysis for what the government and its agents can do is a vastly different analysis than what 

private sector companies can do.

While active defense technologies may be compelling complements to todays passive countermeasures, companies and 
individuals are well advised to pause and seek counsel before plunging into a legally questionable approach.  Our attorneys 
have been counseling both providers and users of these technologies for a number of years.  Our Security Incident Manage-
ment and Response (SIMR) team has many attorneys who are thought leaders in the deployment of active defense technolo-
gies, and other practical and inventive information security practices.  Please contact any of the attorneys below to learn 
more.

Security Incident Management & Response Team Co-Chairs

Kim Peretti | 202.239.3720 | kimberly.peretti@alston.com

Jim Harvey | 404.881.7328 | jim.harvey@alston.com

Cyber Alert | January 11, 2013 | Page 4 

