Cyber Attacks: 
Prevention and Proactive 
Responses
Vince Farhat, Bridget McCarthy and 
Richard Raysman, Holland &  
Knight LLP

This Practice Note is published by Practical Law Company 
on its PLC Intellectual Property & Technology  web services 
at http://us.practicallaw.com/3-511-5848.

This Note discusses common cyber 
attack scenarios and sets out actions 
that companies can take to prevent 
or respond to attacks, including 
developing a cyber attack response 
plan. It also addresses the chief 
compliance officers role in preventing 
and containing attacks and law 
enforcement referrals, and civil and 
criminal actions companies can 
pursue against attackers.

Cyber attacks, including hacking, of business websites and 
computer systems are increasingly common. These attacks 
can be extremely damaging to businesses, particularly if 
security is breached and confidential business and personal 
data compromised. Cyber attacks and the resulting security 
breaches are part of a rapidly expanding international cyber 
threat that costs companies and taxpayers billions of dollars 
each year in lost information and response costs. Company 
executives are under increasing pressure to prevent these 
attacks and must act immediately to contain any damage once 
an attack occurs. 

This Note examines:
  The chief compliance officers (CCO) key role in preventing and 

containing cyber attacks. 

  Developing a cyber incident response plan to report, investigate 

and respond to a cyber attack. 

  Common cyber attack scenarios.
  Civil and criminal legal claims that may be brought against the 

perpetrators of cyber attacks. 

  Recent case law relevant to some of the key issues discussed 

in this Note.

Cyber attacks involving personal information implicate various 
data privacy and security laws. For general information on US data 
security laws, see Practice Note, US Privacy and Data Security 
Law: Overview (http://us.practicallaw.com/6-501-4555). For 
information on state data breach notification laws, see Practice 
Note, Privacy and Data Security: Breach Notification (http://
us.practicallaw.com/3-501-1474). 

WHAT IS A CYBER ATTACK?
A cyber attack is an attack initiated from a computer against a 
website, computer system or individual computer (collectively, 
a computer) that compromises the confidentiality, integrity or 
availability of the computer or information stored on it. Cyber 
attacks take many forms, including: 

  Gaining, or attempting to gain, unauthorized access to a 

computer system or its data.

  Unwanted disruption or denial of service attacks, including the 

take down of entire web sites.

Copyright  2011 Practical Law Publishing Limited and Practical Law Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Cyber Attacks: Prevention and Proactive Responses

  Installation of viruses or malicious code (malware) on a 

computer system.

  Unauthorized use of a computer system for processing or 

storing data.

  Changes to the characteristics of a computer systems 

hardware, firmware or software without the owners knowledge, 
instruction or consent.

  Inappropriate use of computer systems by employees or former 

employees.

The procedures for investigating and responding to a cyber attack 
depend largely on the nature of the attack itself (see Common 
Cyber Attack Scenarios). 

Regardless of the nature of a cyber attack, the CCO of a company, 
or his equivalent, has the primary responsibility for preventing and 
responding to cyber attacks.

CHIEF COMPLIANCE OFFICERS ROLE IN 
CYBER ATTACKS 
In recent years, new and increased use of technologies such as 
mobile devices, social media and cloud computing has increased 
the risk posed by cyber criminals. As a result, in addition to other 
compliance matters, for example, SEC, SOX and Dodd-Frank 
compliance, the CCO is now also typically responsible for: 
  Deterring cyber attacks. 
  Quickly containing any attacks and minimizing any financial 

and reputational harm.

Some companies delegate responsibility for computer systems security 
to their chief information officer (CIO). The CIO is usually responsible 
for protecting access to a companys information technology (IT) 
system and the privacy and security of information on that system. In 
some cases, the company may also have a chief privacy officer (CPO).

Whatever the companys organizational structure, the CCO must 
coordinate with the CIO and other company departments to 
prevent cyber attacks. The CCO must also work closely with the 
CIO to understand the steps being taken to deter these attacks. 
To some extent, the CCO is now also operating as a chief security 
officer and must therefore: 
  Set up policies and procedures for employees to follow. 
  Monitor the occurrence of possible cyber attacks. 

ACTIONS TO PREVENT OR REDUCE THE RISK OF CYBER 
ATTACKS 
There are a number of actions that the CCO should take to 
prevent or reduce cyber attack risk.

Determine the Companys Security Chain
The CCO needs to determine and evaluate the companys entire 
security chain. If even a single link is weak, the company could be 
vulnerable to attack.

Copyright  2011 Practical Law Publishing Limited and Practical Law Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

2

Develop a Compliance Work Plan
The CCO should create a written compliance plan to monitor 
the highest risks for a potential cyber attack. The compliance 
plan must address cyber attack procedures in addition to other 
compliance matters. this should include:
  Policies.
  Codes of conduct.
  Training.
  Specific incident response procedures.

The compliance plan is a living document and should be reviewed 
and updated on an ongoing basis.

Prepare Legally Required Disclosures
The SEC has advised public companies that they are responsible 
for evaluating cybersecurity risks and disclosing these risks to 
investors as appropriate. CCOs of public companies therefore 
must assess whether their compliance plans and disclosure 
procedures comply with the SECs guidance. For more 
information, see Legal Update, SEC Division of Corporation 
Finance Issues Guidance on Cyber Security Disclosures (http://
us.practicallaw.com/3-509-2465).

Coordinate with the CIO, CPO and Other Departments
The CCO must coordinate with the CIO and CPO on cyber 
attack issues. While there is overlap of responsibilities among 
the CCO, CIO and CPO, it is the CCOs responsibility to ensure a 
coordinated effort among all relevant corporate departments to 
ensure effective communication and cooperation to prevent and 
respond to cyber attacks and data breaches. Key departments 
include: 
  IT.
  Human resources.
  Legal.
  Each company business unit. 

The CCO should require periodic meetings of all these departments 
to review policies, procedures and coordination efforts. 

Implement an Enterprise-wide Data Management 
Program 
The CCO should, in coordination with the CIO and CPO, 
implement and maintain an enterprise-wide risk data 
management program to mitigate risk and assure security of 
company and customer data.

As part of this program, the CCO should work with the IT, human 
resources and other appropriate departments to restrict employee 
access to information. Employees should only have access to 
information related to their job functions.

Review Employee Policies 
Employee policies (for example, an electronic systems use 
policy) should restrict employees from unauthorized access 
or exceeding authorized access of the companys computer 
systems. A policy that distinguishes between authorized employee 
access and unauthorized access may help companies pursue 
claims under the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act involving 
unauthorized acts by employees (see also Computer Fraud and 
Abuse Act). 

Invest in Computer Security and Protection Measures 
The company should invest in security equipment and procedures 
to deter or prevent cyber attacks. These include the most up-to-
date IT protection measures, for example:
  Having the companys database on a different web server than 

the application server. 

  Applying the latest security patches.
  Protecting all passwords. 
  Using read-only views of documents and materials when 

possible.

  Maintaining strict input validation. 
  Developing network security architecture. 
  Monitoring activities and procedures of third-party contractors 
with access to the computer system (whether direct or remote).

  Performing network scans to assess activity on the network.
  Comparing outbound network traffic to baseline operations.
  Choosing names for tables and fields that are difficult to guess. 

Adopt a Cyber Incident Response Plan and Employee 
Reporting Mechanisms
The company must adopt reporting mechanisms so that the CCO 
is promptly advised of all cyber attack attempts and can rapidly 
respond. All employees should be aware of the possibility of cyber 
attacks and where such attacks are most likely to be directed 
within the company (see also Cyber Incident Response Plans).

Adopt Procedures to Preserve Evidence 
The CCO should ensure that the company has procedures in 
place to secure and preserve computer-related evidence if a cyber 
attack occurs, to:
  Better understand and repair any damage caused by an attack. 
  Help any criminal or civil action against the violators. 

Failure to properly preserve electronic evidence can adversely 
affect a later criminal or civil action against the violator (see also 
Box, Recent Case Law: Failure to Properly Secure Electronic 
Evidence).

approach aims to get the entire organization to accept compliance 
activities. The CCO should also have the authority to perform 
independent investigations when necessary.

Maintain Relationships with Law Enforcement Agencies 
The CCO should create and maintain relationships with federal, 
state and local law enforcement and other related regulatory 
agencies that deal with cyber attacks (see also Box, Reporting 
Cyber Crime to the Appropriate Law Enforcement Agency).

CYBER INCIDENT RESPONSE PLANS
Every company should develop a written plan (cyber incident 
response plan) that identifies cyber attack scenarios and sets 
out appropriate responses. While the plan must be customized 
for each companys particular circumstances, the plan should 
generally address the following basic components:
  Response team.
  Reporting.
  Initial response.
  Investigation.
  Recovery and follow-up.
  Public relations.
  Law enforcement.

CYBER INCIDENT RESPONSE TEAM 
The response team is responsible for developing the written cyber 
incident response plan and for investigating and responding 
to cyber attacks in accordance with that plan. Specifically, the 
response team, working with the CCO as appropriate, should:
  Develop the cyber incident response plan.
  Identify and classify cyber attack scenarios. 
  Determine the tools and technology used to detect and prevent 

attacks. 

  Secure the companys computer network.
  Develop a checklist for handling initial investigations of cyber 

attacks.

  Determine the scope of an internal investigation once an attack 

has occurred.

  Conduct any investigations within the determined scope.
  Promote cyber security awareness within the company.
  Address data breach issues, including notification 

requirements.

  Conduct follow up reviews on the effectiveness of the 

companys response to an actual attack. 

Obtain Support of Senior Management 
The board of directors, CEO, CFO and other senior management 
must support the CCO in preventing cyber attacks. This top-down 

A large e-commerce company that relies on its website for sales 
or other critical business operations may require a large formal 
response team. Smaller companies that rely less on their IT may 
have smaller and more informal teams. 

3

Copyright  2011 Practical Law Publishing Limited and Practical Law Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Cyber Attacks: Prevention and Proactive Responses
Cyber Attacks: Prevention and Proactive Responses

DISCOVERY AND REPORTING OF CYBER INCIDENTS
The cyber incident response plan should address procedures to 
take on discovery and reporting of cyber attack incidents, including:
  Designating response team members to monitor industry 

practices to ensure that the:
  companys information systems are appropriately updated; 

and

  company installs the latest software security patches to 

allow for early discovery of attacks.

  Continuously monitoring the companys computer logs to 

discover any incidents.

  Creating a database to track all reported incidents.
  Creating a risk rating to classify all reported incidents as low, 

medium or high risk to facilitate an appropriate response.

INITIAL RESPONSE TO A CYBER ATTACK 
If a potential attack is reported, the designated response team 
member should conduct a preliminary investigation to determine 
whether a cyber attack has occurred. If a cyber attack has 
occurred, the response team should follow the investigation 
checklist set out in the cyber incident response plan to conduct 
the initial investigation. 

The initial response varies depending on the type of attack and 
level of seriousness. However, the response team should aim to:
  Stop the cyber intrusions from spreading further into the 

companys computer systems. 

  Appropriately document the investigation. 

INVESTIGATING A CYBER ATTACK 
Following the initial response assessment, the company may 
decide to undertake a formal internal investigation depending on 
the level of intrusion and its impact on critical business functions. 
An internal investigation allows the company to:
  Gain a fuller understanding of the computer intrusion. 
  Increase its chances of identifying the attacker.
  Detect previously-unknown security vulnerabilities.
  Identify required improvements to computer systems.

If the companys response team or IT department lacks the 
capacity or expertise to conduct an internal investigation the 
company may wish to retain:
  Legal counsel. 
  A cyber security consultant. 

Copyright  2011 Practical Law Publishing Limited and Practical Law Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

4
4

COMMON CYBER ATTACK SCENARIOS
Cyber attacks often fall into one or more common scenarios. Effective 
cyber incident response plans anticipate and prepare for these 
common scenarios in advance and provide preliminary investigatory 
questions for each scenario. Obtaining fast and accurate answers to 
these questions helps shape and expedite the investigation. 

Some of these common cyber attack scenarios along with initial 
areas of investigation are explained below.

Inside Jobs 
An employee or contractor working at a company may exploit 
his position to hack the companys computers or otherwise 
compromise its IT systems. In this case, companies should 
immediately ask:
  Who is the subject of the investigation? 
  What is his position and tenure with the company?
  How tech-savvy is the subject? 
  What is his ability to harm the company?
  What kinds of digital devices does the subject typically use (for 

example, PC, laptop or mobile phone)?

  What kinds of data and data systems does the subject have 

access to?

  Are audit trails available that show what systems the subject 

commonly accesses? 

  What are the companys policies regarding digital devices and 

remote access to its systems?

  What are the policies regarding permissible behavior on the 

companys network? 

Social Engineering 
Social engineering is a hacking technique that uses low-tech or 
non-technical approaches to persuade people to compromise 
security procedures and disclose sensitive information. An 
example of this is impersonating company IT personnel and 
calling unsuspecting employees to get them to reveal confidential 
information such as computer access codes or anti-virus software 
used by the company. 

When social engineering is suspected, companies should 
immediately ask:
  What information was potentially disclosed or breached?
  What system at the company was targeted?
  How was the attack discovered?
  Was the company notified by the victim or another affected 

party?

  Is there a reporting process in place for social engineering 

attacks?

  Are complete phone logs available?
  What company or system weakness allowed the attack to 

succeed? 

Exploitation Malware 
Viruses and malware that exploit vulnerabilities in a companys 
computer systems are prevalent. For example, hackers may 
introduce them to computer systems by tricking employees into 
opening infected e-mails. Some malware is designed to steal 
confidential information such as social security numbers, credit 
card numbers and bank account log in numbers. 

The cyber incident response plan must contain procedures to 
defend against malware and following a cyber attack, ensure 
that an investigation is done to ascertain whether any information 
has been stolen. However, IT departments commonly clean the 
computer system after a cyber attack without checking whether 
confidential information has been stolen. 

Extortion and Blackmail 
A company may receive threats from individuals claiming to have 
hacked its website or computer systems offering to return stolen 
confidential information in exchange for money or property. These 
extortionists frequently target small businesses because of their 
perceived inability to fight back. 

In this case, the company must conduct an immediate threat 
assessment to determine whether its computer systems have 
been attacked and, if so, how it was accomplished. Companies 
can do the following:
  Determine whether the extortionist has done what he claims by 

isolating areas that may be affected to determine if they have 
been compromised. 

  Determine the feasibility of restoring critical systems where 
a denial of service attack affects critical infrastructure. This 
includes assessing whether restoring service will negatively 
affect collecting evidence in the investigation.

  Document all aspects of the investigation and secure and 

preserve all evidence, including logs of critical system events. 

RECOVERY AND FOLLOW-UP AFTER A CYBER ATTACK 
The cyber incident response plan should address the recovery of 
the companys computer systems by both:
  Eliminating the vulnerabilities exploited by the attacker and any 

other identified vulnerabilities. 

  Bringing the repaired systems back online. 

Once systems are restored, the response team should: 
  Determine what cyber security management improvements are 

needed to prevent similar incidents from reoccurring. 

  Evaluate how the response team executed the response plan.
  Consider whether the cyber incident response plan can be 

improved.

PUBLIC ANNOUNCEMENTS AND PUBLIC RELATIONS AFTER A 
CYBER ATTACK 
The cyber incident response plan may designate one or more 
executives responsible for handling press releases and other 
public announcements about the cyber attack including:
  The desirability of any announcements. 
  The timing and content of any announcements.

The company may also have to address customer or user 
concerns and take measures to restore confidence and loyalty, 
for example, where there has been theft of credit card and other 
personal information or denial of service. 

LAW ENFORCEMENT INVESTIGATIONS OF CYBER ATTACKS 
Many security-related incidents do not result in criminal 
investigations because companies do not contact law 
enforcement. Several law enforcement agencies investigate 
and prosecute cyber attacks and other computer incidents (see 
Reporting Cyber Crimes to Law Enforcement). 

The response team should meet with its various law enforcement 
representatives before an incident occurs to discuss:
  When incidents should be reported to them.
  How the reporting should be performed.
  What evidence should be collected.
  How evidence should be collected.

The cyber incident response plan should designate one incident 
response team member, for example, the CCO, as the primary 
point of contact with law enforcement. 

CUSTOMIZE THE CYBER INCIDENT RESPONSE PLAN 
CCOs and CIOs should work closely with their IT departments, 
response team, legal counsel and, where appropriate, cyber 
security consultants, to develop a cyber incident response plan 
that addresses the specific needs of their organization.

The following resources can assist companies developing cyber 
incident response plans:
  The Computer Security Incident Handling Guide, published 

by the US Department of Commerce National Institute of 
Standards and Technology, assists organizations in:
  establishing computer security incident response 

capabilities; and

  handling incidents efficiently and effectively.

  The SANS Institute provides:

  information security training and security certification; and
  research documents about various aspects of information 

security.

5

Copyright  2011 Practical Law Publishing Limited and Practical Law Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Cyber Attacks: Prevention and Proactive Responses
Cyber Attacks: Prevention and Proactive Responses

REPORTING CYBER CRIME TO LAW ENFORCEMENT

Designating a Law Enforcement Liaison 
Large-scale cyber attacks should always be reported to law 
enforcement. Companies should designate a response team 
member as the primary point of contact with law enforcement, 
including: 
  Federal investigatory agencies. 
  District attorneys. 
  State and local law enforcement. 

This person should understand the jurisdictional issues arising 
from the location of the company, its assets and the attacker. 
For example, a company based in one state may have a server 
located in a second state that is attacked from a system in a third 
state, which is being used remotely by an attacker in a fourth 
state. Dealing with this scenario may require the assistance of law 
enforcement in multiple jurisdictions. 

Law Enforcement Agencies that Investigate Internet 
Crime
The primary federal law enforcement agencies that investigate 
domestic crime on the internet include: 
  The Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).
  The US Secret Service (Secret Service).
  The US Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE).
  The US Postal Inspection Service.
  The Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF). 

Each agency has offices located in every state to which crimes 
may be reported. In general, suspected crimes may be reported 
to the local office of an appropriate law enforcement agency by a 
telephone call and by requesting the Duty Complaint Agent. Each 
federal law enforcement agency also has an office in Washington, 
DC, with agents who specialize in particular areas. For example, 
the FBI and the Secret Service both have headquarters-based 
specialists in computer intrusion cases. 

The Department of Justice provides information on the agencies 
that may be appropriate for reporting different kinds of cyber 
crime (see Box, Reporting Cyber Crime to the Appropriate Law 
Enforcement Agency).

Additional Cyber Crime Resources
Another resource for reporting cyber crime is the Internet Crime 
Complaint Center (IC3). The IC3 is a partnership between the 
FBI and the National White Collar Crime Center which receives, 
develops and refers criminal complaints regarding cyber crime. It 
gives the victims of cyber crime a reporting mechanism that alerts 
authorities to suspected criminal violations.

For law enforcement and regulatory agencies at the federal, state 
and local level, IC3 provides a central referral mechanism for 
complaints involving internet related crimes. 

Copyright  2011 Practical Law Publishing Limited and Practical Law Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

6
6

For state-related cyber questions, the National Association 
of Attorney Generals maintains a Computer Crime Point of 
Contact List. 

CRIMINAL PROSECUTION
Where an internal investigation leads to evidence of the attackers 
possible identity, companies should consider preparing formal 
referrals to law enforcement for possible criminal prosecution. 
Companies considering this course of action can retain white 
collar crime or intellectual property counsel to guide them through 
the investigation, referral and criminal proceedings. 

The outcome of a criminal prosecution may depend on the 
companys ability to provide evidence and testimony. Counsel 
therefore should be prepared to help the prosecutor present 
complex computer crime evidence to a judge and jury. Counsel 
should also evaluate civil remedies and damage claims against 
the attackers (see Civil and Criminal Remedies for Cyber Attacks).

CIVIL AND CRIMINAL REMEDIES FOR CYBER 
ATTACKS 

IDENTIFYING THE HACKERS
The viability of any criminal or civil cyber attack prosecution 
initially depends on the companys or law enforcement agencys 
ability to identify and locate the hacker. In some cases, an entire 
network or organization of hackers may be involved. Many 
hackers are located outside of the US, presenting jurisdictional 
issues. Some cyber attacks are suspected to be initiated by 
foreign governments or government-sanctioned groups.

If the company has the IP addresses of the hacker, it may be able 
to identify the internet service provider (ISP) through which the 
hacker launched the attack. The company may then demand 
that the ISP identify the hacker. If the ISP denies this request, the 
company can file either:
  A John Doe or Jane Doe action against the anonymous 

hacker to get discovery and issue a subpoena to the relevant 
ISP to reveal the hackers identity.

  If copyright infringement is involved, a subpoena action under 
the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) (Pub. L. No. 105-
304, 112 Stat. 2860). The DMCA authorizes copyright owners 
to subpoena an ISP engaged in storing on its servers material 
that is infringing or the subject of infringing activity. The 
copyright owner can use this subpoena to request the names 
of alleged hackers.

However, a sophisticated attacker can hide his identity by 
various methods, including using someone elses computer 
to launch an attack. This makes it difficult to identify the 
hacker, because multiple ISPs may be involved, each with only 
incomplete information. Forensic consulting firms can assist with 
this process of identification, but it is time consuming, expensive 
and not always successful. The company therefore may elect to 

pursue hackers on a selective basis, and publicize successful 
results to send a deterrent message. The company may also 
contact law enforcement for assistance (see Reporting Cyber 
Crime to Law Enforcement).

COMPUTER FRAUD AND ABUSE ACT
The Computer Fraud and Abuse Act (CFAA) (18 U.S.C.  1030) 
is the main federal criminal statute regulating hacking and other 
computer crimes. The CFAA generally criminalizes:
  Accessing computers without authorization, or in excess of 

authorization.

  Using such unlawfully accessed computers to obtain 

information that causes loss, damage or defrauds another or 
the US government. 

Protected Computers under the Computer Fraud and 
Abuse Act
The CFAA governs cases involving protected computers, 
which are defined as computers that meet one or more of the 
following criteria: 
  Exclusively used by a financial institution or the US 

government.

  Not covered by the above bullet point, but:

  which are used by or for a financial institution or the US 

government; and

  where the offense affects the computers use by or for a 

financial institution or the US government. 

  Used in or affecting interstate or foreign commerce or 

communication. This includes use of computers located 
outside the US that affects: 
  interstate or foreign commerce; or 
  communication within the US.

Prohibited Acts under the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act
The CFAA prohibits the following acts: 
  Computer trespassing (for example, hacking) in a government 

computer.

  Computer trespassing that exposes certain governmental, 

credit, financial or computer-housed information.

  Damaging a government computer, a bank computer or a 

computer used in, or affecting, interstate or foreign commerce. 
Examples of this type of damage include:
  a worm; 
  a computer virus;
  a trojan horse; 
  a time bomb;
  denial of service attack and other forms of cyber attack; and 
  cyber crime or cyber terrorism.

  Committing fraud which involves unauthorized access to a 

protected computer. 

  Threatening to damage a protected computer.
  Trafficking in passwords for a government computer or 

trafficking that affects interstate or foreign commerce.

  Accessing a computer to commit espionage.

It is also a crime to attempt or conspire to commit any of these acts. 

Penalties under the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act
The penalties for committing CFAA offenses range between:
  Imprisonment for up to one year for simple cyberspace 

trespassing. 

  A maximum of life imprisonment when death results from 

intentional computer damage.

The Computer Abuse Amendments Act of 1994 added civil 
remedies to the CFAA allowing any person who suffers damage or 
loss through a CFAA violation to maintain a civil action against the 
violator for: 
  Compensatory damages.
  Injunctive or other equitable relief.

(18 U.S.C.  1030(g).)

In particular, the CFAA authorizes a civil action against a person 
who knowingly and with intent to defraud traffics in any password 
or similar information through which a computer may be accessed 
without authorization. The plaintiff generally must allege losses of 
$5,000 or more.

OTHER CIVIL AND CRIMINAL REMEDIES 
Depending on the circumstances, other civil remedies may be 
available. Companies can also refer criminal cyber attacks to the 
appropriate law enforcement authorities for criminal prosecution 
(see Reporting Cyber Crime to Law Enforcement). Various 
additional civil and criminal remedies are set out below.

Wiretap Act and Electronic Communications Privacy Act 
The Wiretap Act, as amended by the Electronic Communications 
Privacy Act:
  Prohibits the interception, use or disclosure of wire and 
electronic communications unless a statutory exception 
applies. 

  Authorizes civil actions by private persons. 

Violators are subject to a range of sanctions, including: 
  Actual damages. 
  Punitive damages. 
  Statutory damages (the greater of $10,000 or $100 a day per 

violation). 

  Attorneys fees.

(18 U.S.C.  2510-2522.)

7

Copyright  2011 Practical Law Publishing Limited and Practical Law Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Cyber Attacks: Prevention and Proactive Responses

Stored Communications Act 
The Stored Communications Act makes it illegal to intentionally 
access, without or in excess of authorization, a facility through 
which an electronic communication service is provided, to 
obtain or prevent authorized access to a wire or electronic 
communication while it is in storage in the facility. 

Offenses are punishable by fine, imprisonment or both. 

A civil action may be commenced by any:
  Electronic communications services provider.
  Subscriber. 
  Other person aggrieved by a violation of the law. 

Civil damages may include:
  Actual damages. 
  The violators profits.
  Punitive damages. 
  Costs. 
  Attorneys fees.

(18 U.S.C.  2701.)

Trade Secret Theft
Where trade secret theft is involved, a civil action may be commenced 
under the relevant state trade secret act or common law. 

For more information on trade secrets generally, see Practice 
Note, Protection of Employers Trade Secrets and Confidential 
Information (http://us.practicallaw.com/5-501-1473) and for 
state-specific information, see Trade Secret Laws: State Q&A 
Tool (http://us.practicallaw.com/5-505-9592).

Copyright and Trademark Infringement 
Civil actions may be available for copyright infringement under 
the federal Copyright Act and trademark infringement under the 
federal Lanham Act or state trademark law. 

The Copyright Act also provides criminal penalties for copyright 
infringement (17 U.S.C.  506). The law penalizes willful 
infringement of a copyright for commercial advantage or private 
financial gain, among other activities. Violations are punishable by 
imprisonment, fine or both (18 U.S.C.  2319). 

For more information on copyright and trademark law, see 
Practice Notes, Copyright: Overview (http://us.practicallaw.com/2-
505-5835) and Trademark Infringement and Dilution Claims, 
Remedies and Defenses (http://us.practicallaw.com/1-508-1019).

Copyright  2011 Practical Law Publishing Limited and Practical Law Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

8

DMCA Anti-circumvention 
The DMCA prohibits the:
  Circumvention of technological, anti-piracy measures built into 

most commercial software to control access to copyrighted 
works.

  Manufacture, sale or distribution of code-cracking devices 

used to illegally copy software. 

The law authorizes civil actions for:
  Actual or statutory damages. 
  Injunctive and other equitable relief. 
  Attorneys fees.

(17 U.S.C.  1201.)

Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act 
(RICO Act) 
The RICO Act provides criminal penalties, including up to 20 
years imprisonment, for acts performed as part of an ongoing 
criminal organization. Specifically, the RICO Act penalizes those 
engaged in a pattern of racketeering activity, which includes at 
least two acts of fraud and related activity in connection with:
  Identification documents. 
  Wire fraud. 
  Criminal infringement of a copyright. 
  Trafficking in counterfeit labels. 

The RICO Act also provides for a civil action by any person injured 
in his business or property, through a RICO Act violation, for:
  Recovery of money damages, including treble damages.
  Costs. 
  Reasonable attorneys fees.

(18 U.S.C.  1961-1968.)

State Computer Crime Laws
Criminal and civil actions may be brought under various state laws 
targeting computer fraud. For example, in California it is illegal to 
knowingly access and without permission alter, damage, delete, 
destroy or otherwise use any data, computer, computer system or 
computer network to: 
  Defraud.
  Deceive.
  Extort.
  Wrongfully control or obtain money, property or data.

Other prohibited activities include knowingly:
  Accessing and copying data from a computer or computer 

system or network.

  Using without authorization, disrupting or denying a computer 

service.

  Introducing contaminants into a computer service.

Also, the owner of a computer system or program who suffers damage 
or loss through a violation of the law may bring a civil action for:
  Damages. 
  Injunctive or other equitable relief. 
  Attorneys fees.

(Cal. Penal Code  502.)

State laws may also authorize civil actions against the parents of a 
minor hacker.

Other Civil Actions
Civil actions may also be available for:
  Violating the terms and conditions of use of a companys 

website, including:
  contract-based liability; and 
  common law and statutory liability. 

  Computer trespass and conversion.

OTHER ACTIONS TO DETER OR MITIGATE 
CYBER ATTACKS 
In addition to pursuing available civil and criminal claims, 
companies should consider the following to respond to cyber 
attacks and mitigate any resulting losses. 

CEASE AND DESIST LETTERS 
Where there are ongoing violations, a company may decide to 
issue a cease and desist letter to a hacker before commencing a 
civil action. The letter should:
  Aim to persuade the hacker to cease violations under the threat 

of civil actions and remedies. 

  If appropriate, inform the hacker that if the alleged conduct 
rises to the level of a criminal violation, and a case is brought 
by the proper authorities, the hacker could be subject to 
criminal penalties. 

However, the letter should not directly accuse the hacker of 
criminal conduct or threaten criminal prosecution. 

Before deciding to issue a cease and desist letter, the company should 
evaluate the possible responses from the hacker, which may include:
  Disregarding the letter completely. 
  Posting it on a website in an effort to ridicule enforcement 

efforts.

  Adopting alternative hacking approaches. 
  Terminating violations. 

DMCA TAKEDOWN NOTICES
Hackers may post materials on third-party websites or their own 
websites that infringe copyright. ISPs seeking the DMCA safe 
harbor for infringing acts by their third-party users must remove 

copyright infringing material from users web sites on notice. A 
copyright owner can contact the ISP or website operator (together, 
service providers) of the infringing website through a DMCA 
takedown notice to request that the service providers:
  Remove or disable access to the infringing material or activity. 
  Cease linking or referring users to other online locations that 

contain infringing material or activity.

The DMCA takedown notice should be sent to the appropriate 
service and:
  Explain the infringements appearing on the site. 
  Request that the site:

  be shut down; or
  remove any infringements.

For the DMCA notice to be effective, it must comply with certain 
statutory requirements. For a sample DMCA takedown notice, see 
Standard Document, DMCA Complaint (Takedown Notice) (http://
us.practicallaw.com/3-502-6258). 

If the service provider seeks safe harbor protection, it must remove 
the infringing material or disable access to it in response to a DMCA 
notice that substantially complies with statutory requirements. If a 
service provider disregards a proper DMCA takedown notice, it may 
be held responsible for the infringements in any lawsuit.

The DMCA allows the alleged infringer to issue a counter-notice in 
response to a DMCA takedown notice. The service provider must 
forward the counter-notice to the copyright owner. If the alleged 
infringer issues a counter-notice, the service provider must restore 
access to the infringing site or materials if the copyright owner 
does not sue the alleged infringer within ten days after it receives 
the counter-notice. When sending a counter-notice, the alleged 
infringer must: 
  Provide its name and address. 
  Submit to federal court jurisdiction. 

This may help the copyright owner maintain a lawsuit with less 
concern for jurisdictional and certain other defenses. 

CYBER LIABILITY INSURANCE COVERAGE 
Companies should carefully review their liability insurance policies 
and consult with their insurance brokers to determine whether 
they are adequately insured for cyber attack losses. Companies 
may want to obtain insurance coverage for:
  Privacy and data breach liability.
  Computer hardware, software and data damage or loss.
  Crisis management.
  Business interruption, denial of service attack and lost income.
  Loss of business reputation.
  Cyber extortion.
  Media or web content liability.

99

Copyright  2011 Practical Law Publishing Limited and Practical Law Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Cyber Attacks: Prevention and Proactive Responses

RECENT CASE LAW

Representative cases discussing various civil and criminal 
legal issues arising in cyber attacks are described below. 

IMMEDIATE DISCOVERY OF HACKER IDENTITIES
In Liberty Media Holdings, LLC v. Does 1-59, a California 
district court allowed a website owner to conduct immediate 
discovery against unknown defendants who allegedly 
unlawfully bypassed the websites protective payment and 
login procedures, and accessed copyrighted materials (97 
U.S.P.Q. 2d 1986 (S.D. Cal. 2011)). 

The website owner provided the unique IP addresses 
assigned to each defendant and the court found that the 
owner sufficiently alleged:
  Unauthorized access by the defendants under the CFAA.
  Intentional access to stored electronic data in violation of 

the Electronic Communications Privacy Act.

  Unauthorized reproduction and distribution of the 

plaintiffs copyrighted works onto local hard drives in 
violation of the Copyright Act. 

  The court therefore allowed the website owner to serve 

subpoenas on the defendants ISPs for information 
sufficient to identify the unknown parties attached to the 
IP addresses.

FAILURE TO PROPERLY SECURE ELECTRONIC EVIDENCE
In United States v. Koo, an Oregon federal district court 
held that an image of the hard drive from an employees 
company-issued laptop was inadmissible to prove the 
contents of the computer at the time it was confiscated 
because of evidence that before handing over the laptop to 
the FBI for processing, a supervisor:
  Booted the machine. 
  Accessed files. 
  Allegedly altered content. 

(770 F. Supp. 2d 1115 (D. Or. 2011).)

The defendants, former employees of the complainant, 
were charged with wire fraud, trade secret theft and 
computer fraud, among other things, arising out of their 
alleged copying of confidential company data to start a 
competing enterprise. The court granted the defendants 
motion to exclude two hard drive images the FBI took of the 
defendants laptop for failure to authenticate them under 
Rule 901 of the Federal Rules of Evidence. 

DETERMINING VALUE UNDER COMPUTER FRAUD AND 
ABUSE ACT
In United States v. Batti, the US Court of Appeals for the 
Sixth Circuit affirmed the district courts decision finding 
that a felony conviction under the CFAA on the basis that the 
value of electronic information wrongfully obtained exceeded 
$5,000 (18 U.S.C. 1030(2)(B)(iii)), does not require that the:
  Unauthorized access cause loss. 
  Defendant profit from his intrusion. 

(631 F.3d 371 (6th Cir. 2011).)

The US Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit affirmed the 
defendants felony conviction under the CFAA for improperly 
accessing confidential files from his employers computer 
servers, rejecting the defendants argument that the value 
of the proprietary television commercial footage wrongfully 
obtained did not exceed the $5,000 statutory requirement. 
Because no readily ascertainable market value for the 
corporate advertising footage existed, a trier of fact need 
only determine the value of the information through some 
appropriate means. The Sixth Circuit determined that the 
cost of production of that footage was a permissible basis 
on which to rely in determining whether the value of the 
information obtained exceeded $5,000. 

The Sixth Circuit also affirmed that the lower courts 
restitution award for the companys expenses for IT security 
company services and legal advice of $47,565 was not 
excessive in nature.

REASONABLENESS OF BANK SECURITY PROCEDURES 
AGAINST CYBER ATTACKS
In Patco Construction Co. v. People s United Bank, a 
federal district court magistrate granted a banks motion 
for summary judgment on claims under UCC Article 4A and 
other causes of action against the bank for recoupment of 
unauthorized automated clearing house (ACH) wire transfers 
from a customers commercial bank account by unknown 
hackers (2011 WL 2174507 (D. Me. May 27, 2011)). 

The magistrate found that the banks security procedures 
provided to a commercial customer were commercially 
reasonable and complied with Federal Financial Institutions 
Examination Council guidelines. This was because the 
security features (including company IDs and passwords, 
individual user IDs and passwords, and challenge questions 
and answers) provided multilayered security. 

The court found that the government could not make a prima 
facie showing that the laptop image was in substantially the 
same condition as the laptop seized from the defendant.

The magistrate rejected the customers argument that the 
bank should have adopted stronger security procedures then 
available to protect against fraudulent transfers, including, 

Copyright  2011 Practical Law Publishing Limited and Practical Law Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

10

RECENT CASE LAW (CONT.)

for example, security tokens and stronger out-of-band 
authentication techniques. Instead, Article 4A of the UCC 
only requires commercially reasonable security.

employees e-mails by another employee was an intentional 
interception of electronic communications in violation of the 
federal Wiretap Act (622 F.3d 701 (7th Cir. 2010)). 

However, in another case similarly involving fraudulent 
wire transfers, the US District Court for the Eastern District 
of Michigan found that a bank failed to show that it shut 
down fraudulent wire transfer activity in the customers 
account within a reasonable time after receiving an alert of 
suspicious activity (Experi-Metal v. Comerica Bank, 2011 
WL 2433383 (E.D. Mich. June 13, 2011)). The court 
determined that the bank did not act promptly enough to 
stop fraudulent wire transfers in light of, among other things: 
  The volume and frequency of the payment orders, which 

included many transfers within hours.

  The $5 million overdraft created by the fraudulent wire 
transfers in what was regularly a zero balance account. 

  The customers limited prior wire transfer activity. 
  The destinations and beneficiaries of the funds, which 

included individual accounts in Russia and Estonia.

  The banks knowledge of previous and current phishing 

schemes against accountholders. 

AUTO-FORWARDING ANOTHER PARTYS E-MAILS 
PROHIBITED BY WIRETAP ACT
In United States v. Szymuskiewicz, the US Court of Appeals 
for the Seventh Circuit held that automatic forwarding of an 

The court rejected the defendants argument that: 
  Setting up an auto-forwarding rule in Microsoft Outlook was 

not an interception of the e-mails while they were in transit. 

  At most, the defendant could only be convicted of 

violating the Stored Communications Act (see Stored 
Communications Act), which prohibits accessing 
electronic data in storage. 

The court found that the interception was 
contemporaneous with the communication because: 
  Either the companys regional server or the supervisors 

computer made copies of the messages for the defendant 
within a second of each messages arrival. 

  Evidence showed that the Outlook rule was implemented 

on the server side, which was normal for Outlook, and 
such copying was an unlawful interception. 

The court concluded that under the Wiretap Act, an 
intentional interception is enough and a prosecutor does not 
have to show that the intruder obtained valuable information 
through the interception. 

For more information, see Wiretap Act and Electronic 
Communications Privacy Act and Stored Communications Act.

REPORTING CYBER CRIME TO THE APPROPRIATE LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY

TYPE OF CYBER CRIME

INVESTIGATIVE LAW ENFORCEMENT AGENCY

Computer intrusion (for example, hacking)

Password trafficking

  FBI local office
  Secret Service
  Local police department

FBI local office

Internet fraud matters that have a mail nexus

US Postal Inspection Service

Internet fraud and SPAM

  FBI local office

Internet harassment and bomb threats

  Secret Service (Financial Crimes Division)

  Federal Trade Commission (online complaint)

  Securities and Exchange Commission (online complaint for investment 

fraud-related SPAM)

  FBI local office
  ATF local office

11

Copyright  2011 Practical Law Publishing Limited and Practical Law Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Cyber Attacks: Prevention and Proactive Responses

Practical Law Company provides practical legal 
know-how for law firms, law departments and 
law schools. Our online corporate, securities and 
finance resources help lawyers practice efficiently, 
get up to speed quickly and spend more time on 
the work that matters most. This Practice Note is 
just one example of the many resources Practical 
Law Company offers. Discover for yourself what 
the worlds leading law firms and law departments 
use to enhance their practices. 

Contact Us
Practical Law Company
747 Third Avenue, 36th Floor  
New York, NY 10017
646.562.3405
plcinfo@practicallaw.com
www.practicallaw.com

Copyright  2011 Practical Law Publishing Limited and Practical Law Company, Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
Use of PLC websites and services is subject to the Terms of Use (http://us.practicallaw.com/2-383-6690)  
and Privacy Policy (http://us.practicallaw.com/8-383-6692).

12

12-11

