TOP 12 WAYS  

TO DECREASE THE ENERGY 
CONSUMPTION OF YOUR DATA CENTER 

Server and data center energy consumption is projected to nearly double from 2006 to 2011 nationally, 
contributing to electricity costs in excess of $7.4 billion. U.S. EPA encourages you to improve your data 
centers energy efficiency and help your organization limit its energy consumption growth while also 
contributing to a cleaner environment.

UPGRADE AND CONSOLIDATE YOUR TECHNOLOGY 

1.  Virtualize your servers
By consolidating multiple, 
independent servers to a single 
physical server, those servers 
can operate more efficiently  
and reduce energy costs  by  
10% to 40%.
  
2.  Decommission your comatose 
servers15% to 30% of the 
equipment running in your data 
center consumes electricity 
without doing any computing.

3.  Consolidate your lightly used 
serversA typical servers 
utilization is about 5% to 15%, 
yet it draws full power.

4.  Organize and improve your stored dataStorage utilization 
averages only around 30%. It is common for organizations to have 
20 or more copies of the same datawasting storage space.  

5.  Invest in technologies that use energy more efficientlyAn 
ENERGY STAR qualified server uses 30% less energy than a 
conventional server.

GO WITH THE FLOW  MANAGE DATA CENTER AIR FLOW

6.  Take advantage of the 
Hot Aisle/Cold Aisle 
layoutIf your server 
racks are currently 
arranged this way... 

  CRAC stands for computer room air conditioner

...Try arranging them so that the 
fronts of the server racks face each 
other and, therefore, the backs of the 
server racks face each other. This 
arrangement reduces mixing of hot 
and cold air to improve efficiency.

7.  Contain or enclose your server 
racksTo further reduce mixing the  
cold supply air with the hot exhaust 
air (e.g., using flexible strip curtains 
or rigid enclosures).

GO WITH THE FLOW  MANAGE DATA CENTER AIR FLOW

8.  Review general air flow 
improvement tipsInstall 
blanking panels to decrease 
server inlet air temperatures 
and increase the 
temperature of air returning 
to the CRAC, both of 
which improve operational 
efficiency. 

Use structured cabling to 
avoid restricting air flow to 
your servers. 

Unstructured and Structured

Install grommets to seal areas where cables 
enter and exit plenums (such as a raised floor). 
Less leakage helps direct more cold air to the 
equipment that needs cooling. 

(Photo courtesy of 42U.com)

A professional air flow assessment can help identify ways to improve cooling efficiency. 

ADJUST AND IMPROVE YOUR HVAC SYSTEM

9.  Adjust the temperature and humidity in your data centerIn 2008, the 
American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers 
(ASHRAE) established new recommended temperature and humidity ranges 
at the inlet of the server. However, many data centers set their temperatures 
as low as 55F (when the recommended range is 65F to 80F) and keep very 
tight controls on humidity.  Data centers can save 4% to 5% in energy costs for 
every 1F increase in server inlet temperature.     

10.  Retrofit your air conditioning with variable speed fan drivesRetrofit kits for your CRACs have a 
two year payback by being able to adjust fan speed to accommodate changing cooling loads in your 
data center.

11. Install an air-side economizerBring outside 
cooling air into a building. Because data centers 
must be cooled 24/7, 365 days per year, air-
side economizers may even make sense in hot 
climates, where they can take advantage of 
cooler evenings and winter air temperatures to 
save 60% on cooling. 

12. Install a water-side economizerUse the 
evaporative cooling capacity of a cooling tower to 
produce chilled water during the winter months. During water-side economizer operation, costs of a chilled 
water plant are reduced by up to 70%.

Assess the Energy Efficiency of Your Data Center
Measuring  and  tracking  the  energy  consumption  of  your  data  center  is  an  important  means  for  effective  manage-
ment.  ENERGY  STARs  free  Portfolio  Manager  Tool,  www.energystar.gov/benchmark,  enables  you  to  assess  your 
energy  performance  relative  to  your  peers  using  a  1-100  scoring  system,  as  well  as  track  changes  in  use  over  time. 

Please visit http://www.energystar.gov/datacenterenergyefficiency for more details.

ENERGY STAR is a U.S. Environmental Protection Agency program helping 
businesses and individuals fight climate change through superior energy efficiency.

