defenders of wildlife

2013-2023 Strategic Plan

polar bears © joan cambray

DEFENDERS OF WILDLIFE
Defenders of Wildlife is a national, nonprofit
membership organization dedicated to the
protection of all native wild animals and plants
in their natural communities.
Jamie Rappaport Clark, President and CEO
Donald Barry, Executive Vice President

© 2012 Defenders of Wildlife
1130 17th Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20036-4604
202.682.9400

Cover: (clockwise from top) Yellowstone bison © Diana LeVasseur; gray wolf © John Eastcott and Yva
Momatiuk/National Geographic Stock; red-eyed tree frog © Christopher Cote; Yellowstone National Park
© Karen Gerstner; Virginia big-eared bat © Merlin D. Tuttle/Bat Conservation International;
green sea turtle © George Grall/National Geographic Stock; Florida manatees © Brian Skerry/
National Geographic Stock; Great white shark © Carson Ganci/Design Pics/Corbis
green sea turtle © istockphoto.com

introduction
North America is fortunate to have some of the most
abundant and diverse wildlife and natural resources on Earth.
From the wetlands of Florida to the frozen tundras of Alaska,
from the arid deserts of Mexico and the Southwest to the lush
forests of the Pacific Northwest, our continent is home to a
richness of wildlife and special places. More than 200,000
known species exist in the United States alone, species as
varied as the landscapes they depend on for survival. Polar
bears, wolves, condors, sea turtles and freshwater mussels—
all are part of our impressive wildlife heritage, an inheritance
admired around the world.
A great stewardship responsibility comes along with this
abundance of natural riches. Americans have repeatedly risen
to the challenge of fulfilling it, establishing a proud wildlife
legacy in the process. We were the first country in the world to
create national parks and a national system of wildlife refuges.
We pioneered environmental laws, such as the Endangered
Species Act, to protect our native plants and animals and their
habitat base. Other countries have modeled their conservation

Our children and those who follow deserve to see our
diverse wildlife in its native habitats and to enjoy
North America’s spectacular wild places. These are
sights to be experienced firsthand, not through
picture books and old movies.
—Jamie Rappaport Clark, President and CEO

laws on ours; none has surpassed them. For generations, we
have recognized our moral duty to conserve and protect the
diversity of wildlife and special places that make our country
unique. This is part of what makes us proud to be Americans
and prouder still to pass these great treasures to the next
generation. But this legacy is in danger.
Habitat loss and fragmentation, population growth,
resource extraction, invasive species and disease are contributing to a loss of species so rapid that scientists say we are now
living through the sixth great extinction. In the United States
alone, many species are at risk; more than 500 are believed
to be extinct already. Narrow-minded and outdated policies
are undermining accomplishments like the re-establishment
of top predators on landscapes they once roamed freely. And
new threats to biodiversity such as climate change are evolving
rapidly. Scientists agree that rising temperatures will have a
pervasive impact on wildlife but cannot predict exactly what it
will be. Confronted with uncertainty, how should policymakers and land managers respond?
These threats impact not only our wildlife but our lands
and our people. The decline in bees, bats and other pollinators, for example, is starting to affect our crops and food
supply. Because we rely on nature as much as nature relies
on us, a balanced and healthy environment is critical to our
own survival.
Adding to the challenges we face is a slow but steady
shift in public priorities. Although people still value environmental protection, their focus recently has centered on
issues such as the economy, jobs, the deficit, terrorism and
education. Given this social trend, who will remain a strong
voice and advocate for wildlife?
Our children and those who follow deserve to see our
diverse wildlife in its native environments and to enjoy
North America’s spectacular wild places. These are sights to
be experienced firsthand, not through picture books and
old movies.

defenders of wildlife strategic plan

Our Wildlife Heritage

1

Defenders’ Role
Defenders of Wildlife is a major national conservation organization focused
solely on wildlife and habitat conservation and the safeguarding of
biodiversity. We believe in the inherent value of wildlife and the natural world,
whether it is bald eagles prized for their grace and beauty or honey bees valued
for their role in producing our food. This singular focus defines our important
niche in the environmental and conservation community. It serves as the
anchor for our organizational values and the touchstone for the commitments
we make to each other, our supporters and North America’s wildlife.
Defenders’ approach is direct and straightforward: We protect and
restore imperiled species throughout North America by transforming
policies and institutions and promoting innovative solutions. We speak
with one voice informed by scientific, legal and policy expertise, hands-on
wildlife management experience and effective advocacy. This enables
us to “punch above our weight” and puts Defenders at the forefront of

developing enduring solutions to our wildlife conservation challenges. By
aligning Defenders around our integrated and focused strategy, we believe
that we can make a lasting difference for wildlife and its habitat during
these uniquely challenging times.
In this dynamic operating environment, we have developed distinctive
strengths to advance our mission. We are widely recognized by our peers and
policymakers for the effectiveness of our advocacy work, particularly with the
Department of the Interior and Department of Agriculture. We are known
for being the most effective advocate for wildlife funding in the federal
appropriations process and for the political activism of the Defenders of
Wildlife Action Fund. Our field offices enhance our credibility as a national
organization that can deliver on-the-ground conservation at the local level.
And our grassroots organizing strength compels action on behalf of a population segment that cannot act for itself, North America’s wildlife.

2
california condor courtesy u.s. fish and wildlife service

humpback whale © William Welch

Florida panther in Florida Panther National Wildlife Refuge
courtesy David Shindle/Florida Fish and Wildlife Commission

Defenders’ Strategic Plan
Defenders of Wildlife’s 2013-2023 strategic plan articulates a common purpose and direction for the organization. Grounded in the conviction that our wildlife
conservation mission is urgent and important, the plan
provides a framework fo r setting goals and allocating
resources across Defenders. It includes the following
elements:
•	Mission Statement: The purpose/aspiration of
Defenders of Wildlife
•	Values Statement: Who we are and how we operate
•	Conservation Vision: What success looks like over
the long term
•	Conservation Approach: How we get results—our
model for impact
•	Value Proposition: Why donors should support us
•	25-year Unifying Conservation Goal: Our
common objectives, expressed in terms of
outcomes, not activities

•	Priority Strategies: How we will focus our work
organization-wide to meet our benchmarks
By aligning Defenders’ many institutional strengths
within this integrated framework, we believe we can
make a lasting difference for wildlife and have an impact
that belies our size. If we speak with one voice, our
blend of policy expertise, field credibility, grassroots
and grasstops advocacy outreach, science and strategic
litigation enables us to have a disproportionate impact
relative to resources expended. We owe nothing less to
our members, donors and other supporters.

defenders of wildlife strategic plan

•	10-year Conservation Benchmarks: Measurable
targets that contribute directly to our unifying
conservation goal

3

mission statement
Defenders of Wildlife is a national, nonprofit membership organization
dedicated to the protection of all native animals and plants in their
natural communities.
Our mission statement serves as the point of departure for our strategic
plan, articulating our aspirations to protect the full range of North
American biodiversity—fauna, flora and natural communities—and
acknowledging our roots as a membership organization.

4

Red Knots, Dunlin, Semipalmated Sandpipers and Short-billed Dowitchers in delaware bay
© Sean McCandless

jaguar © joel sartore/WWW.JOELSARTORE.COM

values statement

Southern Appalachian waterfall © jim clark

Defenders of Wildlife believes in the inherent value of wildlife and the
natural world, regardless of whether individual species are recognized as
having utilitarian or aesthetic value to humankind. We believe that we
will better achieve our mission to conserve all native plants and animals
in North America in their natural communities if we live by convictions
that guide all aspects of our work. Defenders’ values statement sets out
expectations as to how employees will interact with each other, guides
relationships with partners and supporters, and shapes interactions with
those holding differing opinions and beliefs.
We are “One Defenders,” committed to working together under the
highest standards of honesty and integrity to achieve transformative goals
for our members, supporters and the plant and animal resources we seek to
conserve. We strive to:

•	Balance idealism with pragmatism, focusing on creating solutions
rather than just identifying problems.
•	Be fair, honest, open-minded, collaborative and respectful in all our
internal and external interactions.
•	Be truthful and accurate in our internal and external communications,
acknowledging and rectifying our errors when we make them.
•	Regardless of political affiliation, collaborate with others who share our
commitment to wildlife conservation and challenge those who violate or
seek to weaken our nation’s environmental laws.
•	Measure our performance by the achievement of lasting solutions
consistent with our mission, long-term goals and priorities.
•	Value and respect the critical contributions of our members and
supporters.
•	Use our resources wisely, thinking big and maximizing the impact and
effectiveness of our advocacy work.

•	Value innovation, being willing to take responsible risks to advance wildlife
conservation.
•	Minimize our own impact on wildlife and the environment by conserving
resources in our daily work.
•	Routinely assess both our successes and our disappointments, learning
from those experiences and adapting our strategies and tactics as necessary.
Our employees are our greatest asset; we care about their welfare and
professional growth—and will always listen to our coworkers’ suggestions
for improving our operations. We foster empowerment at all levels of our
organization through clarity of authority and accountability. We value the unique
perspectives and backgrounds of our employees and work to expand the diversity
of our workforce, board of directors and coalitions. Moreover, we recognize
that conservation of biological diversity is best advanced by the contributions of
people of diverse backgrounds, experiences, beliefs and cultures.
This values statement sets the tone for who we are and how we operate. It
emphasizes our commitment to being constructive, fair, straightforward and
truthful as we seek long-term, science-based solutions to complex wildlife
and habitat issues.

defenders of wildlife strategic plan

•	Always use the best available science to inform and guide our decisions
and priorities, but recognize that it may not always be the sole driver
of our actions.

5

gray wolf in yellowstone national park © mike cavaroc/www.freeroamingphotography.com

conservation vision
Diverse wildlife populations in North America
are secure and thriving, sustained by a
network of healthy lands and waters.
Fifty years from now, what outcomes will
indicate tangible progress toward our mission?
What does success look like for Defenders? Our
conservation vision succinctly describes the
elements that define our success:
•	Diverse populations. Our conservation
efforts are targeted at the full range of
vulnerable North American biodiversity,
from plants to pollinators to predators.
We recognize that we cannot protect any
species without simultaneously protecting
the diversity of habitats and wildlife on
which it relies.
•	North America. While we do not set
geographic boundaries on our work,
we primarily focus on species of North
America, including transboundary
terrestrial and marine species that migrate
through its waters.
•	Secure and thriving. We are working for
the day when vulnerable North American
species rebound to the point that they are
secure—no longer threatened with rapid
decline or extinction—and thriving in
robust, well-distributed populations.

6

•	Network of healthy lands and waters.
Wildlife has the greatest chance of being
secure and thriving if it is supported by a
transnational network of public and private
lands, rivers and coastal waters, core natural
areas and working landscapes.

conservation approach
To help realize our conservation vision, Defenders of Wildlife focuses on
three imperatives:
•	Prevent species and their habitats from becoming imperiled.
•	Protect endangered and threatened species and their habitats.
•	Restore the health of once-vulnerable species and their habitats.
This overarching approach is best thought of as a continuum. It summarizes
how we work to abate threats to biodiversity and get measurable results. The three
imperatives are grounded in the principles of conservation biology and provide a
common theme for Defenders’ programs and campaigns.
As illustrated below, this conservation approach covers a wide range in
the status and needs of wildlife and its habitat. The dotted line represents

our vision of species and habitat condition: secure and thriving wildlife
populations sustained by a network of healthy lands and waters. The plummeting line represents what happens without any intervention. The three
blue curves demonstrate the difference we can make by taking preventive,
protective and restorative measures depending on where we step in along
the downward curve. With early intervention at the point at which
resource health is just starting to show signs of dipping below secure levels,
we can prevent further decline and restore resource health quickly (light
blue line). If we wait until the status drops to vulnerable and an emergency
response is required, resource health is regained more slowly (medium blue
line). And if we do not act until species are imperiled and heading toward
extinction and habitat is seriously damaged and disappearing—the crisis
intervention stage (dark blue line)—recovery will be even slower and may
never progress to security.

conservation approach
Prevent

Protect

Restore

Secure

early engagement
defenders of wildlife strategic plan

Species and Habitat Condition

Thriving

Vulnerable
emergency response
Imperiled

crisis intervention
Extinct

7
Time

GOPHER TORTOISE © JOEL SARTORE/WWW.JOELSARTORE.COM

honey bee © Brad Stocker

value proposition
Defenders of Wildlife protects and restores imperiled species by transforming policies and
institutions and promoting innovative solutions needed to conserve wildlife and habitat.
Our value proposition answers the question, “Why Defenders?” Why should a potential
donor or partner invest in Defenders or a policymaker take our advice? What do we deliver that
distinguishes us from other environmental/conservation organizations?
First, with our emphasis on “imperiled species”—our most vulnerable plants and animals—
and their habitat, we are focused on biodiversity conservation, a focus abandoned in some
measure by other conservation organizations. At a time when the growing trend is to accept
the inevitability of development and move toward more human-centric conservation, we are
doubling down on wildlife protection.
Second, we are dedicated to “transforming policies and institutions,” an emphasis that
highlights our strengths as an organization. We are pragmatic, solutions-oriented, passionate
advocates for wildlife that seek to change the behavior of Congress, government agencies and
other public and private institutions involved in wildlife conservation.

25-year unifying
conservation goal
Seventy-five percent of North America’s once-vulnerable
wildlife species are now secure.

8

This ambitious but achievable goal sets forth what
Defenders of Wildlife intends to accomplish for wildlife
conservation over the next 25 years. It is a definition of
success predicated on the core of what we do: Promote the
conservation and restoration of North America’s vulnerable
species. All of Defenders’ work over the next 25 years will
contribute to the achievement of this goal, whether it
involves habitat preservation and restoration, securing greater
wildlife conservation funding or defending and strengthening vital wildlife and land management laws and policies.
freshwater mussels © joel sartore/WWW.JOELSARTORE.COM

defenders of wildlife strategic plan

yellowstone bison © jim clark

9

10-year conservation benchmarks
• Endangered Species Act: More than half of the species currently listed are 	
stable or improving.
• Key species: 25 vulnerable species are secure in important ecosystems and 	
focal landscapes.
• Federal and nonfederal habitat: Double the acreage of high-priority wildlife
habitat that is managed for ecological integrity.
Our 10-year benchmarks build on areas of core strength and focus at
Defenders. We have been heavily involved in the implementation of the
Endangered Species Act since its enactment in 1973. We are the leading
conservation voice in the defense of the act and for the adoption of innovative
policy improvements that will accelerate the recovery of imperiled species.
Defenders has also been extremely effective in generating public support for
the conservation of high-profile imperiled species such as wolves, manatees, sea
otters, bison and grizzly bears. Using these key species as “ambassadors,” we tell
a broader conservation story that includes the integral role of less charismatic
california sea otter © Joe Tomoleoni

10

wildlife. Over the next 10 years, we plan to use some lesser known but equally
key imperiled species, such as pollinators, freshwater mussels and amphibians, as
key ambassadors of ecosystem health and environmental quality to educate the
public on the value of all species of biodiversity and to build support for restoring
these equally key species to their historic functional ecological roles in focal
landscapes. (See the map of our focal landscapes, opposite, and the complete list
of our key species below.)
Finally, Defenders recognizes that the greatest opportunity for maximizing conservation security for the broadest array of vulnerable species is to double the amount of
priority wildlife habitat managed to maintain or restore ecological integrity. Just as a
rising tide raises all boats, maintaining and restoring ecological integrity of our land
base benefits all species.

KEY SPECIES
Wolves
Bees
Bats
Sea turtles
Sonoran pronghorn
Sharks
Mussels
Black-footed ferret
Desert tortoise
Grizzly bear
Parrots
Wolverine
Gopher tortoise

Amphibians
Whales
Migratory shorebirds
Jaguar
Bison
Freshwater fishes
Sea otter
Florida panther
Manatee
Polar Bear
California condor
Sage grouse

To arrive at this list of key species, Defenders’ staff and science advisors conducted an
evaluation based on the following questions: Does the species or group of species have a
disproportionally large effect on the natural environment relative to its abundance? Play a
functional role within its ecosystem and/or serve as an indicator for the health and integrity
of the larger ecosystem of which it is part? Face a significant threat? Have realistic odds
of making meaningful conservation progress? Does Defenders have the specific expertise
to work on it? Can we make a unique contribution to its conservation? Does the list reflect
North America’s rich diversity of species and habitats?

pacific northwest rain forest
© julia michalak/defenders of wildlife

focal landscapes

North
Rockies

Great
Plains Steppe

New
England

Cascadia
Sagebrush Sea

Sierra Nevada
Southern
Rockies
Mojave
Southern
Appalachians
Sky Islands

Eastern
Carolinas

Florida
Panhandle

Arctic

Alaska Gulf
Mountains

Focal landscapes are areas that offer important opportunities to maintain/restore ecological integrity on priority habitats,
stabilize or improve the status of key species or address Defenders’ conservation program priorities, test conservation
approaches and management techniques and maximize our impact by collaborating with federal and state resource
agencies, local organizations and landowners. It includes areas where we currently have field capacity and expertise
(outlined in black) and priority areas for expansion (outlined in red).

defenders of wildlife strategic plan

Greater
Everglades

11

priority strategies for success

sage grouse © C. Robert Smith/ Elk Meadow Images/national geographic stock

Defenders intends to achieve its 10-year benchmarks and unifying 	
conservation goal by concentrating on seven core strategies:
1. Secure new administrative initiatives, policies and laws. 	
Defenders will provide the intellectual capital for innovative ideas and solutions
for enhancing the conservation of vulnerable species and their habitat. We will
also focus on developing new initiatives for dramatically expanding the amount
of high-priority wildlife habitat managed for ecological integrity.
2. Support progressive state policies and programs. 	
Success in stabilizing many vulnerable or declining species is significantly
influenced by the quality and conservation focus of underlying state laws.
We will continue to be heavily involved in federal wildlife policy work, but
will also foster and support progressive state efforts and act strategically to
oppose and attempt to reform state laws, policies and programs that impede
species recovery.
3. Prevent any weakening of current conservation policies or statutes. 	
We will fiercely defend current wildlife and land conservation laws and policies
from efforts to undermine their protective provisions. We will hold agencies
accountable for complying with the Endangered Species Act and other federal
wildlife and land conservation laws. Our goal is to maintain the current level
of wildlife protection as we seek to strengthen and expand it and enhance the
rate of species recovery.
4. Ensure adequate funding for wildlife. 	
Recognizing the political reality that budget drives policy, Defenders has long
been a leader in securing conservation funding and we will continue to build
and show our strength in this area. With the current state of the economy and
the zeal for budget cutting in Congress and state legislatures, wildlife programs
have never been in greater peril. We will fight hard for the public and private
funding and conservation programs needed to achieve greater security for
North America’s vulnerable wildlife.

12

5. Ensure adoption of effective climate-change adaptation policies and
practices. We will take the lead in securing the timely adoption of forwardlooking policies to address the enormous threat rising temperatures pose to
wildlife viability. We will continue to work closely with federal, state and tribal
governments on wildlife adaptation and climate change policy and provide
guidance and advice.

6. Implement on-the-ground conservation measures. 	
We will put conservation measures that reflect—and inform—our national
policy work into practice. As a national conservation organization with state
and regional offices, we can test new ideas and influence the implementation
of national policies in the field and hold agencies accountable for complying
with wildlife conservation laws.
7. Build a broad-based constituency for wildlife conservation. 	
Expanding the base of active conservation supporters at the grassroots and
grasstops levels is critically important. We will work to translate general
public support for wildlife conservation into an effective advocacy voice that
influences government policies on behalf of our nation’s wildlife.
All of these strategies combined will ensure that Defenders is not only an
effective voice for wildlife conservation, but a dominant one in developing
long-term solutions and delivering measurable results. (The chart on pages
14-15 shows how we will use these strategies to meet our 10-year conservation benchmarks.)

black-footed ferret © joel sartore/WWW.JOELSARTORE.COM

defenders of wildlife strategic plan

wolverine © istockphoto.com

scarlet and blue macaws © Jaquie Tomke

13

10-YEAR CONSERVATION BENCHMARKS AND PRIORITY STRATEGIES FOR SUCCESS
10-YEAR BENCHMARKS

ENDANGERED SPECIES ACT (ESA):
More than half of the species currently listed under the ESA are stable
or improving

KEY SPECIES:
25 vulnerable species are secure in important ecosystems and
focal landscapes

• Promote new policies that enhance ESA effectiveness/efficiency in
recovering listed species

• Promote new federal programs/initiatives that protect and restore
key species

• Promote pre-listing/candidate species initiatives that eliminate
species threats

• Promote incentive-based policies and programs at the federal level that
protect and restore key species

• Promote incentive-based policies/programs at federal/state levels that
conserve candidate species

• Promote and implement conservation actions that ameliorate major threats
to protecting and enhancing the conservation status of existing populations
of key species

Priority Strategies
Secure new administrative initiatives,
policies and laws that prevent species
imperilment and maintain and restore
the ecological integrity of landscapes

• Secure adoption of renewable energy “smart from the start” principles to
avoid adversely affecting imperiled species
• Promote invasive species initiatives designed to protect imperiled species
Support progressive state policies
and programs that prevent species
imperilment and loss of priority habitats

• Collaborate with targeted states to secure progressive policies for listed/
candidate species
• Reform strategically selected state wildlife commissions

• Persuade state programs to manage predators as other wildlife
• Persuade states to develop effective conservation programs to protect and
restore key species

• Ensure that species are not delisted without adequate alternative
regulatory mechanisms in place
Prevent any weakening of current
conservation policies or statutes
and hold agencies accountable for
complying with the law

• Cultivate ESA champions and defeat legislative proposals that would
undermine the ESA
• Litigate to block actions that cause imperilment to listed species or
undermine the ESA
• Petition to list strategically chosen species

• Litigate to resolve threats to key species
• Curtail unsustainable international trade in key species with particular focus
on the transboundary species of North America
• Oppose specific projects that adversely affect key species or preclude
restoration of key species

• Curtail unsustainable international trade in North American
transboundary species
Secure adequate funding for wildlife and
land conservation/restoration programs

• Be the leader on the federal funding process for listed species

Ensure that effective climate change
adaptation policies and practices are
adopted by key stakeholders

• Develop and advocate for incorporation of climate adaptation strategies
into ESA implementation

• Assess climate change vulnerability and adaptation strategies
for key species

Implement on-the-ground conservation
measures for imperiled species and
priority habitat

• Implement targeted coexistence initiatives to increase social tolerance
for listed species

• Identify, protect and restore priority habitat for key species

• Stimulate/create incentives for state and private funding for listed/
candidate species

• Promote pilot projects to test innovative conservation strategies for
candidate species

• Increase private and public funding for the protection, enhancement and
restoration of populations of key species

• Implement targeted coexistence initiatives to increase social tolerance
for vulnerable species

• Ensure renewable energy mitigation creates a net benefit for listed/
candidate species
Build an effective broad-based
constituency for wildlife conservation

14

• Build citizen, key constituency and strategic partnership support for
endangered species nationally and in legislatively important areas

• Use key species to help build national and regional support for individual
species conservation and ESA

• Build public consensus that the ESA works in legislatively important areas

• Develop strategic partnerships that promote the recovery and restoration
of key species

HABITAT:
Acreage of high priority wildlife habitat managed for ecological integrity is doubled.
Federal lands

Nonfederal lands

• Secure federal policies/plans that maintain and improve ecological integrity of habitats for
vulnerable species

• Advocate programs that maintain or restore the ecological integrity of nonfederal priority habitat

• Promote landscape-scale management and mitigation policies which conserve vulnerable
species
• Secure enhanced protection for priority habitat
• Secure adoption of "smart from the start” renewable energy principles to protect sensitive
habitat and maintain ecological integrity
• Develop collaborative opportunities for wildlife conservation on Defense Department lands
• Ensure state wildlife management policies on targeted Forest Service/BLM lands do not
undermine the recovery of vulnerable species
• Facilitate closer state/federal land manager cooperation through landscape
conservation cooperatives

• Support incentives for landowners who participate in landscape-scale conservation strategies
• Secure policies and promote incentives that conserve key habitat connectivity
• Promote the use of "wind guidelines" for responsibly developing renewable energy projects on
nonfederal lands
• Expand the use of the Conservation Registry
• Collaborate on wildlife initiatives on tribal lands

• Promote adoption of ecosystem services valuation systems to reward nonfederal land conservation
• Promote state wildlife action plans that enhance the ecological integrity of nonfederal lands

• Defeat legislative proposals that would undermine the ecological integrity of federal lands

• Defeat legislative proposals that would undermine/curtail Farm Bill conservation programs

• Strategically challenge inadequate management plans

• Litigate to block actions that would cause imperilment of vulnerable species

• Litigate to block actions harming vulnerable species or degrading ecological integrity

• Secure increased funding for federal land conservation, restoration and scientific programs

• Advocate/secure increased funding of Farm Bill and other collaborative conservation programs

• Secure increased funding for Land and Water Conservation Fund acquisitions

• Increase funding for state invasive species programs

• Secure incorporation of climate adaptation strategies into all federal land
management frameworks

• Assist nonfederal landowners and land trusts in adopting climate adaptation strategies

• Ensure that renewable energy project mitigation creates a net benefit for affected species

• Promote incentives that restore nonfederal landscape ecological integrity

• Participate in strategically chosen national forest “early adopter” National Forest Management
Act planning efforts

• Support select nonfederal landowner ecological integrity enhancement actions

• Secure adoption of National Wildlife Refuge System vision plan strategies

• Build citizen and key constituency support in legislatively important areas for federal lands
policy campaigns
• Build agreement among stakeholders on conservation priorities necessary to achieve
this benchmark

• Implement targeted coexistence initiatives to increase social tolerance for listed species

• Build public support for habitat policy goals
• Build agreement among stakeholders on conservation priorities necessary to achieve this benchmark

defenders of wildlife strategic plan

• Litigate poorly sited renewable energy projects

15

Everglades national park © FARRELL GREHAN / National Geographic stock

defenders of wildlife offices
HEADQUARTERS
1130 17th Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20036-4604
Ph: 202.682.9400
ALASKA
333 West 4th Avenue
Suite 302
Anchorage, AK 99501
Ph: 907.276.9453

16

ARIZONA
110 S. Church Avenue
Suite 4292
Tucson, AZ 85701
Ph: 520.623.9653

COLORADO
1550 Larimer Street
Suite 278
Denver, CO 80202
Ph: 303.825.0918

CALIFORNIA
1303 J Street, Suite 270
Sacramento, CA 95814
Ph: 916.313.5800

FLORIDA
233 Third Street North
Suite 201
St. Petersburg, FL 33701
Ph: 727.823.3888

IDAHO
P.O. Box 773
Boise, ID 83701
Ph: 208.424.9385
MONTANA
303 W. Mendenhall Street
Suite 3
Bozeman, MT 59715
Ph: 406.586.3970

OREGON
1880 Willamette Falls Drive
Suite 200
West Linn, OR 97068
Ph: 503.697.3222
MEXICO
Bosques de Cerezos 112
Colonia Bosques de las Lomas
Codigo Postal 11700
Mexico D.F.
Ph: 52.55.55.96.21.08

GRIZZLY BEAR © Tammy Shelton

MEXICAN WOLF © JIM CLARK

FpO
18

Cert no. XXX-XXX-000

Defenders of Wildlife
1130 17th Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20036-4604
202.682.9400
www.defenders.org

