Disabling Pop-up Blockers 
The Home Access Center requires the use of pop-up windows.  If you have a pop-up blocker on your 
browser, you will not be able to use all features of the site, including the ability to make payments on-
line.  Find your browser from the list below to disable your pop-up blocker. 

Internet Explorer 
When Internet Explorer blocks a pop-up window, it will display a message in a yellow bar at the top or 
a white box at the bottom.  It may look like this: 

When you see this message, click Allow Once to allow it temporarily.  To disable it for future use,  

 

1.  Choose Tools, Pop-up Blocker, Pop-up Blocker Settings. 
2.  Type in hmac.lz95.org in the address... box and click the Add button. 
3.  Close the window. 

Chrome 

When a pop-up window is blocked in Chrome, you may see either 

 or 

 in the 

upper right corner of the screen.   To disable it, click on the 
from hmac.lz95.org.  To turn them off using Chrome settings,  

icon and choose Always allow pop-ups 

 icon 

1.  Click the 
2.  Choose Options, Under the hood, Privacy 
3.  Click Manage Exceptions in the Pop-ups section. 
4.  Add hmac.lz95.org in the box provided and close the window. 

Firefox 

If necessary, press your alt key to expose the Tools menu.  

1. 
2.  Choose Tools, Content 
3.  Click the Exceptions box and add hmac.lz95.org and press Allow. 

Safari  Mac 

1.  Choose Safari, Preferences, then click Security. 
2.  Turn off Block Pop-up Windows. 

*** because disabling pop-up windows can be a security issue for your computer, District 95 
recommends you re-enable  your pop-up blocker when finished using the Home Access Center.  
Safari blocks or unblocks pop-ups from all sites, not only from the Home Access Center. 

 

 

 
Safari  Ipad / Iphone 

1.  Open the Settings app 
2.  Navigate to Safari and disable Block Pop-ups 

*** because disabling pop-up windows can be a security issue for your device, District 95 
recommends you re-enable  your pop-up blocker when finished using the Home Access Center.  
Safari blocks or unblocks pop-ups from all sites, not only from the Home Access Center. 

Android Devices 

1.  Select the Apps button 
2.  Choose Advanced from the Settings menu. 
3.  Uncheck Block Pop-ups. 

*** because disabling pop-up windows can be a security issue for your tablet, District 95 
recommends you re-enable  your pop-up blocker when finished using the Home Access Center.  
Android tablets block or unblock pop-ups from all sites, not only from the Home Access Center. 

 

