How to Disable Common Pop-up Blockers in Internet 

Explorer

This document will help you identify and disable Pop-up blocking programs on your PC.  
Remember that there are often many Pop-up blocking programs running simultaneously.  It 
is also very likely that you did not knowingly install or activate them. The screenshots below 
can help you identify Pop-up blockers on your PC.

Once you have successfully identified and disabled all Pop-up Blocking programs, 
close all windows and attempt to print in the webrater again.
Microsoft Service Pack 2 (SP2) 

With the release of Microsofts Service Pack 2, Pop-up Blocking is now directly integrated 
into Internet Explorer. 
Note that by default Pop-up blocking is enabled within SP2 Listed below is the location of the 
menu within Internet Explorer:

 

Click on Turn Off Pop-up Blocker. Once this is done, the user should be able to print and 
get upload error windows.  If you are still unable to print, you may have more Pop-Blockers to 
identify and disable.

Common Toolbar Pop-up Blockers

Listed below are some of the more popular Pop-up Blocking software packages that run in 
Internet Explorer, and the workarounds in order to disable them to use the webrater.   In 

general, most Pop-up Blockers will install themselves either within the browser toolbar, or 
within the Windows Taskbar along the bottom right corner.  Instructions with screenshots on 
how to disable Yahoo, Google, MSN, AOL, Viewpoint, AIM, & PopUpCop Toolbars, and Pop-
up Stopper are listed below.  

To find out if you have Toolbar Pop-up Blockers such as Yahoo, Google, MSN, AOL, 
Viewpoint, AIM, & PopUpCop you can look at the area between the Address Bar (where you 
type a web address or URL) and the web page content.  In the screenshot below you can 
identify Google, Norton Internet Security, and, Yahoo (Y!) Toolbars.

Sometimes Toolbars can be hidden from your view, but still block Pop-ups.  To see all of the 
Toolbars available on your PC open Internet Explorer and click View>Toolbars.  In the 
screenshot below, you can see that Google, Norton Internet Security, and Yahoo Toolbars 
are installed but are unchecked or hidden to users.  

In order to disable their pop-up blocking functionality you will first need to click on and 
check each unchecked Toolbar in the View>Toolbars Menu.  When you are finished, 
your View>Toolbars Menu will look similar to the screenshot below.

Once you're able to view all of your browser's toolbars, you can begin disabling Pop-up 
Blocking.  Matching up your Toolbars with the screenshots below and follow the instructions 
for disabling.

Yahoo Toolbar 

Probably the most popular toolbar, this program allows several other functions besides Pop-
up Blocking. Listed below is how the bar will appear within IE:

The following icon is the Pop-up Blocker:

To disable Pop-up Blocking, Click on the Down arrow to bring up the Menu:

Uncheck the entry Enable Pop-up Blocker. Once this is done, the user should be able to 
print and get upload error windows.  If you are still unable to print, you may have more Pop-
Blockers to identify and disable. 

Google Toolbar 

Google has their own brand of toolbar that is very similar to Yahoos. It offers other features 
on top of Pop-up blocking, and looks like the following: 

The following icon is the Pop-up Blocker: 

Clicking on the icon so that it changes to reflect that Pop-ups are allowed will allow the user 
to print and get upload error windows.

 

MSN Toolbar

MSN Toolbar is the latest of the toolbars, but is starting to gain popularity. As with Yahoo and 
Google Toolbars, it allows other features on top of Pop-up Blocking.  Below is the MSN 
Toolbar:

The following icon is the Pop-up Blocker: 

To disable Pop-up Blocking, Click on the Down arrow to the right of the text to bring up the 
Menu: 

-

Click on Allow Pop-ups. Once this is done, the user should be able print and get upload 
error windows.  If you are still unable to print, you may have more Pop-Blockers to identify 
and disable. 

AOL Toolbar 

AOL Toolbar is another fairly new toolbar from one of the big Online Providers. Like the 
others, this Toolbar offers multiple features, and appears in the browser as follows: 

The following icon is the Pop-up Blocker:

To allow Pop-ups to appear, merely click on the icon. You should now see the following: 

Once this is done, the user should be able to print and get upload error windows.  If you are 
still unable to print, you may have more Pop-Blockers to identify and disable. 

Viewpoint Toolbar

Viewpoint Toolbar is often inadvertently installed along with Viewpoint Player, a media player 
software.  This Toolbar provides search functionality and shows snapshots of search results' 
pages.  

Clicking on the word Viewpoint on the right end of the Toolbar will open the drop-down list 
shown below.

 

Clicking on the Options Menu in the drop-down list will open the "Viewpoint Toolbar 
Options" shown below.  To disable Pop-up Blocking choose the Pop-ups Tab and uncheck 
the Enable Pop-up Blocker box.  Then click the OK button.  

Once this is done, the user should be able to use print and get upload error windows.  If you 
are still unable to print, you may have more Pop-Blockers to identify and disable. 

AIM Toolbar

AIM Toolbar is often inadvertently installed along with AOL Instant Messenger, an instant 
messaging software.  This Toolbar provides search functionality and interacts with AOL 
Instant Messenger.  

Clicking on the AIM button on the left end of the Toolbar will open the drop-down list shown 
below.

Clicking on the Toolbar Options in the drop-down list will open the "AIM Toolbar Options" 
shown below.  To disable Pop-up Blocking choose the Popup Blocker Tab and uncheck 
the Block Popup Windows box.  Then click the OK button.  

Once this is done, the user should be able to use print and get upload error windows.  If you 
are still unable to print, you may have more Pop-Blockers to identify and disable. 

PopUpCop

Another popular Pop-up Blocker, this software is also designed solely for preventing Pop-
ups. It installs the following toolbar within the browser: 

To disable Pop-up Blocking, click on the arrow to the right of the badge and a menu will 
appear with a list of options:

Click on Disable PopUpCop. Once this is done, the user should be able to print and get 
upload error windows.  If you are still unable to print, you may have more Pop-Blockers to 
identify and disable. 

Pop-up Stopper 

One of the more popular Pop-up Blockers available, this software is designed solely for 
preventing Pop-ups. It will install an icon in the lower right corner of your Start Menu Toolbar

The following icon is the Pop-up Blocker: 

To disable Pop-up blocking, right-click on the icon and a Pop-up menu will appear with a list 
of options: 

Uncheck the option Block Pop-up ad windows. Once this is done, the user should be able 
to print and get upload error windows.  If you are still unable to print, you may have more 
Pop-Blockers to identify and disable. 

Norton Internet Security

Bundled with many new computer software packages, Norton Internet Security's Pop-up 
Blocking is now integrated into the browser and anti-virus software. Advice on disabling 
Popup Blocking and/or Ad Blocking is modeled below for the most recent versions,  2005 
and 2004.  

Norton Internet Security 2005

Norton Internet Security 2005 usually adds a yellow and orange orb icon to your system tray 
in the Windows taskbar.  You may be able to right-click on it and Disable.

Otherwise, click on Start>Programs>Norton Internet Security>Norton Internet Security.  In 
the left hand pane of the Norton Internet Security window click on Norton AntiSpam. 

Choose the Status and Settings view under Norton AntiSpam.  If Settings for Pop-up 
Blocking display a green checkmark, then Turn Off Pop-up Blocking.  To do this, Click on 
the words Pop-up Blocking. 

The Pop-up Blocking Pane should appear in the right hand pane.  Next click Turn Off. 

 

When Norton Internet Security 2005 Pop-up Blocking is turned off your screen should look 
like the window below.

Once this is done, the user should be able to print and get upload error windows.  If you are 
still unable to print, you may have more Pop-Blockers to identify and disable. 

Norton Internet Security 2004

Norton Internet Security 2004 usually adds a blue and green orb icon to your system tray in 
the Windows taskbar.  You may be able to right-click on it and Disable.

Otherwise, click on Start>Programs>Norton Internet Security.  In the left hand pane of the 
Norton Internet Security window choose the Status and Settings view under Norton Internet 
Security.  If Settings for Ad Blocking display a green checkmark, then Turn Off Ad Blocking.  
To do this, Click on the words Ad Blocking.  The Ad Blocking Pane should appear in the 
right hand pane.  Next click Turn Off.  

Once this is done, the user should be able to print and get upload error windows.  If you are 
still unable to print, you may have more Pop-Blockers to identify and disable. 

