Approximately 4 billion people have cell phones. 

We rely on them. They make our lives easier. 

What could be bad about cell phones?

A LOT according to Devra Davis in her explosive new book 

DISCONNECT: The Truth about Cell Phone Radiation, 

What the Industry Has Done to Hide It, 

and How to Protect Your Family.

Here are some of the shocking details of the disconnect 

between current science and our nations actions:










Studies conducted outside of the cell phone industry consistently show cell phone use damages brain 
cell DNA. Childrens brains are growing at much faster rates and are especially vulnerable.

Dr. Franz Adlkofer, a professor of internal medicine who specializes in diseases with environmental and 
behavioral causes conclusively proved that cell phone radiation unravels DNA.  Adlkofers team 
found that 3G phones were much worse than 2G phones.

Independent studies of cell phone radiation dangers find problems at more than twice the 
rate than industry-funded studies find problems.  Science journals are publishing papers on this 
gaping disparity.

A study found that men who do not use cell phones have far more healthy sperm than those 
who used a cell phone between 2 and 4 hours a day. Those who used a cell for more than 4 hours 
had the lowest and sickliest sperm counts of all.  

In another experiment, rats that have mastered getting out of a tank without drowning, once 
exposed to cell phone radiation for an hour, get lost and swim in circles.

Other nations are beginning to act.  France is banning the sale of phones for children.  Russia, the UK, 
Canada, Belgium, Israel, Finland, Germany, and India have discouraged the use of cell phones by children.

Lloyds of London, the oldest continuously active insurance marketplace in the world, now refuses to insure cell 
phone manufacturers against health-related claims, as do a number of other firms.

The cell phone industry has followed the playbook of the tobacco industry in dealing with any suggestion that 
phones could be problematic. Davis saw serious scientists, raising questions about the long term 
impact of cell phones on health, who were defunded and sometimes drummed out of re-
search altogether.

Bringing together research and interviews with scientists, government 
officials and industry leaders in the U.S. and around the globe, scientist 

Devra Davis pulls back the curtain on the dangers and how this trillion-dollar 

industry has tried to cover it up, potentially harming us all.

Protect yourself NOW

1. uSE A HEAD SEt

Using a speaker, hands-free device, or earphones 
when speaking on a cell phone distances it from the 

body and head and minimizes your exposure to radiation. 

2. DoNt CARRY A CELL PHoNE oN tHE BoDY
even when a cell phone is not in use, it emits radiation.

3. BEWARE oF A WEAK SIGNAL

When a cell phone is in standby mode or when
 the signal strength is weak or blocked, exposure 
to radiation increases. Limit your use at this time.

4. KEEP It AWAY FRoM CHILDREN

Studies consistently show that children are especially vulnerable to the effects of 
cell phone radiation. Generally, the younger the child, the more at risk they are.

5. DoNt LEAVE A CELL PHoNE oN YouR NIGHtStAND

You may be sleeping, but your cell phone 

is busy at work emitting radiation.

DevRA DAvIS, Ph. D., M. P. H., is a scientist, 
professor, speaker, and acclaimed author, and 
recently testified before a United States Senate 
committee about the dangers of cell phone use. 
Her first book, When Smoke Ran Like Water, 
was a National Book Award finalist. She is 
founder of environmental Health Trust and is 
currently visiting professor at Georgetown 
University. She lives in Washington, D.C., 

and Jackson, Wyoming.

l

d
o
h
z
e
e
B
 
a
u
a
P
 


l

ON SALE SEPTEMBER 23, 2010
ISBN: 978-0-525-95194-0   Price: $26.95 ($33.50 CAN)

For more information, visit: DevraDavis.com

Authors royalties go to environmental Health Trust, 

Campaign for Safer Cell Phones.

d DuttoN

