D

R

A

F

T

RESILIENCE OF BUILDINGS TO 
EXTREME WEATHER EVENTS

ABCB DISCUSSION PAPER

April 2014

This document has been issued by the ABCB for consultation and  

discussion with Stakeholders and the general public.

It is available for download from the ABCB website at www.abcb.gov.au  

Please provide any comments via email to resilience@abcb.gov.au  

by 1 July 2014.

 

CONTENTS 

1 
Introduction 
2  Background 

2.1  ABCB Mission 
2.2  Policy setting  
2.3  ABCB Roundtable 

3  Productivity Commission Recommendation regarding Climate Change Adaptation on 

ABCB Work Program 
3.1  Response to Productivity Commission Recommendation regarding 

transparency/identification of climate change related work on the ABCB work program 

4  ABCB Work Program and Adequacy of NCC  

4.1  Climate related natural hazards currently addressed by NCC 
4.2  Financial benefits of natural hazards addressed by the NCC 
4.3  Hazards not addressed by NCC 
4.4  Impact of climate changes on these hazards 
4.5  Limitations on NCC changes to address resilience to extreme weather events 
4.6  Other impacts on hazard risks 
4.7  ABCB Achievements in 2012-13 
4.8  ABCB Future Work Program 

5  ABCB 2010 Report investigating possible BCA Adaptation Measures for Climate Change 

5.1  Report Background 
5.2  Main findings of the Report 
5.3  Role of BCA in addressing community resilience to climate change 
5.4  Further investigation and research needs 
5.5  What has the ABCB done to date in addressing the investigation and research needs 

identified in the 2010 report? 

6 

7 

Impact of NCC changes in short/medium term 
6.1  Identify State/Territory triggers regarding work on existing building/plumbing systems 
Impediments/limitations on amending the NCC for resilience to extreme weather events 
7.1  Need for robust consistent data 
7.2  Political/community support 
7.3  Affordability 
7.4  COAG Requirement for Best Practice Regulation 
7.5  Opportunity  to  differentiate  between  new  and  existing,  residential  and  non-residential 

buildings 

8  Alternatives to NCC dealing with resilience to extreme weather events 

8.1  Identify alternatives 
8.2  Investigate international responses 

9  Building and Planning working cooperatively 

9.1  Planning and Building  Background 
9.2  Possible improvements 

10  Key messages 

10.1 Summary  of  key  messages  relating  to  ABCBs  position  and  activities  on  resilience  to 

extreme weather events 

Appendix A: ABCB Climate Change Adaptation Roundtable  Conclusions 
Appendix B: ABCB Discussion Paper  Response Form 
 

 

1 

1  Introduction 

Effective resilience to extreme weather events (or extreme climate related natural hazards) 
involves a number of strategies across all levels of government, business and 
communities.  These strategies include consideration of settlements and infrastructure, 
emergency planning and response, insurance, and human health.  For the purpose of this 
paper, consideration is limited to buildings, structures, and plumbing systems, which come 
under the domain of the Australian Building Codes Board (ABCB) and the National 
Construction Code (NCC). 
 
To provide an understanding of what resilience means for the purpose of this paper, the 
following definition contained in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
2012 report Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate 
Change Adaptation1 is useful.   
 
Resilience: The ability of a system and its component parts to anticipate, absorb, 
accommodate, or recover from the effects of a hazardous event in a timely and efficient 
manner, including through ensuring the preservation, restoration, or improvement of its 
essential basic structures and functions. 
 
Not to be confused with property protection as an outright objective, a critical future 
challenge facing the ABCB is ensuring that the NCC contains appropriate standards for 
buildings and plumbing systems to be sufficiently resilient in the face of natural hazards 
affected by extreme weather events, which may change over time.  This is not, however, a 
new concept for the ABCB.  
 
The ABCB's mission, as outlined in the Intergovernment Agreement (IGA)2, references 
sustainability in the design, construction and performance of buildings. In turn this is 
reflected in the NCC requirements for new buildings and plumbing systems to be designed 
and constructed to withstand extreme climate related natural hazard events, including wind 
and cyclones, rainfall, snow, bushfire and flood, as appropriate to their location. 
 
The ABCB has traditionally relied on historic climate and weather data when setting 
standards for the resilience of buildings, structures and plumbing systems facing extreme 
natural hazards and extreme weather events. In addition, the ABCB has promptly 
investigated natural disasters to determine whether the current NCC provisions are 
appropriate and has developed new provisions where required.   
 
Changes to the NCC are subject to compliance with Council of Australian Government 
(COAG) best practice regulatory principles; this includes a cost benefit analysis, regulation 
impact assessment (RIS) and consideration of available data and research.  However, 
more recently the ABCB is seeking to utilise scientifically based climate projections such 
as in its review of wind standards for construction in cyclone affected areas. 
 
Further, the COAG National Adaptation Framework, the 2011 COAG National Strategy for 
Disaster Resilience, as well as the Productivity Commission Report into Barriers to 
Effective Climate Change Adaptation all recommended that the ABCB should continually 

                                                 
1 2012: Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation. A Special Report 
of Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V. Barros, T.F. Stocker, D. 
Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-K. Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and P.M. Midgley 
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, and New York, NY, USA, 582 pp. 
2 http://www.abcb.gov.au/~/media/Files/Download%20Documents/ABCB%20docs/ABCB-2012-IGA.pdf 

2 

monitor climate related hazards and review the NCC to ensure the standards are 
appropriate for the risk environment, taking climate change into account. 
 
The purpose of this paper is to inform stakeholders of the ABCBs preliminary views on 
resilience to extreme weather events, to seek feedback from stakeholders and obtain 
responses to a number of questions to help inform the ABCB on the appropriate way 
forward.  The stakeholder feedback will also assist the development of the final document. 
A Response Form is provided at Appendix B. 

2 

Background 

2.1  ABCB 
The ABCB is a COAG standards writing body that is responsible for the NCC, which 
comprises the Building Code of Australia (BCA) and the Plumbing Code of Australia (PCA) 
(refer Figure 1 which displays the NCC Code Series).  COAG has signalled its intent to 
combine all onsite building regulation into the NCC provided the benefits outweigh the 
costs, with gas and telecommunication regulation currently being assessed and electrical 
likely to be considered in future. 
 

 

Figure 1: National Construction Code (NCC) 
 
The Board is a joint initiative of the Commonwealth, State and Territory governments and 
was established by an IGA signed by the Commonwealth, States and Territories on 1 
March 1994. A new IGA was signed by Ministers, with effect from 30 April 2012. 
 
The Boards mission is to address issues of safety and health, amenity and sustainability 
in the design, construction and performance of buildings. It is also a regulatory reform 
vehicle for COAG. 
 
The Board consists of an independent Chairman, up to five industry representatives, a 
representative of the Commonwealth Government, senior executives responsible for 
building regulatory matters from all State and Territory Governments, and a Local 
Government representative. The ABCB reports directly to the Commonwealth 
Government, State and Territory Ministers responsible for building regulatory matters, and 
provides a vital link for the building industry between building practice and Government 
building regulatory policy (note that reference to building here includes plumbing).  
 
The BCA and PCA are national codes which are developed and maintained by the ABCB 
on behalf of the Commonwealth and the State and Territory governments, who each have 
statutory responsibility for building and plumbing control and regulation within their 
jurisdiction.  Both codes contain the minimum necessary requirements for building 
construction and plumbing in Australia. 

3 

2.2  Policy setting 
There are a number of policy expectations and boundaries placed upon the ABCB that 
impact on the way the ABCB is able to deal with these future challenges. At a national 
level these include: 

  The IGA of 30 April 20123 which provides for the on-going operation of the ABCB 
and which gives expression to the COAG policies for regulation of the design and 
construction of new buildings and new building work.  
  COAG Principles of Best Practice Regulation4 (2007). 
  COAG National Climate Change Adaptation Framework5 (2007). 
  COAG National Strategy for Disaster Resilience6 (2011). 
  Productivity Commission Report - Reform of Building Regulation (2004)7. 
  Productivity Commission Report - Barriers to Effective Climate Change Adaptation 

(2012)8. 

  The policies of different governments. 
  Societal expectations. 
  Availability of data 

One of the main objectives of the ABCB under the IGA is to ensure that the NCC 
requirements are as far as practicable nationally consistent. This does not mean, however, 
that 'one size fits all' because different locations can have geographic, climatic or other 
differences, but the overall risk levels to the community should be reasonably similar. 
 
The IGA and the COAG best practice regulation guidelines require the ABCB to undertake 
a RIS for every significant change to the NCC, which includes an assessment of net 
benefits and costs, and justification for the most appropriate option.  The RIS must be 
cleared by the Government's Office of Best Practice Regulation, which also determines the 
applicable discount rate.  The RIS informs the decision making process of the Board.  
 
A 2009 review for the Commonwealth Government9 found that standards for building 
design and construction do not currently reflect the potential impact of climate change. 
The review recommended that governments and industry be open to the potential to 
reflect climate change adaptation risks within the National Construction Code, where such 
inclusion can be justified in regulation impact statement analysis. 
 
The COAG National Adaptation Framework recommended that the ABCB consider 
climate change as part of periodic reviews of the building code. It proposed that 
information used to determine vulnerability of settlements to climate related hazards (such 
as floods, bushfires, cyclones and coastal inundation) should be reviewed'10. 
 

                                                 
3 http://www.abcb.gov.au/~/media/Files/Download%20Documents/ABCB%20docs/ABCB-2012-IGA.pdf 
4 http://www.finance.gov.au/obpr/docs/COAG_best_practice_guide_2007.pdf 
5 COAG 2007, National Climate Change Adaptation Framework, p.18, Canberra 
6 COAG 2011, National Strategy for Disaster Resilience: Building Our Nations Resilience to Disasters, p.12, Canberra 
7 Productivity Commission 2004, Reform of Building Regulation, Research Report, Productivity Commission, 
November 
8 Productivity Commission 2012, Barriers to Effective Climate Change Adaptation, Report No. 59, Final Inquiry 
Report, Canberra 

9 ACG (Allen Consulting Group) 2009, Review of the Intergovernmental Agreement for the Australian Building Codes 

Board, Final Report, p.iv, March, Canberra. 

10 COAG 2007, National Climate Change Adaptation Framework, p.18, Canberra. 

4 

The 2011 COAG National Strategy for Disaster Resilience established a priority outcome 
that building standards and their implementation are regularly reviewed to ensure they are 
appropriate for the risk environment11. 
 
More recently, the Productivity Commission 2012 Report into Barriers to Effective Climate 
Change Adaptation12  (the Productivity Commission Report) identified regulatory and 
policy barriers to effective climate change adaptation together with high priority reforms to 
address these barriers.   

2.3  ABCB Roundtable 
The ABCB held a Climate Change Adaptation roundtable in Melbourne on 17 April 2013 to 
assist the Board further develop a strategy for improving the resilience of buildings and 
plumbing systems in the face of extreme weather events and a changing climate.   
 
Considerations included natural hazards, energy, water and material use. Fourteen high 
level external stakeholders from industry, research institutions and government also 
attended to inform the discussion. The roundtable outcomes (refer Appendix A) have been 
used to inform the content of this paper. 

Productivity Commission Recommendation to include Climate 

3 
Change Adaptation on ABCB Work Program Work Program 

3.1  Response to Productivity Commission Recommendation regarding 
transparency/identification of climate change related work on the ABCB work 
program 
The Productivity Commission Report into Barriers to Effective Climate Change Adaptation 
acknowledged that the 'ABCB has recently undertaken work to consider the implications of 
climate change for the NCC. This included work on assessing the need to update the NCC 
to reflect the impacts of increased cyclone intensity and floods. The Commission 
acknowledged that ABCB has indicated that it intends to consider climate change impacts 
in its future work.' 
 
The Commission further considered there may be potential to improve the transparency of 
this process. 'In particular, there is currently no publicly available work plan published by 
the ABCB explaining how climate change will be incorporated into the NCC, nor is there a 
formal requirement for the Board to consider climate change in its reviews of the NCC.' 
 
The Commission recommended (Recommendation 10.1): 
 

 

The Council of Australian Governments Building Ministers Forum should provide 
formal direction to the Australian Building Codes Board to: 

o  monitor projections of climate change risks to buildings; and 
o  revise the standards in the National Construction Code to take into account 

these projections where this delivers a net benefit to the community. 
  This body of work should be transparently and formally incorporated in the 

Australian Building Codes Boards annual work programs. 

 

                                                 
11 COAG 2011, National Strategy for Disaster Resilience: Building Our Nations Resilience to Disasters, p.12, 
Canberra. 
12 Productivity Commission 2012, Barriers to Effective Climate Change Adaptation, Report No. 59, Final Inquiry 
Report, Canberra. 
 

5 

The Commonwealth Government's response to Recommendation 10.1 was to note the 
recommendation and agree that managing the risks of climate change to existing 
settlements is a significant issue that requires cross-jurisdictional cooperation and further 
investigation. Early planning will reduce future costs, and there is a clear need for 
community engagement on the acceptable levels of risk for public and private assets. The 
Commonwealth Government also agreed to consult with State and Territory governments 
on the best way to address this issue. 
 
Importantly, the Commission did not identify any barriers preventing the ABCB taking 
climate change into account when amending the NCC.  The Commission considered: 
 

 

The current objectives of the NCC do not restrict building regulators incorporating 
climate change risks into the code. 

  The current process of regulatory impact analysis for changes to the NCC is 

appropriate. 

4 

ABCB Work Program and Adequacy of NCC 

4.1  Climate related natural hazards currently addressed by NCC 
Buildings are currently designed and constructed in accordance with the NCC to withstand 
climate related hazards such as cyclones and extreme winds, intense rain, bushfire, snow 
and flood, as appropriate to their location (refer Figure 2 which displays the ABCB Flood 
Standard and Handbook available on www.abcb.gov.au). These hazards impose loads 
and risks to buildings determined mainly by historic records and post event analysis, from 
which design events with annual probabilities of exceedance are specified.  
 

      

 

Figure 2: ABCB Standard and Handbook for Construction of Buildings in Flood 
Hazard Areas1314 
 
Building standards have undergone constant review, particularly after major hazard events 
and via research, to ensure adequate levels of safety and health are maintained for the 
community. Where the building standards proved to be inadequate, as identified in the 
wake of Cyclone Althea in 1971 and Cyclone Tracy in 1974, they were subsequently 
upgraded (refer Figure 3 for example of damage caused by Cyclone Tracy impacting on 
Darwin).  
 

                                                 
13 http://www.abcb.gov.au/education-events-
resources/publications/~/media/Files/Download%20Documents/Education%20and%20Training/Standards/130214%20
Flood%20Standard_Final%20Combined.ashx 
14 http://www.abcb.gov.au/education-events-
resources/publications/~/media/Files/Download%20Documents/Education%20and%20Training/Handbooks/2012%20F
lood%20handbook%20Third%20Edition.pdf 

6 

 

Figure 3: Example of damage - Cyclone Tracy 
 
These improved standards for high wind design were later demonstrated to be satisfactory 
as evidenced by the small number of building failures resulting from Cyclones Vance, 
which affected northern WA in 1999, and Cyclones Larry and Yasi which affected northern 
Qld in 2006 and 2011 respectively. However, the largest problem identified by recent 
cyclone investigations relates to pre-1980 buildings that were designed in the main to 
lesser standards and which have often been weakened by material degradation and 
inadequate maintenance (refer Figure 4 for example of damage to older housing caused 
by Cyclone Yasi). 
 

 

Figure 4: Example of damage to older house - Cyclone Yasi 
 
As noted in the Productivity Commission Report, the ABCB has undertaken a study into 
the impact of climate change on the BCA15.  The Report finds that by and large, buildings 
designed and constructed in accordance with the current BCA are likely to be reasonably 
adequate for climate related hazards anticipated in 50 years- time, associated with a low 
emissions scenario. If the climate changes in accordance with high emissions scenarios 
however, the current BCA is likely to be deficient in some areas. 
  
Whatever the emission scenario, potential climate change impacts at both a regional and 
national level require constant monitoring and review to ensure the NCC's established 
level of safety is proportional to the likely hazard intensity and resultant risk of damage. 

Financial benefits of natural hazards addressed by the NCC 

4.2 
The fact the NCC currently addresses a number of natural hazards through what have 
been adjudged to be proportional minimum performance requirements, results in both 
significant social benefits and financial benefits for the Australian economy.   
 
                                                 
15 ABCB (Australian Building Codes Board) 2010, An Investigation of Possible Building Code of Australia (BCA) 
Adaptation Measures for Climate Change, December, Canberra. 
 

7 

For example, a report by Risk Frontiers, Macquarie University in December 2007 for the 
ABCB entitled Financial benefits arising from improved wind loading construction 
standards in Tropical-Cyclone prone areas of Australia,16 found that ...the improved 
building standards have been enormously successful with our calculations suggesting that 
they have been responsible for reducing annual average cyclone-related losses by nearly 
two thirds.  The report estimates that this equates to a present value benefit of future loss 
reductions equalling AUD14.2 billion.  It is anticipated that additional significant financial 
benefits will also accumulate from the other natural hazards addressed by the NCC. 

4.3  Hazards not addressed by NCC 
The main objective of the NCC is life safety and not property protection.  However, a level 
of property protection is often achieved as a consequence of addressing life safety. For 
example, a house should be able to provide reasonably safe shelter for occupants during a 
cyclone, bushfire or flood.  In the process of providing safe shelter, the objective is for the 
building to remain intact.   
 
While the bulk of the building may as a consequence be protected, this level of protection 
may not extend to building contents.  For example, during a cyclone or flood, water may 
affect the non-structural elements leading to failure of these elements (e.g. plasterboard 
ceiling or wall linings), which could cause additional contents damage. 
 
The NCC currently does not cover hail, storm tide or have specific requirements relating to 
heat stress.  However, for heat stress, the NCC energy efficiency requirements would 
moderate the impacts of extreme heat within buildings that have been built to 
contemporary energy efficiency standards, resulting in reduced risk of heat stress for 
building occupants. 
 
Some of the largest insurance property losses result from hail damage (e.g. the 1999 
Sydney hailstorm). However, any proposed changes would need to pass regulation impact 
analysis.  It is unlikely it would be cost effective to require all external building materials to 
resist hail impact, taking into account the localised nature of such storms, the cost of 
upgrading or restricting certain building materials, and the low risk to life safety. 
 
Storm tide is potentially a very high risk in low lying coastal communities, especially those 
subject to the risk of cyclones (refer Figure 5 for example of housing impacted by storm 
surge caused by Cyclone Yasi).  However, it would be very costly and restrictive to design 
and construct buildings to resist storm surge because of the significant water forces 
involved.  Restricting development in high hazard areas via planning controls may provide 
a more realistic solution. 
 

Figure 5: Example of storm surge damage Cyclone Yasi 

 

                                                 
16 McAneney, J., Crompton, R., and L. Coates, 2007. Financial benefits arising from improved wind loading 
construction standards in Tropical-Cyclone prone areas of Australia. Risk Frontiers, Macquarie University. Report 
prepared for Australian Building Codes Board.  

8 

  
Nevertheless, taking into account the Productivity Commissions report on Barriers to 
Effective Climate Change Adaptation, the ABCB could include hail, heat waves and storm 
surge in its future work program, undertake investigations of each hazard, develop 
possible solutions and subject them to the RIS process.   
 
It would be unwise to commit to projects of this nature, however, without consulting more 
broadly, establishing an evidence base and better understanding the capacity of the NCC 
to provide meaningful and pragmatic responses.  It is also doubtful, given the current data 
gaps and likely cost implications, that a RIS would provide a net benefit. 
 
Rather than undertake the exercise, it may be more appropriate for the ABCB to monitor 
these hazards, the data and stakeholder views, to determine if and when an investigation 
of any new hazards would be appropriate. 
 
Another possible option is for the ABCB to develop information Handbooks on these 
hazards to provide non-mandatory advice on building solutions to help mitigate these 
hazards. 
 
As mentioned above, recognising the inter-operability of building and planning controls for 
natural hazard mitigation is crucial, not only to ensure the correct geographic locations are 
identified for the application of building standards, but also because the best way to reduce 
risk to life and property is to determine where buildings should or shouldnt be built in the 
first place. 
 
It is also important to note that the vast majority of buildings that are highly exposed to 
natural hazard events already exist.  The NCC does not apply retrospectively unless 
required by State and Territory laws (such as in the case of swimming pool fences). This 
means it will take a long period of time for the existing stock to be replaced or 
incrementally improved as owners undertake renovations that require the building to meet 
the current requirements of the NCC. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

bushfire, flood, cyclone and extreme wind.  What about other hazards 
such as hail and extreme heat? 

achieve the objectives of safety and health, amenity and 
sustainability.  Is this scope reasonable and sufficient enough to 
account for resilience to extreme weather events? 

3. Under the IGA, the NCC must be the minimum necessary to efficiently 

The ABCB is seeking your Feedback on- 
1.

Is the NCC adequate and is the scope reasonable for extreme natural 
hazard events? 

2. The NCC covers most natural hazards affected by climate (i.e. 

 

Impact of climate changes on these hazards 

4.4 
The weight of scientific analysis tells us that our climate is changing and this may impact 
on extreme weather events such as storms, floods and heat waves.  Data is also informing 
us that temperatures are rising and that the impact on rainfall appears more variable 
around the country (refer Figure 6 showing changes in average temperature for Australia 
from 1910-2010).  However, the impact of these changes on extreme natural hazard 
events is not always apparent. 
 
 

9 

 

Figure 6: Changes in average temperature for Australia (Source BoM) 
 
The impact of climate changes on wind and cyclones appears minimal at this stage.  An 
investigation by JDH Consulting in 201117 reviewed recent studies of climate change 
effects on tropical cyclones. The studies indicate that in the Australian region, the total 
number of cyclones has diminished.  However, there is evidence that the number of more 
severe events has increased. Simulations of future climate, with projected increases in 
CO2 concentrations, also predict fewer cyclones, but further increases in more severe 
tropical cyclones.  One of the more significant scenarios is the possibility of a greater risk 
of a severe cyclone affecting South-East Queensland. 
 
The IPCC 2012 Report entitled Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to 
Advance Climate Change Adaptation18 found: 
 
 

It is likely that there will be increasing temperatures, an increasing proportion of total 
rainfall from heavy falls, increasing droughts and sea level rises.  

  A low confidence in any long-term (i.e. 40 years or more) increase in tropical cyclone 
activity (in terms of intensity, frequency, or duration); however it is likely that there will 
be a poleward shift in the tropical storm tracks. 

For bushfires, where the models show an increase in temperature combined with lower 
rainfall as well as longer droughts and lower humidity, an increased risk is likely. 
 
Other implications include: 
 
 

Increased flooding and erosion due to more intense rainfall in places. 
Increased soil moisture variation resulting in greater ground movement which will 
impact on foundations and plumbing services. 
Increased localised hailstorms. 
Increased risk of heat stress and increased energy demand due to longer periods of 
higher temperatures (refer Figure 7 showing an increase in the number of hottest days 
in Australia since the mid 1990s). 

 
 

                                                 
17 JDH Consulting, 2008, Impact of Climate Change on Design Wind Speeds in Cyclonic Regions. 
 
18  

10 

 

Figure 7: Number of hottest-day-of-the-month (highest maximum) records at 43 
Australian climate reference stations (Source BoM) 

4.5  Other impacts on hazard risks 
In addition to the climate change implications for weather affected natural hazards 
impacting on buildings, other significant impacts on potential risk to life and building 
damage include the increasing density of settlements and the increasing dwelling size and 
value. In other words, a greater number of buildings of increasing value are being exposed 
to extreme weather events.  Examples include increased density of settlements on the 
coastlines and river systems of Australia which are exposing a greater number of people 
and buildings to cyclones and other extreme winds, flooding and storm surge (refer Figure 
8 showing increase in development on the Gold Coast from 1950s to present).  Even if the 
risk of extreme weather events does not increase, the greater density and value of 
settlements exposed to these risks will mean that losses of life and property will inevitably 
also increase. 
 

Figure 8: Contrast of Main Beach, Gold Coast, in the 1950s and in more recent 
times (Source Gold Coast Tourism Bureau) 
 

 

Limitations on the NCC to address resilience to extreme weather events 
4.6 
The ABCB are not climate experts.  The ABCB must rely on climate/weather experts to 
provide advice, research and evidence to establish whether and to what extent climate 
changes are impacting on extreme natural hazards and should be taken into account in 
determining the coverage and appropriate risk levels in the NCC.  This must occur in 
conjunction with policy makers having regard to the science and providing strategic 
direction for the Board in undertaking its work. 

 

11 

4.7  ABCB Achievements in 2012-13 
In 2012-13, the ABCB completed a number of projects concerning the adequacy of the 
NCC in relation to natural hazard impacts and extreme weather events. The projects 
include: 
 
  Completion of an assessment of the adequacy of the current cyclonic wind provisions 

taking climate change into account. The final Cyclone RIS is freely available online. 

  ABCB Flood Standard and Information Handbook completed together with an 

associated RIS.  The Flood Standard is referenced in NCC 2013, whilst the Standard, 
Handbook and RIS are freely available online. 

  Natural disasters monitored to determine whether current NCC provisions are 

appropriate. 

  Monitored progress of revised Australian Standards for roller doors; roof tiles; and shed 

design criteria; resulting from the July 2011 Cyclone Yasi investigation. 

  Undertaken research into acceptance criteria for the design and construction of private 

bushfire shelters. 

4.8  ABCB Future Work Program 
The ABCB proposes to undertake several activities in 2013-14 including: 
 
  Developing a discussion paper on resilience to extreme weather events for public 

consideration. 

  Finalising an ABCB policy statement outlining the principles to be used by the ABCB to 
guide its approach to resilience to extreme weather events when considering Proposals 
for Change to the NCC. 

  Reviewing the ABCB's 2010 report on possible NCC adaptation measures to identify 

priority areas for further investigation. 

  Continuing to monitor natural disasters to determine whether the current NCC 

provisions are appropriate. 

  Transparently and formally incorporate the body of work relating to resilience to 

extreme weather events into the ABCB's annual work programs. 
Investigating ways to improve the interaction between planning and building control.  

 

The ABCB has a number of initiatives underway to address the issue of resilience to 
extreme weather events.  As a number of the measures are climate and location 
dependant (e.g. cyclones, flood, bushfire), accordingly there are differing requirements in 
the NCC. 

5 

ABCBs 2010 Report on Climate Change 

5.1  Report Background 
In December 2010, the ABCB Office completed a report titled An Investigation of Possible 
Building Code of Australia Adaptation Measures for Climate Change. The purpose of the 
report  was  to  identify  and  review  the  potential  impacts  of  climate  change  on  the  BCA  to 
contribute to strategic policy development by the ABCB.  
 
The  report  identified  there  is  a  reasonable  level  of  confidence  that  new  buildings 
constructed to the BCA can withstand current climate hazard design events (noting that a 
building  withstanding  all  types  of  events  can  be  guaranteed  and  that  maintenance  is  a 

12 

critical  factor),  and  will  cope  reasonably  well  with  future  events  that  are  slightly  more 
severe  under  a  low  emissions  scenario.  The  largest  concern  is  in  relation  to  existing 
buildings  constructed  prior  to  today's  contemporary  building  standards.  These  buildings 
are  likely  to  be  vulnerable  to  current  climate  hazard  events,  so  would  be  even  more 
vulnerable when faced with the prospect of more severe future events. 
 
The  report  further  identified  that  the  BCA  provisions  affected  by  the  different  climate 
change  scenarios,  such  as  higher  temperatures  and  greater  bushfire  risk,  highlights 
relevant areas of the BCA requiring further investigation, and recommended priority areas 
for consideration. 

5.2  Main findings of the Report 
The  report found that the  main impacts of climate change with implications for Australian 
buildings are: 
 
 
  Adverse  health  effects  on  building  occupants  caused  by  over-heating  due  to  higher 

Increased energy consumption due to higher temperatures. 

temperatures. 
Increased risk of damage from - 

 

o  more intense tropical cyclones, storms and stronger winds. 
o 

increased flooding, inundation, and erosion due to more intense rainfall events, 
sea-level rise and storm surge. 
increased bushfires (refer Figure 9 showing examples of bushfire damage). 
increased hailstorms especially in Sydney. 
increased moisture variation of clay soils resulting in greater ground movement 
impacting on foundations and services. 

o 
o 
o 

 
Under a high emissions scenario, the need for buildings to be more resilient to the impacts 
of climate change becomes more critical because climate related events have the potential 
to be more extreme.  For example, heat stress may become a critical factor impacting on 
public health and wellbeing, which could necessitate significant improvements in building 
passive design and ventilation.   
 
Also,  extreme  sea  level  rise  or  bushfire  risk  could  result  in  significant  relocation  or 
improvements  in  either  protecting  the  buildings  themselves  or  in  creating  protection 
mechanisms  or  buffer  zones.  Therefore,  subject  to  the  availability  of  sufficient  data  to 
justify changes, future editions of the BCA would need to consider these possible impacts. 
 

Figure 9: Example of bushfire damage (Source: istockphoto) 

 

 

13 

5.3  Role of BCA in addressing community resilience to climate change 
The report identified that the role of the BCA is critical in addressing community resilience 
to  climate  change  impacts.    However,  the  report  also  found  that  the  BCA  is  but  one 
component  of  many  which  need  to  interact  successfully  for  the  community  to  be  more 
resilient to the effects of severe climate related hazards. 
 
The factors that ultimately determine community resilience include: 
 
  Appropriate  land  use  planning  controls  to  restrict  or  condition  development  in  areas 
subject  to  high  risk,  such  as  areas  subject  to  flooding,  extreme  bushfire  and  storm 
surge. 

  Appropriate  mitigation  measures  such  as  flood  mitigation  works  and  bushfire  risk 

reduction measures (eg controlled burning). 

  Proportional building standards in the BCA so buildings can be appropriately designed 

and constructed for the likely hazards. 

  Community  awareness,  understanding  and  preparedness  in  the  face  of  climate 

hazards. 

  Effective emergency management response when climate related hazard events occur, 

including recovery planning. 
Insurance to provide a safety net. 

 

Further investigation and research needs 

5.4 
Whilst  acknowledging  that  changes  to  the  BCA  may  be  required  to  respond  to  impacts 
under  a  high  emissions  scenario,  the  report  found  that  without  further  investigation  and 
research  it  is  unlikely  there  would  be  sufficient  justification  to  enable  BCA  changes  that 
would be consistent with the COAG Principles and the IGA. 
 
Potential further investigation and research needs identified in the 2010 ABCB Adaptation 
Report include: 
 
  Review the ability of buildings to cope with increased bushfire risk. 
  Review  BCA  energy  efficiency  provisions  and  other  measures  to  reduce  risk  of  heat 

stress related health impacts on occupants. 

  Review the ability of buildings and structures (particularly roof cladding) and associated 

 

test methods, to cope with higher winds. 
Investigate  the  impact  of  climate  change  on  the  design  annual  probabilities  of 
exceedance  for  climate  related  hazards.    For  example,  to  maintain  the  current  BCA 
requirement  for  housing  to  resist  wind  with  an  annual  probability  of  exceedance  of 
1:500, do the current standards need to be more stringent? 

  Continue  to  monitor  climate  change  information  and  research  to  identify  whether  the 
low  or  high  emissions  case  is  likely,  and  identify  any  new  risks  so  they  can  be 
addressed. 

  Develop a RIS covering the proposals relating to the impact of climate change design 

wind speeds in cyclonic regions. 

  Obtain better data more suited to our use  i.e. climate scientists to develop  probability 
density  functions  (PDFs)  for  all  climate  related  hazards  (not  just  provide  estimates  of 
temperature  and  rainfall,  but  also  cover  hazards  such  as  cyclones  and  other  wind 
events, bushfire, flood, storm surge and hail etc.) for specific regions. 

  Develop  a  Standard  and/or  Guideline  on  flooding,  including  construction  options  to 

minimise flood damage. 

14 

5.5  What has the ABCB done to date in addressing the investigation and 
research needs identified in the 2010 report? 

Review the ability of buildings to cope with increased bushfire risk. 
In NCC 2010, the standards for the construction of buildings in bushfire prone areas were 
updated  to  reflect  the revised  risk  levels  in  the  amended  Australian  Standard  AS 3959   
Construction of buildings in bushfire prone areas. 
 
In  NCC  2011,  new  provisions  were  included  for  Class  10c  private  bushfire  shelters 
associated with Class 1 dwellings.  In addition, the ABCB developed a new performance 
standard  for  private  bushfire  shelters  (refer  Figure  10  which  displays  the  ABCB 
Performance  Standard  for  the  design  and  construction  of  private  bushfire  shelters 
available at www.abcb.gov.au). 
 

 

Figure  10:  ABCB  Performance  Standard  for  the  design  and  construction  of  private 
bushfire shelters19. 

Review BCA energy efficiency provisions and other measures to reduce risk of heat stress related 
health impacts on occupants. 
In NCC 2010, the stringency of the energy efficiency provisions for housing was increased 
to a minimum house energy rating software rating of 6 stars (or equivalent).  This change 
could assist in making houses cooler in summer therefore reducing the risk of heat stress 
for occupants.  

Develop a RIS covering the proposals relating to the impact of climate change design wind 
speeds in cyclonic regions; and review the ability of buildings and structures (particularly roof 
cladding) and associated test methods, to cope with higher winds. 
In  February  2012,  the  ABCB  published  a  Final  RIS  on  a  proposal  to  revise  the  NCC 
requirements  for  construction  in  cyclone  regions.    After  full  investigation  and  careful 
analysis,  the  ABCB  resolved  there  was  insufficient  justification  to  increase  stringency  or 
amend the cyclone region boundaries at this stage. 
 
Other initiatives undertaken to improve the resilience of buildings and structures in the face 
of high winds include revised Australian Standards for wind actions (including new criteria 
for  solar  panels  on  roofs  and  revised  requirements  for  impact  of  wind  borne  debris)  and 
amended standards for roof tiles, garage doors and sheds. 

                                                 
19 http://www.abcb.gov.au/education-events-
resources/publications/~/media/Files/Download%20Documents/Education%20and%20Training/Handbooks/2010_Perf
ormance_Standard_for_PBS.ashx 

15 

Investigate the impact of climate change on the design annual probabilities of exceedance for 
climate related hazards.  For example, to maintain the current BCA requirement for housing to 
resist wind with an annual probability of exceedance of 1:500, do the current standards need to 
be more stringent? 
The ABCB commissioned JDH Consulting to revise an earlier 2008 report on the impact of 
climate  change  on  design  wind  speeds  in  cyclonic  regions.    The  revised  2011  report 
determined  there  is  currently  insufficient  information  and  justification  to  change  design 
wind  speeds 
for  Wind  Actions 
(AS/NZS1170.2) taking into account currently available wind data; recent extreme events, 
such as Cyclone Yasi; and with particular reference to climate change.  

the  Australian  Standard 

in  cyclonic  regions 

in 

Continue to monitor climate change information and research to identify whether the low or 
high emissions case is likely, and identify any new risks so they can be addressed. 
This work is ongoing. 

Obtain better data more suited to our use i.e. climate scientists to develop PDFs for all climate 
related hazards (not just provide estimates of temp, rainfall, but also cover hazards such as 
cyclones and other wind events, bushfire, flood, storm surge, hail etc.) for specific regions. 
The report identified that modelling techniques can be used to assess the potential range 
of climate outcomes based on current understanding. This information can be presented in 
the form of a PDF, where the median has the highest probability of occurring, but where 
there is also a chance of outcomes that are either much more benign, or much more 
damaging.   
 
PDFs have been developed for individual elements such as rainfall and temperature.  
However, it would be of much greater assistance to building regulators if PDFs were 
available for the entire range of climate related hazards including cyclones, floods, 
bushfires, hail and intense rainfall in different regions.  This information would be of 
significant assistance to building regulators in ensuring buildings can be sufficiently 
resilient to the impacts of extreme weather events. 
 
However, the ABCB has limited funds for climate related research so it must rely on work 
undertaken by others and monitor the outcome of this work.  The monitoring is ongoing.   

Develop a Standard and/or Guideline on flooding, including construction options to minimise 
flood damage. 
New performance requirements were included in NCC 2013 to require buildings to resist 
actions associated with a defined flood event if the buildings are located in a flood hazard 
area.  In addition, the ABCB developed a new flood standard which is referenced in NCC 
2013 and is deemed-to-satisfy the performance requirements.  An information handbook 
was also published to provide commentary on the standard and provide additional 
information. 

6 

Impact of NCC changes in short/medium term 

Identify State/Territory triggers regarding work on existing 

6.1 
building/plumbing systems 
The NCC has little impact in the short term in regard to existing buildings. One area of 
work that is already proceeding as part of the ABCBs current study into existing buildings 
is to investigate the State/Territory triggers as to when the NCC is applied to existing 
buildings. The study to date has revealed a reasonable level of consistency in the way 
States and Territories regulate new work on existing buildings or plumbing systems. 
 

16 

In general, where an existing building undergoes a change of use, which would 
necessitate a change of building classification under the NCC, the new use would be 
required to comply with the new classification as if it was a new building.  Most 
administrations permit a level of discretion by the approving body. 
 
Where the new work involves an addition or alteration to an existing building or plumbing 
system the new work would need to comply with the latest NCC provisions.  Again, 
discretion by the approving body may apply. 
 
Most administrations also require existing buildings undergoing alteration or addition to be 
upgraded and brought into total or partial conformity with the BCA under special 
circumstances. A circumstance likely to require this is when the proposed building work, 
together with any other building work completed or authorised within the previous 3 years, 
represents more than half the total volume of the building. 
 
The consequence of the above State/Territory requirements is that the NCC changes take 
significant time to impact on existing buildings and the application of the latest NCC relies 
on the trigger of a change or use, or significant alterations or additions. 
 
This is also an area where information handbooks could have a role. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

annum. It takes a long time for NCC changes to have a meaningful impact 
on a community. Therefore, is the NCC the most realistic means to 
transition building stock for resilience to extreme weather events? 

4. What impact would NCC changes have in the short to medium term? 
5. New buildings account for around 1.8% of total building stock per 

The ABCB is seeking your Feedback on- 

6. The NCC also applies to building and plumbing work in existing 

buildings (subject to State/Territory laws). What effect does this have on 
improving the resilience of a community? 

7. What is the best strategy for upgrading existing buildings to adapt them 

for more extreme weather events? 

 

 

Impediments/limitations on amending the NCC for resilience to 

7 
extreme weather events 

7.1  Need for robust consistent data 
Any changes to the NCC must be evidence-based and cost-effective.  Therefore before 
the NCC can be amended to improve resilience of buildings to extreme weather events, 
robust and consistent data must be available, there must be clear government and 
community support; and evidence available showing the benefits exceed the costs.  While 
these aspects are primarily outside the ABCB's control, it can monitor the information as it 
becomes available.   
 
The ABCB is not a climate expert.  The ABCB must rely on policy makers and 
climate/weather experts to provide advice and robust, consistent research and evidence 
as to whether and to what extent climate changes are affecting extreme natural hazards 

17 

and should be taken into account in determining the coverage and appropriate risk levels 
in the NCC. 

7.2  Government/community support 
The ABCB is established by the Commonwealth, State and Territory Governments via an 
IGA.  The Governments, via the BMF, collectively provide policy direction to the ABCB.  All 
major initiatives, such as reviewing the NCC to improve resilience to extreme weather 
events, must be endorsed by the BMF.  The support of industry and the community are 
also crucial in successfully undertaking significant reforms.  The ABCB already has 
processes in place which ensure high levels of transparency and consultation in 
developing new NCC proposals. 

7.3  Affordability 
The cost of new buildings and housing in particular, is a crucial factor in driving 
affordability.  Increasing the NCC stringency to improve building resilience in the face of 
extreme weather events comes at a cost.  The primary goal is to ensure the benefits of 
any potential change exceed the costs.  Where increased cost is unavoidable because of 
necessary health, safety, amenity or sustainability improvements, the increased costs 
must still be justified in accordance with the COAG best practice regulation guidelines as 
described earlier. 

7.4  Opportunity to differentiate between residential and non-residential 
buildings and new and existing buildings 
One possible opportunity to keep any construction cost increases resulting from improved 
resilience to extreme weather events to a minimum would be to differentiate between 
residential and non-residential buildings to effectively permit different risk levels for these 
building types.  This matter would need to be carefully investigated however, to ensure 
building occupants were still provided with an adequate level of safety. 
 
Another possibility is to restrict the application of more stringent standards that apply to 
new buildings from applying to alterations, additions and changes of use for existing 
buildings.  This would however be a matter for individual States and Territories to 
implement as the ABCB has no jurisdiction in this area. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

existing buildings in order to help lift the resilience of existing buildings 
in vulnerable areas at a lower cost? 
Is the IGA too limiting?  

9.
10. Is there sufficient data/research available to justify NCC changes in 

8. Are there opportunities to differentiate requirements for new and 

The ABCB is seeking your Feedback on- 

accordance with the IGA and COAG Principles of Best Practice 
Regulation? 

11. What is the appropriate discount rate to use (for cost/benefit analysis) 

when assessing draft NCC proposals dealing with resilience to extreme 
weather events? 

18 

Alternatives to NCC dealing with resilience to extreme weather 

8 
events  

Identify alternatives 

8.1 
Most of the alternatives to the NCC (e.g. planning, incentives, market mechanisms, 
insurance) are outside the scope of the ABCB.  In discussion with building regulators from 
other countries, it is apparent that where there are obvious risks that can have a 
quantifiable measure developed for a building to respond to, provisions will be prepared.  
However, they may not be uniformly adopted as they are in Australia given the different 
nature of systems in other countries.   

Investigate international responses 

8.2 
The ABCB proposes to investigate and monitor international responses to resilience to 
extreme weather events in relation to buildings and structures.  The ABCB is a member of 
the Intergovernmental Regulatory Collaboration Committee (IRCC) established to 
harmonise as far as practicable building regulatory structures and processes, and to share 
regulation and standards information. Many of the IRCC members have measures for 
natural hazards, including extreme weather events, however, the approach to the potential 
for change is varied. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

13. Can planning controls effectively address all extreme weather events? 
14. Is the insurance market more efficient at dealing with extreme weather 

16. Is there a role for governments to offer incentives for owners of existing 

15. Is it likely insurance always be available for building owners in high 

buildings to bring them up to a higher standard of resilience? 

The ABCB is seeking your Feedback on- 

12.  Are there more appropriate alternatives to the NCC dealing with 

resilience of buildings and structures for extreme weather events? 

events?  

hazard areas? 

9 

Building and Planning working cooperatively 

9.1  Planning and Building - Background 
Planning control systems determine whether a building can be constructed in an area 
subject to natural hazards or risks and often operate in conjunction with the NCC. 
Examples of these interactions include regulation relating to flooding and bushfires where 
the planning system identifies the extent of the hazard which then triggers the appropriate 
NCC standard. 
 
As the coverage of the NCC moves from the traditional safety and health issues 
associated with building design and construction to sustainability/societal issues such as 
energy, water and access for people with disabilities, the distinction between building and 
planning control systems and other areas of administrative responsibility becomes 
increasingly blurred.  The overlap of local government regulations and the NCC has been 
recognised as an issue by several bodies.    

19 

 
The 2004 PC Report "Reform of Building Regulation' recommended that the future agenda 
for building regulation reform should include examining ways to reduce the scope for the 
inappropriate erosion of national consistency of building regulation by Local Governments 
through their planning approval processes. The report further recommended that the 
ABCB, in consultation with key stakeholders, should examine the possibility of defining a 
clear delineation between those issues to be addressed by planning regulation and those 
issues to be addressed by building regulation. 
 
Some States (e.g. Victoria and Queensland) already have regulations in place (the 
gateway-model), which restricts the ability of local governments to impose requirements 
already regulated through the BCA. The gateway model was agreed to in-principle by the 
Building Ministers Forum in 2008 and is now reflected in the 2012 IGA. 
 
The 2012 Productivity Commission Report Barriers to Effective Climate Change 
Adaptation20 states that in some cases, the vulnerability of people and buildings to climate 
change impacts will depend on how well building standards (which generally control how 
to build) and planning regulations (which generally control where to build) are integrated.  
For example, where planning schemes can identify areas that are bushfire prone and the 
level of bushfire hazard, building regulation can then specify a construction standard for a 
building in a given area to better manage bushfire risk.  
 
The importance of this crossover is recognised in the National Strategy for Disaster 
Resilience which states that: 
 
... the predicted impact of climate change on sea level and the frequency and intensity of 
extreme weather events must be considered in an integrated approach to natural hazards 
in land-use planning schemes, building code standards, and state and territory based 
regulations21.. (Refer Figure 11 showing past and projected global average sea level rise). 
 

 

Figure 11: Past and projected global average sea level (Source: IPCC (2007) 
 
The Productivity Commission Report also states: it is appropriate that the NCC does not 
contain standards to manage some natural hazards which would be better managed by 
the planning system (for example, the current NCC does not contain standards for storm 
surge).  

                                                 
20 Productivity Commission 2012, Barriers to Effective Climate Change Adaptation, Report No. 59, Final Inquiry 
Report, p. 204, Canberra 
21 COAG 2011, National Strategy for Disaster Resilience: Building Our Nations Resilience to Disasters, p.11, 
Canberra. 

20 

 

9.2  Possible improvements 
Although building and planning delineation is now embraced by the IGA there is still a 
need to further refine the building and planning regulatory relationship. A robust system of 
delineation will reduce regulatory duplication and costs to the community. 
 
Unfortunately there is no longer a central body to coordinate national planning matters and 
to provide advice on building/planning delineation resulting in a greater potential for 
regulatory overlap and duplication. Nevertheless, the ABCB will need to engage effectively 
with those State and Territory agencies responsible for land use planning controls to 
improve the current relationship between the two. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17. Are Building and Planning working effectively on this matter? 
18. How can planning and building controls work better together? 
19. Are planning agencies able to adequately identify and map hazard 

areas where building standards can then be applied? 

The ABCB is seeking your Feedback on- 

20. More and more development is occurring in high hazard areas.  

Should such development be discouraged?  If so, how? 

10.  Key messages 

10.1  Summary of key messages relating to ABCBs position and activities on 
resilience to extreme weather events 
The  ABCB  is  committed  to  comprehensively  reviewing  and  considering  the  impacts  of 
extreme  weather  events  in  relation  to  all  relevant  new  regulatory  initiatives  as  outlined 
below in Table 1: ABCB Principles  Catering for Extreme Weather Events. 
 
The ABCB has robust processes in place to ensure the NCC adequately addresses future 
extreme weather events, and that they are continually refined and improved.  All changes 
to the NCC must be evidence based with the problem clearly articulated and the response 
proportional  to  the  issue  being  addressed.  This  is  consistent  with  the  ABCBs  2012  IGA 
obligations and COAG best practice regulatory principles. 
 
The challenges resulting from the potential for increased extreme weather events will in all 
likelihood change the way that many new buildings and plumbing systems are designed 
and constructed to withstand the requirements associated with different locations and to 
meet changing societal demands. 
 
The challenges will also stretch the capacity of the ABCB to maintain national consistency 
and minimum performance standards for new building and plumbing work, whilst ensuring 
the NCC continues to meet its objectives of minimum performance standards for safety 
and health, amenity and sustainability. 
 
In  order  to  better  assess  the  future  impacts  of  extreme  weather  events  on  buildings  and 
plumbing systems, ongoing access to contemporary climate information including research 
and data is imperative.  Additional research and more reliable data is required on specific 
climate  impacts,  such  as  cyclonic  events,  bushfires  and  intense  rainfall,  to  ensure  that 
standards can be adequately reviewed to take account of longer term trends. 
 

21 

The ABCB is not the appropriate organisation to undertake research and collect data of a 
nature  that  predicts  future  weather  events.  Any  research  used  as  a  basis  for  future 
regulation  needs  to  be  robust,  peer-reviewed  and  have  the  support  of  the  scientific 
community. 
 
Finally, the ABCB needs to continually engage with its stakeholders to ensure there are 
ample opportunities for input and to ensure that all potential impacts of proposed changes 
are fully identified and analysed before final decisions are made by the ABCB.  However, 
judging by the ABCBs past achievements in areas including disability access, energy 
efficiency, natural hazard mitigation, health and safety, it is highly likely that the ABCB will 
also deal effectively with the challenges resulting from potential increases in extreme 
weather events. 
 
 

Table 1: ABCB Principles  Catering for Extreme Weather Events 

 
The ABCB commits to the following principles to guide its approach in amending 
the NCC to cater for extreme weather events: 
 
The ABCB will: 
 
  Comprehensively  review  and  consider  the  impacts  of  extreme  weather  events  in 

relation to all relevant new regulatory initiatives. 
 

  Ensure the objectives for the NCC, as detailed in the Intergovernmental Agreement 
which  provides  for  the  operation  of  the  ABCB,  are  achieved  taking  resilience  to 
extreme weather event impacts into account; 
 

  Ensure  compliance  with  the  COAG  Best  Practice  Regulation  Guidelines  and  have 
regard to other relevant COAG initiatives, such as the National Strategy for Disaster 
Resilience, and the National Climate Change Adaptation Framework; 
 
Investigate climate related natural hazard events as they occur to determine whether 
the NCC scope and provisions are adequate; 
 

 

  Monitor  projections  of  extreme  weather  event  risks  to  buildings  and  revise  the 
standards in the NCC to take into account these projections where this delivers a net 
benefit to the community; 

 

  Liaise  with  the  planning,  building,  industry  and  insurance  sectors,  to  improve  the 
relationship  between  building  and  planning  and  to  explore  ways  of  better  defining 
responsibilities, especially in high hazard areas; 
 

  Recognise  that  it  is  appropriate  that  the  NCC  does  not  contain  requirements  to 
manage  natural  hazards  where  these  would  be  better  managed  by  the  planning 
system.    In  these  cases  the  ABCB  will  strive  to  liaise  with  the  planning  sector    to 
ensure that the risks are appropriately managed by the planning system; and 
 
Identify  any  consequential  improvements  to  relevant  Australian  Standards  and 
promote consistency with NCC objectives. 

 

 

22 

References 

 
ABCB (Australian Building Codes Board) 2010, An Investigation of Possible Building Code of Australia (BCA) 
Adaptation Measures for Climate Change, December, Canberra. 
 
ACG (Allen Consulting Group) 2009, Review of the Intergovernmental Agreement for the Australian Building Codes 
Board, Final Report, March, Canberra. 
 
COAG 2007, National Climate Change Adaptation Framework, Canberra. 
 
COAG 2011, National Strategy for Disaster Resilience: Building Our Nations Resilience to Disasters, Canberra. 
 
JDH Consulting, 2008, Impact of Climate Change on Design Wind Speeds in Cyclonic Regions. 
 
McAneney, J., Crompton, R., and L. Coates, 2007. Financial benefits arising from improved wind loading construction 
standards in Tropical-Cyclone prone areas of Australia. Risk Frontiers, Macquarie University. Report prepared for 
Australian Building Codes Board. 
 
Productivity Commission 2004, Reform of Building Regulation, Research Report, Productivity Commission, 
November. 
 
Productivity Commission 2012, Barriers to Effective Climate Change Adaptation, Report No. 59, Final Inquiry Report, 
Canberra. 
 
The International Energy Agency (IEA), REDRAWING THE ENERGY-CLIMATE MAP, World Energy Outlook 
Special Report 10 June 2013. 
 
2012: Managing the Risks of Extreme Events and Disasters to Advance Climate Change Adaptation. A Special Report 
of Working Groups I and II of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V. Barros, T.F. Stocker, D. 
Qin, D.J. Dokken, K.L. Ebi, M.D. Mastrandrea, K.J. Mach, G.-K. Plattner, S.K. Allen, M. Tignor, and P.M. Midgley 
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, and New York, NY, USA, 582 pp. 
 
 
 

 

23 

 
ABCB CLIMATE CHANGE ADAPTATION ROUNDTABLE - CONCLUSIONS 
Held in Melbourne on 17 April 2013 

Appendix A 

Adequacy of the NCC 
Half of the roundtable participants considered the National Construction Code (NCC) is not 
adequate,  taking  into  account  the  Productivity  Commission  report  on  Barriers  to  Climate 
Change  Adaptation.    Potential  areas  of  investigation  include  consideration  of  addressing 
hail, heat waves and storm surge in particular. 
 
The ABCB could include the issues in its work program, undertake investigations of each 
new  hazard,  develop  possible  solutions  and  subject  them  to  the  Regulation  Impact 
Statement (RIS) process.  However, it would be unwise to commit to projects of this nature 
without consulting more broadly, establishing an evidence base and better understanding 
the  capacity  of  the  NCC  to  provide  meaningful  responses.    It  is  also  doubtful,  given  the 
current  data  gaps  and  likely  cost  implications,  that  a  RIS  would  currently  provide  a  net 
benefit. 
 
Rather than undertake the exercise, it is recommended the ABCB monitor the hazards, the 
data  as  it  becomes  available  and  stakeholder  views,  to  determine  if  and  when  an 
investigation of any new hazards would be appropriate. 
 
Another possible option is for the ABCB to develop information handbooks on the hazards 
to  provide  non-mandatory  advice  on  building  solutions  to  mitigate  these  hazards.    This 
would  be  consistent  with  the  ABCBs  strategy  to  promote  good  industry  practice  through 
the development of voluntary tools. 

Impact of NCC changes in the short to medium term 
The  roundtable  acknowledged  that  the  NCC  has  little  impact  in  the  short  term  and  in 
regard to existing buildings. One area of investigation that is already proceeding as part of 
another  ABCB  project  on  existing  buildings  is  to  look  at  the  State/Territory  triggers  as  to 
when the NCC is applied to existing buildings. 
 
This is also an area where information handbooks can have a role. 

Impediments to amending the NCC for climate change adaptation 
The principal impediments to amending the NCC for climate change adaptation are lack of 
robust data, lack of government and community support and affordability.  While these are 
primarily  outside  the  ABCB's  control,  it  can  monitor  the  information  as  it  becomes 
available. 

Alternatives to the NCC dealing with climate change risks 
Most of the NCC alternatives (eg planning, incentives, market mechanisms, insurance) are 
outside  the  scope  of  the  ABCB.    In  discussion  with  International  building  regulators,  it  is 
apparent  that  where  there  are  obvious  risks  that  can  have  a  quantifiable  measure 
developed for a building to respond to, provisions  could be prepared.  However,  in other 
countries  the  measures  may  not  be  uniformly  adopted  as  they  are  in  Australia  given  the 
different  nature  of  their  systems.    It  is  also  clear  that  up  until  now  the  primary  focus  has 
been on mitigation rather than adaptation, and in this respect Australia could consider itself 
pioneering in the area.  Many other countries have measures for natural hazards, but not 
necessarily related to the risk of climate change impacts (eg. seismic). 

24 

Building and Planning working cooperatively 
The  roundtable  identified  an  opportunity  to  re-establish  the  Building/Planning  Working 
Group or a similar forum with industry and insurance also invited to participate, to improve 
the  relationship  between  building  and  planning  and  to  reduce  the  risk  of  inappropriate 
development in high hazard areas. 
 
 

 

25 

 

 

Appendix B 

ABCB Discussion Paper Response Form 

Resilience of Buildings to Extreme Weather Events 

 
Name of person responding:................................................................................................ 
Organisation (if applicable):............................................................................................... 
Email address:................................................................................................................ 
Please send completed Response Form to resilience@abcb.gov.au by 1 July 2014. 
 
Question: 

Response: 

 
Any additional comment: 
.......................................................................................................................................... 
................................................................................................................................. 
................................................................................................................................. 

Thank you for your input. 

26 

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

