PHYSICAL REVIEW E 66, 035101~R! ~2002!

Email networks and the spread of computer viruses

RAPID COMMUNICATIONS

M. E. J. Newman,1 Stephanie Forrest,1,2 and Justin Balthrop2

1Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Road, Santa Fe, New Mexico 87501

2Department of Computer Science, University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, New Mexico 87131-1386

~Received 2 July 2002; published 10 September 2002!

Many computer viruses spread via electronic mail, making use of computer users email address books as a
source for email addresses of new victims. These address books form a directed social network of connections
between individuals over which the virus spreads. Here we investigate empirically the structure of this network
using data drawn from a large computer installation, and discuss the implications of this structure for the
understanding and prevention of computer virus epidemics.

DOI: 10.1103/PhysRevE.66.035101

PACS number~s!: 89.75.Hc, 89.20.Hh, 87.23.Ge, 87.19.Xx

The structure of various networks, including social and
computer networks, has been a subject of considerable recent
interest in the physics literature @1,2#. The spread of infection
is an area of special interest @36#, including the spread of
human diseases and also computer viruses @7,8#, which are
the topic of this paper. We present an empirical analysis of
the networks over which computer viruses spread and study
some possible control strategies for preventing virus infec-
tions.

Currently, the primary vehicle for transmission of com-
puter viruses is electronic mail. Viruses typically arrive on a
computer as an attachment to an email message, which,
when activated by the user, sends further copies of itself to
other recipients. The email addresses of these other recipi-
ents are usually obtained by examining an email address
book, a file in which the user for convenience stores the
email addresses of his or her regular correspondents. As
pointed out by Lloyd and May @5#, these address books cre-
ate a network of computer users over which the virus
spreads. One can visualize this network as a set of nodes
representing computer users, with a link running from user A
to user B if Bs email address appears in As address book.
This network is entirely distinct from the physical network of
optical fibers and other connections over which data are
transferred between computers @21#. The network over which
an email virus spreads is a social network of personal con-
nections between computer users. If we are to understand the
mechanisms by which viruses spread, we need to understand
first the structure of this social network.

We have analyzed address book data in 20 common for-
mats, gathered from a large university computer system serv-
ing 27 841 users, and thereby reconstructed the correspond-
ing network of computer users. Because email viruses can
only be transmitted if computer users actually read their
email, all data were discarded for users who had not read
their email in the previous 90 days, leaving a total of 16 881
in the network.

The network necessarily omits any connections from the
outside world to users inside the network, since there is no
way to find out about such connections other than by collect-
ing data from external users. A similar issue arises in studies
of the structure of the Worldwide web, in which hyperlinks
to a website from other sites cannot easily be discovered.
Connections to users from outside the observed network are

important because it is presumably along these connections
that viral infection initially arrives. Thus our data can tell us
about the spread of viruses within a community, but not
about how those viruses arrive in the first place. From a
practical standpoint, however, there is little that computer
system administrators can do to control the spread of a virus
in the world at large. Consequently, their efforts are usually
focused on minimizing damage once the infection enters the
computer system for which they have responsibility. For this
reason, we have also eliminated from our network all con-
nections to users outside the network, which are many, leav-
ing a network composed only of those connections that fall
within the set of users studied.

An important property of our email network is that it is
directed. That is, each edge ~i.e., line! joining two vertices in
the network has a direction. Just because Bs email address
appears in As address book does not necessarily mean that
the reverse is also true, although, as we will see, it often is.
The directed nature of the network makes the spread of email
viruses qualitatively different from the spread of human dis-
eases, for which most types of disease-causing contacts are
undirected. As we will see, there are a variety of interesting
phenomena that are peculiar to the spread of infection on a
directed network.

Table I provides a summary of the statistical properties of
our email network. In the remainder of this paper we discuss

TABLE I. Summary of statistical properties of the email net-

work.

Number of vertices
Number with address books
Number with nonzero in- or out-degrees
Mean number of entries per address book
Mean degree z ~either in or out!
Correlation coeff. of in- and out-degrees

Clustering coefficient
Expected clustering on random graph

Total number of edges
Number of edges that point both ways
Fraction pointing both ways ~reciprocity!
Expected reciprocity on random graph

16881
4581
10110
12.45
3.38
0.529

0.168
0.017

57029
13176
0.231
0.00095

1063-651X/2002/66~3!/035101~4!/$20.00

66 035101-1

2002 The American Physical Society

NEWMAN, FORREST, AND BALTHROP

PHYSICAL REVIEW E 66, 035101~R! ~2002!

RAPID COMMUNICATIONS

ponential in models with sublinear preferential attachment
@13#. Thus the observed distributions would probably be well
fit by a growth model in which the source of added edges
was chosen according to a sublinear preferential attachment
and the destination at random. This seems reasonable: it is
natural to suppose that individuals who already have large
address books would be more likely to add to them than
individuals who do not, but it is not clear if there is any
mechanism that would favor making new connections to in-
dividuals with a high in-degree.

Regardless of the precise degree distribution, however, it
is clear that there are a few vertices in the network that have
a very high degree. This has important implications for the
spread of infection in the network @4,14,15#, a point which
we discuss further below.

The in- and out-degrees of a vertex are not necessarily
independent, but may be correlated ~or anticorrelated!, and
one should therefore really consider a joint distribution p jk
of in-degree j and out-degree k @16#. Although this quantity is
difficult to represent visually, one can get an idea of the level
of correlation between in- and out-degrees by calculating a
correlation coefficient for the two, given by r5(( jk jkp jk
2z 2)/(sinsout), where sin and sout are the corresponding
standard deviations. This quantity takes values in the range
21<r<1, depending on the level of correlation. For our
network, we find its value to be r50.53, indicating that the
two degrees are strongly correlatedthe email addresses of
individuals who have large address books tend to appear in
the address books of many others.

Another important statistical property peculiar to directed
networks is the reciprocity @17#. Reciprocity measures the
fraction of edges between vertices that point both ways. In
the network studied here, the reciprocity is about 0.23, i.e., if
there is an edge pointing from vertex A to vertex B, then
there is a 23% probability that there will also be an edge
from B to A. We can also calculate the reciprocity on a ran-
dom network, and in terms of the joint degree distribution
p jk defined above, we find that
the expected value is
(nz) 21( jk jkp jk , which gives 9.4931024 for the present
network, several orders of magnitude smaller than the ob-
served value. This strongly suggests that the observed value
is not the result of a pure chance association of vertices. Very
likely we are observing social phenomena at workthere is
a heightened chance that you will have a person in your
address book if they have you in theirs, presumably because
the presence of a persons address in an address book implies
some kind of social connection between the two people in
question, which in many cases goes both ways.

Bidirectional edges can be thought of as undirected, and
the email network can be thought of as a semidirected net-
work, a graph in which some edges are directed and others
are undirected. ~Technically one might define a semidirected
network as one in which the reciprocity does not tend to zero
as n becomes large, but instead tends to a nonzero constant
value.! It seems likely that many other real-world networks
that are formally directed networks are in fact really semidi-
rected. For example, we have calculated the reciprocity for a
269 504-vertex subset of the Worldwide web @10#, which is a
directed network of web pages and hyperlinks, and found a

FIG. 1. In- and out-degree distributions for our network. The
solid lines represent fits to the exponential and stretched exponen-
tial forms discussed in the text.

in detail the network structure and its implications for virus
spread.

The first thing we notice about our network is that quite a
small fraction of the 16 000 vertices actually have address
booksaround a quarter @22#. However, a majority of the
vertices in the network are nonetheless connected to one an-
other, by edges leading either in or out of the vertex, or both.
About 10 000 vertices, or 59%, are connected to others and
therefore are at risk of either receiving or passing on virus
infections.

The mean degree z of a vertex is 3.38. ~Recall that the
degree of a vertex is the number of edges to which it is
connected.! In a directed network such as this one, vertices
have both an in-degree and an out-degree. The means of
these numbers are the same, since every edge that begins at a
vertex must end at some other vertex. Thus z is both the
mean in- and out-degree. As a rough rule of thumb, viruses
spread when the mean out-degree of a vertex is greater than
1, since in this regime each infection received by a computer
is on average passed on to more than one other computer.
Thus it appears that our network of computer users is easily
dense enough to spread infection.

Also of interest is the distribution of vertex degrees. In
Fig. 1 we show cumulative histograms of in- and out-degrees
for our network. Both distributions are markedly faster de-
caying than the power-law degree distributions seen in other
technological networks such as the Internet @9# and the
Worldwide web @10,11#. In fact, as the figure shows, the
cumulative distributions are well fit by a simple exponential
for the in-degree and a stretched exponential with exponent
1
2 for the out-degree. These correspond to noncumulative dis-
tributions
p k
;(1/Ak)exp(2Ak/k 0) for the out-degree with j 058.57(9)
and k 054.18(3). ~Free fits to stretched exponential forms
give values of 1.034 and 0.493 for the two exponents, very
2 assumed here.! Interestingly,
close to the values of 1 and 1
both these degree distributions are known to occur in certain
models of growing networksthe pure exponential in mod-
els with random edge assignment @12# and the stretched ex-

p j;exp(2j/j0)

in-degree

for

the

and

035101-2

EMAIL NETWORKS AND THE SPREAD OF COMPUTER VIRUSES

PHYSICAL REVIEW E 66, 035101~R! ~2002!

RAPID COMMUNICATIONS

FIG. 2. The structure and relative sizes of the components of our

email network.

value of 0.57, where the expected value on the correspond-
ing random graph would be 1.231024, indicating that the
Web is probably also a semidirected graph.

We turn now to the specific issue of the spread of com-
puter virus infections over email networks. A virtue of the
approach taken here is that, since we have the entire network
available, we can study infection dynamics directly without
relying on approximate techniques such as differential equa-
tion models, statistical deduction, or computer simulation, as
in most studies of human diseases. Here we make the most
pessimistic assumption about email viruses, that they spread
with essentially 100% efficiency. That is, we assume that
they ruthlessly send copies of themselves to everyone listed
in an address book, and that no recipients are immune to
viruses because of antivirus software or other precautions.
~The real-world situation is unlikely to be this bad; our cal-
culations give a worst-case scenario.!

Consider then an email network of the type studied here.
Since the network is directed, there does not necessarily exist
a path that could carry a virus from vertex A to vertex B,
even if A and B are connected by edges in the network, since
the virus can, in general, only pass one way along each edge.
The large-scale structure of a directed network can be repre-
sented by the bowtie diagram of Broder et al. @11# de-
picted in Fig. 2. A strongly connected component of the net-
work is defined to be any subset of vertices in which every
vertex can be reached from every other. Typically the net-
work has one giant strongly connected component ~GSCC!
which contains a significant fraction of the entire network, as
well as a number of smaller strongly connected components.
The GSCC is represented by the circular middle part of the
bowtie in the figure. Then there is a giant in-component,
which comprises the GSCC plus those vertices from which
the GSCC can be reached but which cannot themselves be
reached from the GSCC. We can think of the latter set as
being the vertices upstream of the GSCC. They are repre-
sented by the left part of the bowtie. There is also a giant
out-component consisting of the GSCC plus downstream
vertices ~the right part of the bowtie!. In addition, there may
be small groups of vertices that are connected to the giant
components but are not part of them ~sometimes called ten-

FIG. 3. The maximum outbreak size on our network, as vertices
in the giant in-component are progressively removed either at ran-
dom ~dotted line! or in decreasing order of their out-degree ~solid
line!.

drils! or that are not connected to the giant components at
all. For our email network, the sizes of these various portions
are given in Fig. 2. As we can see, the bowtie is in this case
quite asymmetric, with many more vertices downstream of
the GSCC than upstream of it. Most of the downstream ver-
tices are vertices that have a zero out-degree themselves ~i.e.,
no address book! but which are pointed to by members of the
GSCC.

We can apply these insights to the spread of email viruses
as follows. We concentrate on the giant components; infec-
tions in the small components will not spread to the popula-
tion at largeit is the giant component that is responsible for
large-scale virus epidemics. A virus outbreak that starts with
a single vertex will become an epidemic if and only if that
vertex falls in the giant in-component. The number of verti-
ces infected in such an epidemic ~making the pessimistic
assumptions above! is equal at least to the size of the giant
out-component. It may be slightly larger than this if the epi-
demic starts in the region upstream of the GSCC and thus
affects some vertices there also. For the particular case of our
network, we find that epidemics have a minimum size of
9108 vertices and a maximum size of 9132, which means
that about 54% of the network is at risk from epidemic out-
breaks.

So how can we prevent these epidemics or reduce their
size? Current virus prevention strategies correspond essen-
tially to random vaccination of computers using antivirus
software @23#. Our network data however suggest that this is
an ineffective way of combating infection. In Fig. 3 we show
~dotted line! the maximum possible outbreak size in our net-
work as vertices are removed at random from the network.
As the figure shows,
the outbreak size drops only very
slowly as vertices are removed, a result similar to that seen in
other networks @14,18,19#.

On the other hand, previous work on other networks has
shown that often a very effective strategy is targeted removal
of vertices, i.e., identification and removal of the vertices
most responsible for the spread of infection. For undirected
networks, simply removing the vertices with the highest de-
gree often works well @11,18,19#. A similar but slightly more

035101-3

RAPID COMMUNICATIONS

NEWMAN, FORREST, AND BALTHROP

PHYSICAL REVIEW E 66, 035101~R! ~2002!

sophisticated strategy looks promising in the present case. In
Fig. 3 ~solid line!, we show the result of removing vertices
from the giant in-component of our network in decreasing
order of the out-degree ~i.e., of address book size!. As the
figure shows, the maximum size of the epidemic in this case
declines sharply as vertices are removed, until about the 10%
mark, beyond which the epidemic is negligibly small and
further removal achieves little. This suggests that if we can
protect a suitably selected 10% of the vertices in the net-
work, almost all vertices would become immune to an epi-
demic.

In this paper, we have analyzed data on the structure of
the network formed by the email address books of computer
users; it is over this network that email viruses spread. We
have simulated the effect on virus propagation of both ran-
dom and targeted vaccination of vertices and find that ran-
dom vaccination, which is roughly equivalent to current an-
tivirus precautions, is expected to have little effect on virus
spread. Targeted vaccination, on the other hand, looks much
more promising. This suggests that we should be developing
virus control strategies that take network structure into ac-
count. Similar concepts could also be used to identify high-
risk vertices in the network and determine priority orderings
for security upgrades. Because it is often infeasible to up-
grade all hosts in a network simultaneously ~especially if the

upgrades require hardware modifications!, and because up-
grades are routine and continual, such a strategy could yield
a substantial benefit in terms of reduced network vulnerabili-
ties. For environments that use centralized and well-
protected address books ~e.g., to store addresses of interest to
an entire community!, the kind of analysis performed here
could potentially be useful in analyzing and managing the
trade-offs between local and centralized address books. For
example, how large can a locally stored address book grow
before it becomes worthwhile to accord it the same protec-
tions and restrictions as centralized databases?

The ideas considered here may also be applicable to other
social networks that are exploitable by computer viruses or
worms. Email networks are the most obvious example of
such a network today, but other electronic services give rise
to social networks as well. The techniques employed in our
analysis of email networks could readily be applied in some
of these new settings, and more speculatively, might be use-
ful as a guide for engineering new network services in the
future.

The authors thank Jeff Gassaway and George Kelbley for
providing the data used for the analyses in this paper. This
work was supported in part by the Office of Naval Research,
the NSF, DARPA, and by the Intel Corporation.

@1# R. Albert and A.-L. Baraba si, Rev. Mod. Phys. 74, 47 ~2002!.
@2# S.N. Dorogovtsev and J.F.F. Mendes, Adv. Phys. 51, 1079

~2002!.

@3# C. Moore and M.E.J. Newman, Phys. Rev. E 61, 5678 ~2000!.
@4# R. Pastor-Satorras and A. Vespignani, Phys. Rev. Lett. 86,

3200 ~2001!.

@5# A.L. Lloyd and R.M. May, Science 292, 1316 ~2001!.
@6# D.J. Watts, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A. 99, 5766 ~2002!.
@7# W.H. Murray, Computers and Security 7, 139 ~1988!.
@8# J.O. Kephart, S.R. White, and D.M. Chess, IEEE Spectrum 30,

20 ~1993!.

@15# F. Liljeros, C.R. Edling, L.A.N. Amaral, H.E. Stanley, and Y.

A  berg, Nature ~London! 411, 907 ~2001!.

@16# M.E.J. Newman, S.H. Strogatz, and D.J. Watts, Phys. Rev. E

64, 026118 ~2001!.

@17# S. Wasserman and K. Faust, Social Network Analysis ~Cam-

bridge University Press, Cambridge, 1994!.

@18# R. Albert, H. Jeong, and A.-L. Baraba si, Nature ~London! 406,

378 ~2000!.

@19# D.S. Callaway, M.E.J. Newman, S.H. Strogatz, and D.J. Watts,

Phys. Rev. Lett. 85, 5468 ~2000!.
and

@20# H. Ebel, L.-I. Mielsch,

S. Bornholdt,

e-print

@9# M. Faloutsos, P. Faloutsos, and C. Faloutsos, Comput. Com-

cond-mat/0201476.

mun. Rev. 29, 251 ~1999!.

@10# R. Albert, H. Jeong, and A.-L. Baraba si, Nature ~London! 401,

130 ~1999!.

@11# A. Broder, R. Kumar, F. Maghoul, P. Raghavan, S. Rajago-
palan, R. Stata, A. Tomkins, and J. Wiener, Comput. Netw. 33,
309 ~2000!.

@12# D.S. Callaway, J.E. Hopcroft, J.M. Kleinberg, M.E.J. New-

man, and S.H. Strogatz, Phys. Rev. E 64, 041902 ~2001!.

@13# P.L. Krapivsky, S. Redner, and F. Leyvraz, Phys. Rev. Lett. 85,

4629 ~2000!.

@14# R. Cohen, K. Erez, D. ben-Avraham, and S. Havlin, Phys. Rev.

Lett. 85, 4626 ~2000!.

@21# It is important also to distinguish between the network de-
scribed here and networks of actual email messages passing
between computer users, which have been studied previously
by, for example, Ebel et al. @20#. While the latter network is
certainly of use in understanding patterns of communication
between computer users, it is only indirectly relevant to virus
spread, since most email messages do not carry viruses.

@22# This is a lower bound. Although data were collected for a wide
variety of address book formats, there are probably still some
that were missed.

@23# One should bear in mind that antivirus software works only on

known viruses, not new or unknown strains.

035101-4

