This book is a collection of essays from artists, designers, 
psychogeographers, cultural researchers, futurologists and 
neuroscientists brought together by christian nold to explore 
the political, social and cultural implications of visualising 
peoples intimate biometric data and emotions using technology. 

WWW.EMOTIONALCARTOGRAPHY.NET 

ISBN 978-0-9557623-1-4

edited by christian nold
www.softhook.com

designed by daniela boraschi 
www.danielaboraschi.com 

This book was funded through a SCIART Research 
& Development Award from the Wellcome Trust 
www.wellcome.ac.uk/arts and supported by SPACE 

the book is available for free download from:
www.emotionalcartography.net

ISBN 978-0-9557623-1-4SB

the essays by dr. stephen boyd davis, sophie hope 
and dr. tom stafford were specially commissioned 
for this book. 

published under a CREATIVE COMMONS  
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 LICENSE 
excluding the made to measure essay which is 
copyright raqs media.  

many thanks to: daniela boraschi, prof. john 
gruzelier, heather corcoran, raqs media collective, 
sophie hope, dr. tom stafford, dr. stephen boyd davis, 
rob van kranenburg, marcel van der drift, jim prevett, 
meroe candy, marie-lise sheppard, tony steffert,  
dr. beau lotto, dr. joydeep bhattacharya and prof. 
hugo critchley.

contents

introduction:
emotional cartography
technologies of the self
christian nold 
machines made to measure: on the 
technology of identity and the 
manufacture of difference
raqs media collective 
a future love story
marcel van der drift 

san francisco emotion map
christian nold 

mapping the unseen: making sense 
of the subjective image  
dr. stephen boyd davis

stockport emotion map
christian nold 

blanquis parade
rob van kranenburg

greenwich emotion map
christian nold 

socially engaged art: the  
conscience of urban development
sophie hope

brentford biopsy
christian nold 

hacking our tools for thought
dr. tom stafford 

1

3

15

27

33

39

53

60

63

68

83

88

introduction:

emotional cartography 

technologies of the self

Christian Nold

This book is a collection of essays from artists, psychogeographers, 
designers, cultural researchers, futurologists and neuroscientists, brought 
together to explore the political, social and cultural implications of 
visualising peoples intimate biometric data and emotions using technology. 
The book is the outcome of a research process which aimed to reach 
a deeper understanding of a project called Bio Mapping, which since 2004, 
has involved thousands of participants in over 16 different countries. 
Bio Mapping emerged as a critical reaction towards the currently dominant 
concept of pervasive technology, which aims for computer intelligence to 
be integrated everywhere, including our everyday lives and even bodies. 
The Bio Mapping project investigates the implications of creating 
technologies that can record, visualise and share with each other our 
intimate body-states.
              To practically explore this subject, I invented and built the 
Bio Mapping device, which is a portable and wearable tool recording data 
from two technologies: a simple biometric sensor measuring Galvanic Skin 
Response and a Global Positioning System (GPS). The bio-sensor, which 
is based on a lie-detector, measures changes in the sweat level of the 
wearers fingers. The assumption is that these changes are an indication 
of emotional intensity. The GPS part of the device also allows us to record 
the geographical location of the wearer anywhere in the world and pinpoint 

 The Bio Mapping device: GPS - left, fingercuffs - top and data logger on the right.

2

3

where that person is when these emotional changes occur. This data can 
then be visualised in geographical mapping software such as Google Earth. 
The result is that the wearers journey becomes viewable as a visual track 
on a map, whose height indicates the level of physiological arousal 
at that particular  moment. The Bio Mapping tool is therefore a unique 
device linking together the personal and intimate with the outer space of 
satellites orbiting around the Earth. The device appears to offer the colossal 
possibility of being able to record a persons emotional state anywhere in 
the world, in the form of an Emotional Map.
            People who actually wore the device and tried it out while going for 
a walk and then saw their own personal emotion map visualised afterwards, 
were baffled and amazed. But their positive reactions hardly compared 
to the huge global newspaper and TV network attention that followed the 
launch of the project. People approached me with a bewildering array of 
commercial applications: estate agents in California wanting an insight into 
the geographical distribution of desire; car companies wanting to look at 
drivers stress, doctors trying to re-design their medical offices, as well as 
advertising agencies wanting to emotionally re-brand whole cities. Other 
emails arrived from academic sociologists, geographers, futurologists, 
economists, artists, architects and many urban planners, trying to get new 
mental insights into their own disciplines. Surprisingly, there were also 
intensely personal emails from people who wanted to understand their own 
body and mind in more detail, asking for a therapeutic device to monitor 
their daily anxiety levels.
            I was shocked: my device, or more correctly, the idea or fantasy of 
my device had struck a particular 21st century zeitgeist. A huge range of 
people had imagined ways of applying the concept, some of which I felt 
uncomfortable about. I realised that Mapping Emotions had become 
a meme that was not mine anymore, but one that I had merely borrowed 
temporarily from the global unconscious. Faced with some dramatic 
choices, I decided to try to establish and document my own vision of 
emotion mapping as a reflexive and participatory methodology.

from device to methodology

From talking with people who tried out the device, I was struck by their 
detailed and personal interpretations of their bio-data. Often we would 
sit next to each other and look at their track together. While I would see 
just a fairly random spiky trail, they saw an intimate document of their 
journey, and recounted events which encompassed the full breadth of life: 
precarious traffic crossings, encounters with friends, meeting people they 
fancied, or the nervousness of walking past the house of an ex-partner. 
Sometimes people who walked along the same path would have spikes 
at different points, with one commenting on the smells of rotting ships, 
while another being distracted by the CCTV cameras. People were using 
the Emotion Map as an embodied memory-trigger for recounting events 
that were personally significant for them. Sometimes these descriptions 
overlapped, while at other times they were unique. For them, the spikes 
were documenting not what we would commonly call emotion, but 
actually a variety of different sensations in relation to the external 
environment such as awareness, sensory perception and surprise. 
I suddenly saw the importance of people interpreting their own raw 
bio-data for themselves. 
              Bio Mapping functions as a total inversion of the lie-detector, which 
supposes that the body tells the truth, while we lie with our spoken words. 
With Bio Mapping, peoples interpretation and public discussion of their 
own data becomes the true and meaningful record of their experience. 
Talking about their body data in this way, they are generating a new type of 
knowledge combining objective biometric data and geographical position, 
with the subjective story as a new kind of psychogeography. 
              Participants often describe the sensation of using the Bio Mapping 
tool as a kind of Reality TV show, where they can see their own life 
documented in front of them. Such a description suggests something similar 
to Berthold Brechts notion of Verfremdung (de-familiarisation). Brechts 
idea is that this performative distancing allows the viewer to take a critical 

4

5

distance on viewed events. In the case of Bio Mapping, the participants are 
vocalising their intimate internal mental life as well as public behaviour to 
a communal group. In effect, the participants are carrying out a type of 
co-storytelling with the technology, that allows them to creatively disclose, 
or omit, as much as they like of what happened during their walks. 
The Bio Mapping tool therefore acts as performative technology which 
shoulders the burden of having to hold the publics attention, while offering 
a safe distance from public exposure to the interpreter. Used in this way, 
the tool allows people who have never met each other to tell elaborate 
descriptions of their own experiences, as well their opinions on the local 
neighbourhood, in a way that they would have never done otherwise.
            This vision of Bio Mapping as a performative tool which mediates 
relationships is very different to the fantasy of Emotion Mapping that 
many people approached me about: such as marketeers intentions to 
metaphorically slice peoples heads open to see their innermost feelings 
and desires. 
            With the passing of the time, I started to realise that both 
the particular context and ways in which a biometric sensor is used 
drammatically affects the social relationships that are formed, as well as the 
types of observations that people make during the workshop.  
            The early Bio Mapping workshops had all taken place in art galleries 
in the centres of towns and cities. People often walked randomly for 30 
minutes before returning to the exhibition to see their emotion maps. 
In such context, the kind of descriptions and annotations that people left 
were mainly anecdotal: drank a coke here, had an ice cream there, was 
spooked by pigeons etc. 
            Once I started to work with local community organisations for longer 
periods of time and in less central towns areas, where people lived in and 
cared about (and not just worked or shopped), the annotations changed 
dramatically. Instead of being just about their momentary sensations in the 
space, participants told stories that intermingled their lives with the place, 
local history and politics. The discussions often followed a trajectory of 

noticing the bodily effect of car traffic on one persons emotion map, often  
leading to discussing the lack of public space and identifying its social 
and poltical causes. This process of scaling-up and seeking connections 
between issues encouraged people to talk both personally and politically in 
a way they had often not done before with other local people.                
             At the end of each Bio Mapping workshops project, all the 
information and data gathered were designed into a printed map, which 
was then distributed for free in the locality. For example, in the Greenwich 
Emotion Map, this meant using a GIS (Geographical Information Systems) 
software to create a communal arousal surface which blended together 80 
peoples arousal data and annotations. The resulting communal emotion 
surface is a conceptual challenge and question. Can we really blend 
together our emotions and experiences to construct a totally shared vision 
of place? 

introduction to the essays

The theme of this collection of essays is to investigate the apparent 
desire for technologies of Emotion Mapping, using a variety of different 
approaches. In addition to the essays, interspersed throughout the book, 
are the images of the printed Emotion Maps as well as photos of the 
participatory process. The aim being that this combination of practice and 
theory will allow us to imagine the social, economic, cultural and political 
implications of creating a public Emotional Cartography. 
              Looming heavily over the idea of being able to see what people 
think and feel, is the spectre of social and mind control. The text Machines 
made to Measure by the Raqs Media Collective examines a history of 
biometric technologies as tools of state control, that rewrite our notions of 
self. For them, mapping the body is the first step in its governance, and 
in the subjugation of its boundaries to regulation and control. Their essay 
highlights an important duality in the way biometric technologies are used. 

6

7

The first tends towards an aggregation of peoples bio-data and 
a search for communal averages and patterns as in anthropometrics or 
racial profiling. The second attempts to identify and track the unique 
individual via technologies such as fingerprinting. Raqs do suggest that 
people posses a natural left-hand knowledge that allows them to structure 
new identities:
            What the technologies of identification do not take into account, 
however, is the ability of a person to enact different iterations of the self... 
a hyperlinking of aspects of being - an expanding and cross referencing 
matrix of acts, attributes and attitudes that constitute the database of 
a persons becoming over time.
            This concept of a personal database of our own future possibilities is 
an alluring alternative vision for technology that resonates with Bio Mapping 
and runs counter to the way biometric technologies are currently being 
thought about. 
            Marcel van der Drift, in the text A Future Love Story extends this 
vision towards a not too distant future, where mobile phones sense and 
log our emotional state, sending the information to other peoples phones. 
In this world, self-reflection on ones emotional behaviour is almost 
universally enforced by a mixture of technology, design and social peer 
pressure. The central question that emerges from the story is 
a question of choice. Who will interpret all these huge amounts of 
body/emotion data? Will it be interpretation software, other peoples 
reactions or our conscious mind? The chocolate box ending of the story 
suggests a willing rejection of technology in favour of pure and unmediated 
human experience. Nevertheless, in my mind, the uncomfortable suspicion 
arises that, once introduced, people may not be allowed to or actually want 
to live without these gadgets.
            Mapping the Unseen by Dr. Stephen Boyd Davis examines a history 
of maps that emphasise the interpretative and subjective aspects of 
mapmaking. His approach suggests that while we may not be aware of it, 
we are already used to working with psychogeographical maps. Boyd Davis 

suggests that this drive towards the subjective image leads to interactive 
technical systems. His articulation of an Egocentric Subjectivity, where 
the individual user is in total charge of generating his own map of the 
surrounding world, is a succinct summary of the current paradigm of 
technology design. For Boyd Davis, rather than self-reflection, biometric 
data enables reflection-in-action, which suggest a human-machine 
feedback loop of people integrating with technical systems. In this 
technophilic vision of individualistic interactivity, how can we imagine 
shared social space emerging where people develop new social relations?  
              In Blanquis Parade, Rob van Kranenburg offers a complex allegory 
for the multiplicity of a social space where different groups of people can 
be simultaneously carrying out divergent agendas. His text suggests the 
importance and power of subtlety, ambiguity and subterfuge in communal 
social behaviour. For a keen observer, small perceptual shifts can suddenly 
and dramatically alter our experience of an event and our own role 
within that.
              The essay Socially Engaged Art by Sophie Hope moves the focus 
away from a purely theoretical speculation, to look at an applied example 
of the Bio Mapping project being used by a local community in Greenwich, 
London. To understand the project, Sophie unpacks the complicated 
political contexts that this participatory art project operates within. She 
analyses the project by establishing categories of participatory tactics that 
artists have evolved in order to try and break through paternalistic and 
top-down relationships with local audiences. Sophie identifies Bio Mapping 
as adopting a deliberately schizophrenic tactic of (F)utility, that tantalises 
with easy disclosure while offering dynamic complexity. Her articulation of 
(F)utility suggests a constructively agonistic tactic that challenges the full 
range of participants and stakeholders involved in socially engaged 
art project.
              Tom Staffords concluding essay Hacking Our Tools for Thought 
offers us a vision of the mind as flexible and naturally tool-using. Starting 
from the example of a patient who has lost his long-term memory, Stafford 

8

9

articulates a perspective of the modular brain that can have parts removed 
and still manage to function, and an extended mind, which can have parts 
added integrate them into the flow of thought. Stafford proposes that the 
mind can have the Bio Mapping component added to enhance communal 
self reflection and turn us into social cyborgs. He rejects the egocentric 
individualistic notion of the mind and proposes Bio Mapping as a vision of 
future social tools that can empower us to move away from the individual 
brain towards communal mind hacks and a radical rethinking of self.
            As a conclusion, it comes natural to ask and reflect on what will be 
the future of Emotional Cartography. Will it become mind control, mobile 
phones, interactive maps, revolution, public consultation or 
brain augmentation? But, perhaps, the most important aspect of Emotional 
Cartography is the way in which it creates a tangible vision of places as 
a dense multiplicity of personal sensations, which we are not normally 
aware of. The complexity and diversity of these experiences presents 
a fundamental challenge to all our formal notions of representational 
politics. Furthermore, the bottom-up process of identifying communal 
matters of concern, starting from personal sensations, suggests the 
possibility of an alternative body politic of place. 
  

about the editor

Christian Nold is an artist, designer and educator who works with people 
to create new models for communal representation. In 2001 he wrote the 
book Mobile Vulgus, which examined the history of the political crowd and 
which set the direction for his research into participatory mapping. Since 
graduating from the Royal College of Art in 2004, he has taught and lectured 
extensively whilst running large scale research projects across the world. 

Two participants from an early Bio Mapping workshop and exhibition, at the Angel 
Row Gallery in Nottingham in 2005.

10

11

Communal workshop at Independent Photography for the Greenwich Emotion Map 
2005 - 2006.

Typical visulisation of Bio Mapping data shown in Google Earth. The height of the 
track indicates the physiological arousal at that point. The annotation was made by
the participant.

12

13

machines made to measure: on 

the technology of identity and 

the manufacture of difference 

raqs media collective

Editors Note: this text is an extract from the essay Machines Made to Measure: 
On the Technology of Identity and the Manufacture of Difference, published in 
Sarai Reader 04, (2004) and Leonardo Electronic Almanac, Volume 11, number 11, 
November 2003. Due to brevity, the section titled Identity and Difference has been 
ommited from this version of the text but can be viewed in full on the Sarai website.

...We may classify human beings and human features but cannot bring 
about or find a precise agreement between any two; we have white men, 
red men and yellow men; we have well ascertained and defined types 
of humanity; we have in each type classifications of hair, eyes, noses, 
mouths and so on; but we have a large residue of difference between any 
two individuals and so on; but a large residue of difference between any 
two individuals remains as it were a recurring decimal which cannot be 
distinguished; the difference between each human face and every other 
of its species. Upon which evidence of identity has been always so firmly 
rested can be easily observed, but it cannot be specifically and completely 
isolated. We know that it is there, but we cannot in any case completely 
define the details. But in the case of finger impressions, there is no question 
of dealing with those evanescent expressions which so largely contribute 
towards recognition of the identity of the human face. "e exact differences 
in such impressions may be pointed out with as much certainty as the 
differences between the maps of two countries...  [ 1 ] .

A modern lie detector, combining sensors for breathing rate across the chest, blood 
pressure on the arm and galvanic skin response on the fingers.

14

15

bodies and maps

Images of human beings construct a map of the world. Even the judgement 
in a criminal case has to rely on the metaphor of the difference between 
the maps of two countries when talking about the difference between two 
impressions of the ridges and whorls at the fingertips of two human beings. 
As if the body were a territory, and its features possible to render as lines, 
ridges and whorls on a map. As if the body were a territory, the mapping of 
which would be the first step in its governance, and in the subjugation of its 
boundaries to regulation and control. Images of human beings, like maps of 
the world, locate like and unlike, near and far, familiar and strange. These 
categories, which are premised in the sense of what we see as being similar 
or different to who we are, or where we stand - on our sense of orientation. 
It is through these that power creates the binaries needed to inscribe in our 
minds its map of the world.
            When this happens, images of the body (or of clusters of bodies) can 
become weapons of offence, and the instruments of a siege. They can be 
used to maim or injure, or imprison. No war or skirmish (local or global) is 
fought without its own arsenal of images. Images are endowed with the 
ability to create proximities and distances that can impel or sanitize acts 
of violence. Consider the aerial photograph used to identify targets for 
bombardment in cities, or the identikit photograph of the Wanted person 
that often sticks to the walls of cities. Both kinds of images carry with them 
the charge of an anticipated act of violence, a bombing, an imprisonment, 
perhaps an execution. Both act as indexes, as maps, as locators of targets, 
and as the means to zero in on them. They are both navigation aids for 
missiles in the mind, and the radar that locates the enemy for the eye.
            Consider the image of the typical other, the one who renders 
a distance between anyone we say is like us and anyone we are 
accustomed to thinking of as unlike us. At its barest, it is a measurement 
of the distance - between us, and those we are mobilized to think of as 
being different, or exotic, or banal, or inferior, or superior, subhuman, or 

superhuman in relation to us. At its barest, this is what the issue of identity 
and difference are about.

the measure of man

In a photograph taken in the year 1876, forty-six men, women and children, 
aboriginal inhabitants of the Andaman Islands (an archipelago off the south 
east coast of India), are portrayed arrayed about a single measuring rod. 
The rod, at the very centre of the image, stands in relation to the people 
about it as a scale would to features on a map, or a silhouetted, stylized 
human figure would to an architects drawing of a building. Perhaps, 
more crucially, the rod can be read as an indexical allegory, or as a barely 
concealed code inscribed into the image that ironically points to an imputed 
and immeasurable distance that separates the photographed from the 
photographer, or, man from his measure  [ 2 ].
              The photograph, titled simply and prosaically, as Andamanese 
Group with Measuring Rod, is one of a series of images taken by Ernest 
Horace Man, as part of his project to study Andamanese aboriginals, then 
considered to be a pure primitive race in serious danger of extinction. 
E.H. Mans copious photographic record paved the way for an intense 
process of the scrutiny of the bodies of living and dead Andamanese (which 
lasted through to the early years of the twentieth century, and which 
continues, somewhat erratically till today). They were photographed against 
anthropometric grids, clothed as well as naked, their skulls were measured 
with calipers, and their nostrils, ears, eye sockets, buttocks and hair were 
measured and tabulated on cross indexed tables. The photographs, which 
were circulated as ethnographic studies, images in travelogues, items in 
popular encyclopaedias and museum catalogues, illustrations in missionary 
literature and as pornographic curiosities, continued to have a career well 
into the late twentieth century.
            The measurements and images harvested from the Andamanese 

16

17

were worked on to compute statistical averages  means and medians that 
could then express the idea of what an average Andamanese might be.
            This in turn could then be taken to express the identity of the 
Andamanese, a figure that could substitute a mathematical metaphor 
for the inconvenient tendency of the individual human body to exhibit 
variation. The figure of the measure of the average Andamanese 
(expressed through calculations, or through photographic composites)
was then something that could be compared to other averages to 
create clusters of information about niches within the social spectrum. 
Photographic composites of Andamanese skulls, for instance, were mapped 
on to composites consisting of the images of the skulls of Irish indigents, 
prostitutes, convicts and the criminal insane. Finally, there were more 
photographs and measurements than there were people. The Andamanese 
became more data and less a living community of human beings. It could 
be said that the technology that indexed their identity and hence their 
difference to those who did the indexing also measured out the terms of 
their subtraction from life, until they remained only as the ghostly prisoners 
of photographic negatives in the collections of anthropological museums 
and archives. The measure of man in the end became a calculus of 
cadavers  a detail in the arithmetic of violence of the nineteenth century.

the smear of truth

If Anthropometry sought to compute an average that flattened differences 
in the name of a composite image of an identity, then Fingerprinting, 
another way of reading the body for signs of identity, sought to locate and 
fix the individual as a unique and unvarying entity  [ 3 ]. Nineteenth century 
India, which was one of the greatest anthropometric field laboratories in 
the world, was also the prime experimental site for the development of 
technologies for registering and interpreting fingerprints, and the rise of 
fingerprinting as a precise forensic science. From the pioneering usage of 

fingerprints as identity markers in land records in the village of Jangipur 
in the Maldah district of Bengal by James William Herschel in 1858, to 
Francis Galtons enthusiastic anthropometric endorsements of Herschels 
experiments, to the systematization of forensic fingerprinting (along 
with Bertillonage or anthropometric measurements after the manner of 
Alphonse Bertillon) by Sir Edward Henry, Azizul Haque and Hem Chandra 
Bose of the Bengal Police in 1897, created a rich body of knowledge about 
the principles that animated technologies of identification. In a sense, 
the techniques of ruling through information that were perfected in the 
colonies, were then exported to the metropoles, and thereafter became 
generalized as the standard technologies for the affixture of identity and 
the recognition of difference that we have come to know today on a global 
scale. Had the early experiments with anthropometric image-making not 
been undertaken in remote parts of the world, or the intense desire to 
read the smears of fingertips as markers of truth not taken root in the 
minds of colonial administrators in rural Bengal, the techniques of 
biometric identification and surveillance that we have become familiar
with in recent years all over the world would not have had such a smooth 
and untrammelled career as the necessary exigencies of power, articulated 
as knowledge in and about bodies, read as maps, and subjugated as 
conquered territories.
              It is important to understand that this anxiety to produce certainties 
about identity emerged from a deep cognitive gulf that separated power 
from its objects in colonial Bengal. To the rulers of the day, the natives 
they governed, were infamously disingenuous. Their un-veracity and the 
desire to confuse those who ruled them was a matter of great concern to 
administrators, judges, prison authorities and even to those assigned with 
the tasks of collecting taxes and revenue. Thomas Babington Macaulay 
once famously remarked, with some exasperation and considerable 
rhetorical flourish: What horns are to the buffalo, what the paw is to 
the tiger, what the sting is to the bee, what beauty, according to old Greek 
song, is to woman, deceit is to the Bengalee. Large promises, smooth 

18

19

excuses, elaborate tissues of circumstantial falsehood, chicanery, perjury, 
forgery, are the weapons, offensive and defensive, of the inhabitants of 
the lower Ganges....
            It was against these weapons, this modest arsenal (deceit, 
circumstantial falsehood, chicanery, perjury, forgery) of everyday 
insurgencies in the offices, courts and corridors of power that the emergent 
colonial state invested into the development of an armoury for ascertaining 
identities and recognizing differences. That this project of ascertaining who 
was what took place at the broadly anthropological level (as in the case 
of the Andamanese, and many other ethnic groups spread across the 
South Asian landmass) as well as the microscopically forensic level (as in 
the case of the Bengali peasant) tells us about the scope and pervasiveness 
of this anxiety.

the inextinguishable 
recurring decimal

It is difficult to imagine why or when and under which circumstances one 
would like to yield a complete transparency about oneself to the scrutinizing 
apparatus of power. However, the increasingly fraught operation of power 
in society requires the harnessing of exponentially amplified means of 
visualizing us as transparent vessels of bodies of data. This means that 
the slightest shadow, the smallest reticence or hesitation in yielding the 
substance of our selves, and the iteration of our selves through actions, 
encounters and interactions with others, is liable in many places today 
to be read as deceit, circumstantial falsehood, chicanery, perjury and 
forgery. This is the means by which the true test of citizenship is not a level 
of commitment to and participation in the polis, but the degree to which 
the subject is prepared to make him or herself known to the state. This 
votive offering of knowledge about ourselves to the guardians in power then 
guarantees us a place in the polis, and a certainty that we are what the state 

says we are, and distinct from those aliens that it seeks to protect us from.
              In an early book of the Mahabharata, one of the great epics in the 
Indic tradition, Ekalavya, an aboriginal teenager, is found copying and 
practicing the education being imparted to the Aryan warrior princes, the 
Pandavas, the protagonists of the narrative. Their teacher and guardian, 
who is concerned that Ekalavya has greater mastery over the art of archery 
than his favourite pupil  the Pandava prince Arjun - demands of Ekalavya 
his right thumb as Guru Dakshina (a gift that every pupil must make to his 
teacher on the completion of his education).
              Ekalavya, bound as he is by the protocols and codes that govern 
the transmission of knowledge in society, cuts off his thumb (the one with 
which he grips the bowstring) and offers it to the guardian. The subaltern 
exchanges his mastery of archery for the knowledge that the warriors 
will always be different from him, and that it is his identity as a lowborn 
aboriginal that will underwrite this difference. The difference will locate him, 
as well as them, in the places assigned to them by the guardians of social 
order, and his bloodied thumb seals the terms of this inexorable contract.
             The subaltern Ekalavyas bloodied thumb (the first demand for a digit 
as a mark of identity) remains with us as a resonant smear of the truth of 
power. Ekalavyas thumb, which guided his grip over the bowstring, can be 
seen as symbolic place holder for the inextinguishable recurring decimal, 
which makes the low born aboriginal teenager similar to the warrior 
princes by the same logic that makes all human beings similar or different 
from other human beings  their individuality. It is that complex interplay 
between their genetic inheritance, their social experiences and environment 
and their specific desires. The rounding off of this digit, this inextinguishable 
recurring decimal to the nearest available whole integer, marks the identity 
of the subaltern, and the clear difference of the subaltern from the prince. 
The bloodied smear of the truth produced by the apparatus of identification 
tells Ekalavya, overriding all ambiguities, who he is, who he is not, and 
what he never can hope to be. A technology of location, registration and 
the production of knowledge, does successfully extinguish the obstinate 

20

21

recurring decimal. The digit is cleaved from the body, and Ekalavya, like all 
of us when we give up all our digits to the state, loses the means and the 
skills acquired with effort to defend himself.
            What the technologies of identification do not take into account, 
however, is the ability of a person to enact different iterations of the self. 
Crucially, this means that the story of personhood, and the narratives of 
identity that gather around a person, are material available for constant 
re-fashioning. It means that the question of identity can also give rise to 
a hyperlinking of aspects of being - an expanding and cross referencing 
matrix of acts, attributes and attitudes that constitute the database of 
a persons becoming over time. Thus, even if Ekalvyas amputated right 
thumb is an emblem of the way in which a discourse of power wishes 
to reduce his identity, it cannot guarantee that Ekalavya, in some other 
narration of his story, may not decide to learn to use his left hand.
            The identity of Ekalavya, then, is something that emerges from the 
relationship of two kinds or enactments of selfhood. It is something that 
bridges the person whose right thumb got cut off and the person who 
decided to learn to use his left hand, and cultivate a left-handed knowledge 
of the world. The inextinguishable recurring decimal by its very nature 
resists being rounded off to the nearest whole number, and continues its 
fractal dance on the adding machine. 
            Ekalavyas effort with his left hand, may give rise to speculations 
in some quarters about the distance between the original and the 
counterfeit Ekalavya  the first, the devoted disciple willing to efface 
himself out of deference to the knowledgeable guardian, and the second, 
the one who goes against the moral of the story and rises above or beyond 
his station to be something or somebody he never should have been. This 
is not to say that the fake Ekalavya, who keeps the label of his name but 
changes the content of his person, does not have an identity. However, 
this identity is something that he fashions, taking something from a story 
already told about him and something from a story yet to be told, in such 
a way that it is impossible to construct a hierarchy of veracity. What he 

is, what he is reduced to, what he desires and what he becomes, are 
impossible to place along a graduated scale of more and less truth. They tell 
different truths about the different acts of personhood that are possible to 
imagine on the ground of Ekalavya.

ekalavyas left hand

In these random reflections, we have tried to sketch an itinerary that moves 
from a set of fading photographs in the basements of archives, to the 
thumbprints on a ledger of landholdings, to a strange story about a bloodied 
thumb. These digressions have been a way for us to think about the present 
we find ourselves in. A climate of paranoia about national security has 
made it possible for key factions within the Indian state to argue for the 
creation of a nationwide citizens identification database tied to a system 
of smart cards containing biometric data about every legal Indian citizen. 
This apparatus, which is being touted as the solution to all problems ranging 
from terrorism to the crisis of identities within contemporary India, is in our 
eyes the worthy inheritor of the legacy that produced Ekalavyas thumb in 
mythic antiquity, the measuring rod amidst the Andamanese in 1862, the 
fingerprints of the peasants of Jangipur in Bengal in 1858, and the system 
devised by Henry, Haque and Bose of the Bengal Police in 1897. In a single 
digital move it is able to forge a solution to the problem of identity that 
bridges the realities of the twenty first century, the history of the colonial 
era, and an ancient fable.
             A continuous state of emergency (what Agamben has characterized 
as the state of exception peculiar to our contemporary reality) produces 
its own specific sense of fatigue  an exhaustion that comes from remaining 
alert to yielding oneself up to acts of random or routine scrutiny. This 
wakefulness and watchfulness, this baleful insomniac rendition of the self 
into units of meaningful information, is the unexamined personal collateral 
damage of the rise of a global apparatus of interlocking security and 

22

23

notes

[ 1 ]   Emp. Sahdeo, V.S.; in Aiyer, K. J.(1949) Law and Practice of Evidence in 
Criminal Cases in India and Pakistan. Allahabad {p.461}.
  
[ 2 ]   For a detailed discussion of the history of Anthropometric Photography 
in the Andaman Islands, and in India in general,  
 See Pinney, C. (1997) Stern Fidelity and Penetrating Certainty; in Camera 
Indica. Reaktion Press, London.
- See Edwards, E. Science Visualized: E.H. Man in the Andaman Islands.
- See Pinney, C. The Parallel Histories of Anthropology and Photography; 
in Edwards, E. (ed.) (1992) Anthropology and Photography 18601920; 
Yale University Press, New Haven and London, in association with the Royal 
Anthropological Institute, London.

[ 3 ]   For a history of fingerprinting in India, see Sengoopta, C. (2003) Imprint 
of the Raj; Macmillan, London.

surveillance systems.
            For some time now, many parts of the world, particularly those that 
are governed by the imperatives of the global war against terrorism, have 
learnt to live with a state of emergency, a moderate intensity level of panic 
and anxiety that makes the predatory excesses of the scrutinizing eye seem 
banal by the mere fact of exhausting repetition. And so, we succumb. We do 
so not only at airports and border posts, but also at workplaces and public 
spaces in large cities the world over, to routine and random searches of our 
persons, to scans, registrations, surveillance and recordings of the traces of 
our actions, our encounters with others, our presences and transiences, our 
itineraries, purchases and decisions, our intimacies and our public acts, our 
utterances and our secrets, our habits and our desires - the minutiae of all 
our lives.
            We see surveillance, particularly new technologies such as facial 
recognition, retinal tracing and biometric scanning, as performing 
a similar set of operations to those undertaken by early anthropometry and 
fingerprinting. The body as data is also put to analogous uses, especially for 
racial profiling at airports and other transit points, just as anthropometric 
photographs were used to substantiate elaborate theories of racial typage. 
The intensive application of surveillance technologies at public places, 
work, and even in the home or in the private sphere leads to a monitoring 
of thought and affect to a degree that suggests that we can now begin to 
speak tentatively of an anthropometry of the soul.

about the authors

Raqs is a collective of media practitioners that works in new media & digital 
art practice, documentary film-making, photography, media theory and 
research, writing, criticism and curation.

24

25

This image shows all the participants tracks and annotations of the Greenwich 
Emotion Map.

a future

love

story

marcel van der drift

Twenty years from now, a cell phone gently sinks to the bottom of the river. 
Its one of the latest models. The clever design, trendy colours and nifty 
features make our cell phones look ancient. Everything about it is new. 
Cell phone isnt even the right name for it. Its hard to describe exactly what 
it is. So I wont.
              Anyway, this phone, for lack of a better word, belongs to Steve, who 
is on the bridge, feeling generally depressed, but for the moment happy to 
be rid of his phone. It was a powerful gesture. Steve got wired up only half 
a year ago, after everyone else had been wired up for years.
              People used to ask: Are you wired up ? That question was soon 
followed by: Why arent you wired up ? Are you religious ? Arent you 
curious ? They looked at him suspiciously and you could hear them think: 
He must be suppressing something. Definitely some sort of denial. 
Getting wired up means having all sorts of sensors either implanted or 
attached to your clothes.
              Theyre connected to your cell phone to monitor heart rate, 
temperature, the sound of your voice, the position of shoulders, hands and 
feet, chemicals in the blood and what not. These sensors have been around
for decades, even small portable ones. Their first use was medical: 

26

27

monitoring health and medication, correcting bad posture and 
compensating all sorts of disabilities. They had also been used successfully 
in psychology: monitoring body language, metabolism and chemicals in 
the brain. Data was gathered from many patients over time, giving new 
insights into psychological disorders. But it only took off when some clever 
marketing guy, later to become yet another trillionaire, realized their 
combined potential for the consumer market. When people started using 
their game consoles to train their memories and concentration, he thought: 
Maybe theyd like to know about their emotions. By then, sensors 
and software could read people like a book. This marketing whiz quickly 
teamed up with academic researchers and major producers of sensors. 
And suddenly there was this huge company selling insight, one-ness and 
emotional connectivity. It started an industry of self-reflection, mood 
blogging, mood matching, real-time automated flirt coaching and some 
embarrassing employment relation strategies
            Steve, however, was reluctant. He didnt need any software to tell 
him how he felt. He was depressed. Three years after losing his job as 
a garbage collector to some smart-ass system, he was definitely depressed. 
But he was determined to handle it on his own, as he always had. Then 
Steve got even more depressed. When he finally decided to get help, he 
skipped the on-line forums and arranged a face-to-face talk with an old 
fashioned trained expert: R.L. Steinberg, MD, psychiatrist. Doctor Steinbergs 
first question to Steve was: Are you wired up ?. No, Im not,  he sighed.
Is there any particular reason youre not wired up ?.  At this point he used 
to express his concern about privacy and security, but that argument didnt 
seem to convince anyone anymore. I dont need it. I know how I feel.
I see. Of course self-reflection is the best tool. And Im sure we can 
understand your situation by discussing it here. But some data would 
be very useful. You see, the way we see ourselves is often different from 
the way we actually behave. When a child is frustrated, it doesnt say 

Im frustrated. It just starts kicking things over. It needs to be taught 
then and there, by adults who understand this behavior, that what he is 
feeling is frustration and it can be expressed in different ways. Even adults 
have difficulty understanding their emotions at some point in their lives. 
They mostly need feedback from others, but they also gain insight into 
themselves from a higher perspective, so to say, from objective long-term 
observation of their behavior. Its no magic, but a useful tool. I see. 
I suggest you get wired up without any interpretation software. Youll 
just get the sensors and leave the rest to me. All that software just 
oversimplifies everything anyway. We can look at some of the data during 
our meetings, if need be.
              So Steve got wired up. He met doctor Steinberg every Tuesday and 
promised to follow his advice on exercise, sleep, diet, etc. But he couldnt 
get himself to actually do all those things. The meetings with doctor 
Steinberg, who confronted him with data to prove his lack of motivation, 
got more and more embarrassing. Eventually he stopped seeing him.
Instead, he downloaded the latest interpretation software. During the 
installation he opted for brutally honest instead of constructive or 
positive. Now he wasnt depressed. He was lethargic, unconcentrated 
and easily agitated. So be it,  he thought to himself as he scrolled through 
the diagnosis on his cell phone. It also said hungry. Am I hungry ? Well, 
come to think of it, I am. And he told his phone Id like to order 
a chicken curry, anywhere.  It replied Chicken curry has been ordered at 
Phonsawan, located ten minutes from here.  His left shoe started vibrating, 
so he turned left. As he walked to Phonsawan restaurant for the first time 
in his life, he thought: Funny how quickly you get used to this stuff. Three 
months ago, when my shoes first started vibrating, my first impulse was 
to kick them off. Now Im not even aware of them. I just turn left or right 
because thats where I need to go. He read somewhere that shopping 
malls are installing vibrating floors just to lure customers into expensive 

28

29

stores. He even checked to see if it was a hoax. One site strongly denied 
these claims, but it seemed to be sponsored by the same shopping mall. 
That didnt have to mean anything though, because those ads are placed 
anywhere automatically, or so he thought. He didnt feel like digging any 
deeper. True or not, he decided vibrating floors in shopping malls were 
very unlikely. Right then, both his shoes vibrated shortly, indicating he had 
arrived at the restaurant, just as planned. He wasnt at some expensive 
store and this somehow proved his point.
            The rest of the evening was spent eating curry, staring at the 
waitress, ordering beer, staring at the waitress and ordering one or two 
more beers while staring at the waitress. In the end Steve felt better than 
after any meeting with doctor Steinberg. As he walked out of the restaurant 
to cheerfully follow his good vibrations home, he felt the urge to check 
his mood on his cell phone. Happy it said. Thats right, he thought, 
I know it. I feel it. Who needs these gadgets. More details it said. Ok 
then, get me the details. A warning screen appeared. He clicked ok and 
read: Happy, intoxicated, consumed too many saturated fats, sexually 
aroused. I beg your pardon ?.  Steve asked, clicking on. Repeated sexual 
response when in contact with female x.  Up came a chart showing his 
hormones, blood pressure, some correction for the influence of alcohol and 
this female x. He clicked on, passed some warning screens about revealing 
his identity and requesting information from other people. Then it said: 
Annoyed. Im not annoyed, am I ? Just curious. The next click made it all 
too clear. There was the picture of female x, the waitress from Phonsawan 
restaurant: Tired, embarrassed and annoyed when in contact with Steve 
Smith. Steve felt a dark, numbing heaviness come over him. Thats how 
she saw me. And thats what I am. Annoying.  He stood still, ignoring the 
vibrations in his feet. Thats what I am,  he repeated, as he slowly fiddled 
with his cell phone. Connection terminated. He sank to the ground as he 
realized what had just happened. He had asked the waitress what she really 
felt for him. She must have read his request and thought What a creep. 
She had rejected him. Slumped on the pavement, he slowly clicked Exit 

until the main menu appeared. Current mood: depressed. Some time 
passed. Steve still felt depressed and rejected, as he suddenly stood up and 
told his phone Take me to the highest public area nearby. His right shoe 
vibrated and off he went. This was an old habit. At times when he was most 
down, hed wander through the city, late at night, looking for certain places. 
Places he could jump from. Not that he ever actually did. He knew he never 
would. But just standing there, on the edge, feeling the wind, having the 
option to jump, somehow everything made sense to him. He was aware, 
awake, charged, relieved, comforted, everything. No software would make 
any sense of it, but that was how he was.
              He felt determined as he walked toward the city centre, even though 
he didnt know where he was going. Being guided by vibrations in his shoes 
was a little different from the old, long walks to nowhere, but he went with 
it. It was cold and windy at the bridge. Perfect. Walking toward the middle, 
he started wondering how he felt. Was he relieved? Comforted? That was 
when he decided to chuck his cell phone in the river. He swung his arm 
backward, which was interpreted as Greatly surprised, and he flung his 
cell phone as far as he could. It was a powerful gesture. The device made 
a disappointingly small splash, but Steve was relieved. I am relieved, he 
thought, Definitely relieved. His cell phone slowly sank deeper and deeper 
to the bottom, still giving off a blue glow. It silently landed right next to 
another cell phone, which also gave off a blue glow.
             This second cell phone belongs to Sandy, who is also on the bridge 
at this very moment, feeling both depressed and relieved. As she climbs the 
railing to look down at the water, she notices Steve, balancing on the railing, 
walking slowly towards her. Meanwhile, at the bottom of the river, their 
phones are frantically trying to interpret their increased heart rate and 
a sudden surge of dopamine.

30

31

about the author

Marcel van der Drift is an artist/programmer working on storytelling, 
co-creation and community sites.

The images on the next few pages are all from the San Francisco Emotion Map, 2007. 
The images show the final printed map as well as documentation from the process of 
working with people to gather the biodata. 

32

33

34

36

 
 
 

 

 

mapping the unseen:

making sense of 

the subjective image

stephen boyd davis

It used to be thought that photography, as a kind of automatic mapping, 
could provide an objective view of the world. Now we are aware of the 
power of framing and other interventions between what is out there 
and what is captured in depiction. Perhaps even perception, let alone 
depiction, shares this subjectivity ? The Sapir-Whorf hypothesis holds that 
different cultures actually see the world in different ways, as evidenced 
and influenced by concepts in their languages  though this idea has been 
derided, for example by Pinker (Sapir 1924, 1949; Whorf 1956; Pinker 1994:62). A key 
difficulty is that the word subjectivity is bandied about without care for its 
different meanings and without distinguishing the many forms it takes in 
the graphic image. If into this muddle we introduce the idea of interactivity, 
still greater confusion could follow. What follows is a way of bringing some 
order to different kinds and levels of subjectivity by documenting how they 
are reflected in forms of graphical mapping. In the process, it will become 
clear how significant is the change in media technologies from those bound 
by the conventional rectangles of the page and screen to media which are 
interactive, pervasive, multimodal, physical and social. 
 

38

39

interpretation and subjective mapping

Geographic maps often appear to be among the more objective kinds of 
graphics. We think of them as representing in a rather direct way something 
in the world. However, as semioticians from Pierce and Saussure onwards 
have pointed out, words, maps or even pictures do not represent things, 
but shared ideas of things. Even so, the very form of a map, with its way 
of viewing the world from an equal distance above all places, seems to 
carry a sense of objectivity. Contrast this with the strongly located stance 
of a perspective view: in such a view it is obvious that we are looking at 
one viewpoint  literally and perhaps metaphorically  onto a scene. It is a 
place seen by an observer, while a map shows a place that seems to exist 
independently of being looked at. 
             Despite their apparent message of objectivity, maps select and 
even distort, because maps, like all images, are made for purposes, and 
those purposes influence the final form (Boyd Davis 2007). In some cases, 
the distortion might be for simple practical reasons: streets in an atlas 
may be made broader to accommodate street names at legible sizes. In 
most maps, significant features are picked out in darker tones or stronger 
colours depending on the intended uses of the map: this kind of graphical 
selectivity is one of the services we expect the mapmaker to provide. While 
aerial photography presents everything which the camera sees, prioritising 
nothing, a well-made map serves its purpose precisely through its 
selectivity. We can click back and forth between two representations 
in Google Maps to get the complementary benefits of either: the 
all-seeing, unknowing photographic image of the camera, or the intentional 
communication of the drawn map. There are cases, however, where the 
selective processes which a map represents are not so readily acceptable. 
Mark Monmonier has published a number of entertaining books, including 
the canonical How to Lie with Maps, on the distortions introduced, 
sometimes with malicious motives, in all kinds of geographic mapping 
(Monmonier 1996:186). Aside from these deliberate and conscious interventions, 

in some ways more profound distortions are those which pass unnoticed 
because they embody a shared cultural perspective which makes them 
transparent. Ted Nelson argued that a terrestrial globe ( scale model of the 
earth) , is a good example of directness, untrammelled by metaphor or other 
representational filtering: A globe does not say Good Morning; it does not 
bother you with menus, icons or prompts. You turn it and move your head 
to the most useful position for overview or detail, thats all  (Nelson 1990).
               Yet even a terrestrial globe does not have the purity that Nelson 
hopes. The northern hemisphere is conventionally at the top of these 
devices, placing the developed, map-making world on top, and the mapped, 
under-developed world beneath. It is hard to recall that there is no right 
way up to the globe we live on. When the globe is projected onto a flat 
surface, distortion becomes inevitable and the merits of the different 
projections are hotly contested (Snyder 1993). A technical necessity as simple 
as framing can have unacknowledged consequences for how we see the 
world. So map-making, even when apparently most objective, is, like any 
representation, not the straightforward transferral of visual data to 
a surface that it might seem. Representation chooses what it measures and 
conveys. And already in this brief discussion, different forms of subjectivity 
have surfaced. The most basic is that subjectivity arising from who and what 
we are, and from the nature of representation, which prevents us from 
ever making maps or any other images which are exact equivalents of what 
they represent. Overlaid on this is the subjectivity created by the shared 
culture of large groups. Only encounters with other cultures, across space 
or through time, draw attention to its existence. Often, dominant groups 
assume that the shape of their world is the shape of the world. But there is 
increasing recognition that other groups live in other shaped worlds which 
can be mapped in different ways. 

40

41

from where i stand

The shape of the world changes depending on who you are and what 
you do. A recurrent motif in industrial societies has been to see space as 
increasingly compressed by the new ease with which it is traversed, and  
this has often been described as though it were the same for all observers. 
Thrift (1996: 264-265) considers this compression concept to have been 
associated with stagecoaches, railways, bicycles, the post and the 
telegraph: certainly the railway age has many such references. For Heine, 
(quoted in Schivelbusch 1986: 37)  The elementary concepts of time and space 
have begun to vacillate. Space is killed by the railways. I feel as if the 
mountains and forests of all countries were advancing on Paris . For 
Williams (1852: 284-85)  The extremities of the island are now, to all intents 
and purposes, as near the metropolis as Sussex or Buckinghamshire were 
two centuries ago  . And the hyperbole continues:  Lille and Brussels 
will be within striking distance for daily commuters  according to a 2007 
newspaper article on the newly opened cross-Channel rail link at Londons 
St. Pancras station. This is one kind of subjective mapping, where increased 
speed of access makes the world a different size and shape. However, this 
is more subjective evenz    than it seems, since it is experienced differently 
by different people. Feminist geography has provided a valuable critique 
of the lazier generalisations concerning time-space compression. Massey 
(1993) was among the first to point out the unreasonableness of suggesting 
that spatial compression was the same for everyone at a given historical 
period, regardless of wealth, gender or other factors. She highlights how the 
degree to which we can move between countries, walk about the streets 
at night, take public transport, or venture out of hotels in foreign cities, is 
not influenced simply by universal changes such as the flow of capital or 
the availability of technology. In the same volume, Rose takes exception 
to just that kind of apparently objective mapping described above, arguing 
that  This transcendent, distanced gaze reinforces the dominant Western 
masculine subjectivity in all its fear of embodied attachment and in all its 

universal pretensions  (Rose 1993: 71). One alternative lies in the use of time-
space mapping, a conscious attempt to reintegrate cultural subjectivity  in 
this case womens spatial mobility, their access to resources, and the power 
relations which constrain these into representation.
              Feminist geographers have used time-geography to detail these 
processes, because of its sensitivity to the routines of womens domestic, 
everyday lives. Time-geography traces the rountine paths of individuals 
in time-space and is especially interested in the physical, technological, 
economic and social constraints on such movement. It claims to 
demonstrate how society as a whole is constituted by the unintended 
consequences of the repetitive acts of individuals. (Rose 1993: 76)
              Such work is continued by Mei-Po Kwan at Ohio State University, 
who has argued that Geographical Information System mapping  often 
regarded as anti-feminist because it appears to confirm an objective map 
of the world while really being nothing of the sort  can in fact be harnessed 
to investigate the subjective world of minority groups. It should be noted 
that these are allocentric representations - from the outside, looking on at 
the aggregated space-time paths of cultural clusters: they are not attempts 
to see the world from within as it may appear to the subjects themselves. 
The features of the landscape are still separated by their conventional 
Cartesian distances.  
             In other mappings, Cartesian distance is replaced by subjective 
measures representing other kinds of accessibility. For example in a map 
by Oskar Karlin, the lines of the familiar London Underground diagram are 
distorted to represent one additional dimension  the length of time it takes 
to reach each station from Elephant and Castle, an inner-London station 
south of the Thames. Karlin also alters the colours of the lines to represent 
each lines average speed. Even the classic Beck London Underground map 
uses distortions, to serve practical purposes and incidentally to convey 
a message, and these start to embody a subjective point of view expressed 
through the geometry. The central area of the London Underground map is 
enlarged in relation to the periphery. While this is largely to solve a practical 

42

43

problem of accommodating the greater density of stations in that area, 
it also has the effect of giving greater importance to the central region, 
rather as a fisheye lens does for a photograph. Physically peripheral areas 
become metaphorically peripheral too. This is an analogue of subjective 
vision, in which what we attend to is in the centre of the field of view where 
visual discrimination is finest, while things not currently of importance are 
confined to less well defined regions at the edge of sight.  The subjectivity 
inherent in the idea that geography depends on where you start is dealt 
with by another method in space syntax diagrams (Hillier and Hanson 1984). 
Two rooms of a building may adjoin in a plan view, but be far apart in
a space syntax diagram if there is no direct connection between them. 
Markus among others has used this to show how buildings may offer very 
short routes to sites of power, such as the ready access to doctors rooms 
in a health centre for the doctors themselves, compared with long and 
complex routes for others  such as the patients (Markus 1993: 14). Like the 
work of the feminist geographers, these maps reclaim mapping for those 
whose view would be lost in those so-called objective mappings which are 
really mappings for the majority or those in power. Though space syntax 
diagrams augment traditional topography with a topological diagram, 
showing how the connections to adjacent spaces present themselves when 
approached from one particular starting point, they also take up a viewing 
position outside the subjective, depicting that subjectivity from without 
rather than within.  
            Perspective itself, of course, even when not in the extreme form of 
a fisheye view, prioritises what is near over what is far, and does so through 
selection of view. In 2005, the BBC chose to replace its traditional weather 
map of the United Kingdom with a perspectival view onto a VR model. Since 
any such view must be seen from somewhere and, perhaps inevitably, 
the designers chose to view the nation from the south, the result was that 
Scotland, now furthest away, became little more than a distant blur. The 
BBC Trust criticised these forecasts for breaching the corporations duty 
of impartiality (BBC Trust 2007: 53). Such subjective tendencies in perspective 

were earlier used consciously and humorously by Saul Steinberg in a 1976 
magazine cover mocking the typical New Yorkers alleged view of the world. 
Ninth Avenue looms in the foreground with Tenth Avenue just behind; 
a short way further off is the Hudson river; beyond in rapidly decreasing 
scale and definition is all the remainder of the United States, equal to the 
size of just three New York city blocks; finally beyond the Pacific lie China, 
Japan and Russia, vague mountain ranges on the horizon (Steinberg 1976). 
The subjective view of the Londoner or the New Yorker is represented from 
within, by a point of view onto the world.  
 

me, now: interacting with 
subjective views

Interactivity allows the map-maker to drill down, beyond the subjective 
view of cultures and sub-cultural groups, to the view of the individual. 
The useful properties of visual distortion for this purpose were explored 
several years ago by emulating in software the subjectivity of attending to 
what is central. Within a hierarchical tree of information, as visualised by 
Lamping, Rao and Pirolli (1995), users could change their subject of attention 
either by clicking on any visible point to bring it to the centre or by dragging 
a distant part of the information landscape to the central position, most 
detail being allotted to the centre, least to the edges. In this way topics 
close to what interests me most at the moment are prioritised while others 
fall away towards the fringes. The topic map is visually sensitised, not only 
to the subjectivity of the individual, but to that of the moment, a kind of 
temporal subjectivity.
             Inspired by Karlins Underground map described above, Tom 
Carden (2005) has produced a dynamic Travel Time Tube Map in which the 
geographic layout of the stations is distorted on demand to represent travel 
times from any station nominated by the user. Once more we are looking 
at subjectivity from the outside, but now designed, through interactivity, 

44

45

for the individuals momentary needs. In a sense, the ability to use the map 
to see the network from any station, rather than just one, re-introduces 
an element of objectivity, since now the map behaves appropriately when 
operated by any user for whatever location; but the most important feature 
for this discussion is the way in which responsive interactivity becomes 
the means for users to see their own map, configured to their interest. 
This is a crucial aspect of modern subjective mapping: instead of being 
locked to a single subjective interpretation, it is momentary, contingent 
on needs expressed through the medium of interaction. This does not lead 
to the death of the map-maker, any more than the responsiveness of 
interactive digital texts led to the death of the author as some at one time 
anticipated. However, it does alter the respective roles of map-maker and 
user. Interactivity means that authors are creating opportunities for the 
users action as much as they are communicating to the user. As in other 
areas, new map technologies have increasingly made it possible to deliver in 
practice the otherwise largely metaphorical open work (Eco 1989) in which 
the work is a field for action as much as a form of presentation. 
            The increasing responsiveness of digital systems creates many 
possibilities for implementing temporal subjectivities. Like Cardens Tube 
Map, some of these are based on an essentially conversational model of 
interaction in which each of the users successive questions  expressed 
by interaction events  is answered in turn by a response from the system. 
Work at University of Maryland over many years has aimed, by providing 
a responsive interface, to enable users to explore complex data sets more 
rapidly and effectively than with static systems, and some of this work 
has dealt specifically with maps which change according to need. In some 
cases, discrete inquiries (such as by clicks of the mouse) are replaced by 
smooth, continuous change. Work of 1994 showed the use of on-screen 
sliders to move through a virtual additional dimension of colour in maps 
of the United States, allowing the user to not only see but in a sense feel 
the patterns of health data and their correlation with income and other 
factors (Plaisant and Jain 1994). This has been characterised by Peuquet 

(2002: 157) as playing with maps to see what latent relationships emerge.
              Of course now we have the ability in everyday SatNav systems 
to go even further beyond conversational models of interaction and get 
continuous feedback to the recurrent questions where am I? And what 
should I do now?  The global positioning system calculates a position on  
the Earths surface in relation to the heavens. The method is analogous  
to navigating by the stars, though these stars have been installed by us 
in the form of satellites. When GPS is embedded in a personal portable 
device, it effectively positions an individual in relation to the cosmos.  
But while the technology itself is highly objective, applying the same  
rules to every GPS client, it is also intensely personal. This is my position, 
mapped for me on my device. It is also essentially based on the idea of  
now: like earlier navigation technologies, GPS is reliant on knowing the 
correct time. So the map is made not only for me, but for me now at  
this moment.
 

mapping becomes pervasive,multimodal,
social and personal

The availability of inexpensive, lightweight GPS devices has encouraged 
the development of innovative location-based projects. A small number 
of these add to location-sensitivity a responsiveness to other forms of 
dynamic personal data. Christian Nolds Emotion Map investigations, 
described elsewhere in this volume, present the individuals subjective 
state, measured using Galvanic Skin Response as an index of arousal, 
within the map of a district. Each map is therefore a personal record of 
an emotional as well as a physical journey. These subjective mappings are 
constructed retrospectively, allowing subjects to reflect on their experience 
 and those of others. In addition, the records of these personal journeys 
can be aggregated into a composite map which represents the emotional 
engagement of a group, showing where the community feels stressed or 

46

47

excited, so both personal and group subjectivities are depicted, and both 
incorporate transient temporal phenomena.  
            A parallel approach is taken in the project Ere be Dragons (Boyd Davis 
et al 2007). The user wears a heart-rate monitor connected to a smartphone 
or PDA with GPS capabilities. Here the mapping takes place live, as a part of 
the experience of moving about in the world. During a walk, an on-screen 
landscape is built which corresponds spatially to the real one around the 
player. At each stage in a journey, the graphical presentation of the route 
reflects one of five states. Squares of flourishing landscape are displayed 
where the walker achieves their optimum heart-rate (previously calculated 
from their age or their resting heart-rate). Either side of the optimum, the 
squares will be desert-like if the rate is too low, or grimly forested if too 
high. Beyond these zones the whole behaviour of the landscape alters, 
darkening and eventually disappearing. A distinction made by Schon (1983) 
highlights an interesting difference between Emotion Map and Ere be 
Dragons: that between reflection-on-action and reflection-in-action: 
in the latter, the ongoing experience is subject to constant feedback, 
rather as when a designer draws, and both observes and responds to 
the drawn marks in a continuous cyclic experience. Because action and 
reflection are almost simultaneous, users modify their behaviour in the 
light of the current state of the map.  Such projects are special cases of 
external cognition (Scaife and Rogers 1996) where, rather than the output 
representing processes of the mind, it as much represents those of the 
body. By constructing cognitive artefacts for our own perception we 
became capable of processing the knowledge they represent in alternative 
ways which are not easily accessible while they remain internal. The 
territory as mapped is an externalisation of something which belongs to 
the user. When this is presented to the user on a device held in the hand 
while walking, as a kind of prosthetic extension, the element of personal, 
temporal subjectivity centred on the subject is brought to the fore. 
            These experimental projects take subjective mapping further than 
it has gone before. This discussion began by emphasising how all 

map-making, however apparently objective its motivations, is affected 
by considerations which give it characteristic forms. To represent is to 
select, interpret, translate, transform: this is the first level of subjectivity. 
Next, selections and distortions which belong to whole cultures and to 
groups and subgroups are evident  these are the cultural subjective and 
sub-cultural subjective. The latter may take on a conscious socio-political 
aspect, as in feminist geography, or may simply reflect in some way that 
the world is different depending on who you are and where you start from. 
Interactivity introduces the possibility of customisation to the individual 
and to the time: the individual subjective both spatial and temporal. With 
the advent of portable interactive technologies sensitive to multimodal 
inputs, what matters to me now at this moment in my current location and 
circumstances can become central. This introduces a form of subjectivity 
we could call the egocentric subjective, in which my location and other 
aspects of myself impact decisively on the representation. This is perhaps 
the furthest that subjectivity has ventured so far, but technological change 
continues its interplay with altered perceptions of geography to produce 
unanticipated forms of mapping.

about the author

Dr. Stephen Boyd Davis is the Reader in Interactive Media at 
Middlesex University.

48

49

notes

BBC Trust (2007) From Seesaw to Wagon Wheel: Safeguarding Impartiality  
in the 21st Century. Published 18 June 2007. Online at :
http://www.bbc.co.uk/bbctrust/research/impartiality.html 
Accessed August 2007. 

Boyd Davis, S. (2007) A Schema for Metaphorical Visual Representation. In 
Van der Waarde, K. and Westendorp, P. (ed.) Visible Language { 41 (3). Special 
issue on Visual Metaphors in User Support. P. 280-300}.

Boyd Davis, S.;  Moar, M.; Jacobs, R.; Watkins, M.; Capra, M.; Shackford, R. and 
Oppermann, L. (2007) Mapping Inside Out. In Magerkurth, C. and Rocker, C. 
(eds) Pervasive Gaming Applications: Volume 2. Shaker, Aachen. 
{p. 199-226.}.

Bird, J.; Curtis, B.; Putnam, T.; Robertson, G. and Tickner, L. (eds.) (1993) 
Mapping the Futures: Local Cultures, Global Change. 
Routledge, London. 

Carden, T. (2005) Travel Time Tube Map. Online at : 
http://www.tom-carden.co.uk/2005/12/ 

Eco, U. (1989) The Open Work. Originally published in 1962 as Opera Aperta. 
Translation Anna Cancogni. Harvard University Press, Cambridge MA. 

Hillier, B., Hanson, J. (1984) The Social Logic of Space. Cambridge University 
Press, Cambridge. 

Karlin, O. (2005) Time Travel. Available online at :
http://www.oskarlin.com/2005/11/29/time-travel
Accessed January 2008. 
 
Kwan, Mei-Po. 2002. Feminist Visualization: Re-envisioning GIS As a Method 
in Feminist Geographic Research. {Annals of the Association of American 
Geographers. 92(4)/ p. 645-661} . 

Lamping, J.; Rao, R. and Pirolli, P. (1995) A Focus+Context Technique Based 
on Hyperbolic Geometry for Visualizing Large Hierarchies. {Proceedings of 
the SIGCHI conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, Denver, 
Colorado. ACM Press, New York. P. 401-408}.

Markus, T. A. (1993) Buildings and power  freedom and control in the origin 
of modern building types and Massey, D. (1993)  Time-Space Compression 
and the Geometries of Power. In Bird et al. (1993) Mapping the Futures: Local 
Cultures, Global Change. Routledge, London  {p.59-69}.

Monmonier, M. (1996) How to Lie with Maps. 2nd Edition. University 
of Chicago. 

Nelson, !eodor H. (1990) "e right way to think about software design. 
In Laurel, Brenda (ed.) "e art of human-computer interface design. 
Addison-Wesley. {p. 235-243} . 

Peuquet, D. J. (2002) Representations of Space and Time. !e Guilford 
Press, New York.  
 
Pinker, S. (1994) "e Language Instinct. Penguin, London. 

Plaisant, C. and Jain, V. (1994) Dynamaps: dynamic queries on a health 
statistics atlas . In Conference Companion on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems. {Boston, Massachusetts, United States, April 24th/28th, 1994).
CHI 1994. ACM, New York. P. 439-440} . 

Rose, G. (1993) Some Notes towards "inking about the Spaces of the 
Future. In Bird et al. (1993) Mapping the Futures: Local Cultures, Global 
Change. Routledge, London {p. 70-83} . 

Sapir, E. (1924) "e Grammarian and His Language. American Mercury 
{p. 149-155}.

Sapir, E. (1949) Selected Writings of Edward Sapir. David G. Mandelbaum 
(ed.) University of California Press, Berkeley.  

Scaife, M. and Rogers, Y. (1996) External Cognition: How Do Graphical 
Representations Work ?. { International Journal of  Human Computer Studies 
45/185-213}.
 
Schivelbusch, W. (1986) "e Railway Journey: "e Industrialisation of Time 
and Space in the Nineteenth Century. University of California Press, Berkeley, 
California. 

Schon, D. (1983) "e Reflective Practitioner. Jossey-Bass, San Francisco, CA. 

Snyder, J. P. (1993) Flattening the Earth: Two "ousand Years of Map 
Projections. University of Chicago Press. Chicago, Illinois. 

Steinberg, S. (1976) Cover illustration for !e New Yorker magazine.  
{ Number 29th March 1976} . Online at: 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Saul_Steinberg  
Accessed 8 November 2007.

50

51

!rift, N. (1996) Spatial Formations. Sage Publications, London. 

Whorf, B. (1956) A Linguistic Consideration of "inking in Primitive 
Communities. In John B. C. (ed.) Language, "ought and Reality: Selected 
Writings of Benjamin Lee. Whorf, MIT Press, Cambridge MA {p. 65-86} .

Williams, F.S. (1852) Our Iron Roads  their History, Construction and Social 
Influences. Ingram, Cooke and Co, London.

The images on this and the next pages are all from the Stockport Emotion Map, 2007 
which was commissioned as a public consultation project by the local council and 
an urban developer.

52

53

54

55

(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)

W
h
e
n
 
t
a
l
k
i

  r
e
a
l
 
f
o
c
a
l
 

 

p
e
o
p
l
e
 
c
a
n
 
a
c
c
e
s
s
 
w

i
t
h
o
u
t
 

m
o
n
e
y

 
a
n
d

 

u
s
e
 
a
s
 
t
h
e
y

 
l
i
k
e
.
 

O
n
 
t
h
e
 
w
h
o
l
e

a
c
c
e
s
s
.
 

T
h
e
r
e
 
a
r
e
 

v
e
r
y

 

 
f
e
w
g
r
e
e
n
 
s
p
a
c
e
s
 
i

n
 
t
h
e
 
c
e
n
t
r
e
 
o
f
 

S
t
o
c
k
p
o
r
t
 
t
h
a
t

o
f
 

S
t
o
c
k
p
o
r
t
.
 

s
o
c
i
a
l
 
c
o
n
d
i
t
i
o
n
s
.
 

M
o
s
t
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 

p
u
b
l
i
c
 
l
i
f
e
 
i

 

n
S
t
o
c
k
p
o
r
t
 
s
e
e
m

 
t
o
 
t
a
k
e
 

p
l
a
c
e
 

a
 
l
c
o
h
o
l
 
c
o
n
s
u
m
p
t
i
o
n

,
 
s
t
e
a
l
i

n
g
 
a
n
d

 

k
n

i
f
e
 
c
r
i
m
e
.
 

W

e
 
e
m
p
h
a
s
i
s
e
 
t
h
e
 

p
e
o
p
l
e
 
t
o
 

p
u
r
c
h
a
s
e
 
o
r
 
a
t
 
l
e
a
s
t
 
f
o
l
l
o
w
 
s
o
m
e
 

b
e
h
a
v
i
o
u
r
a
l
 
r
u
l
e
s
 
t
o
 

b
e
 
a
l
l
o
w
e
d

 

p
e
o
p
l
e
 
t
o
g
e
t
h
e
r
 
a
n
d

 
a
l
l
o
w

 
t
h
e
m

 
t
o
 

b
e
 
i

n
c
l
u
d
e
d
w

 

i
t
h

i

n
 
t
h
e
 

p
u
b
l
i
c
 
l
i
f
e
 

i

n
 
s
e
m

i
-
p
u
b
l
i
c
 
s
p
a
c
e
s
 
s
u
c
h
 
a
s
 
t
h
e
 
s
h
o
p
p
i

n
g
 
c
e
n
t
r
e
 
o
r
 
c
a
f
e
s
 
t
h
a
t
 
r
e
q
u
i
r
e
 

i

m
p
o
r
t
a
n
c
e
 
o
f
 

p
r
o
v
i
d
i

 

n
g
y
o
u
t
h
 
a
c
t
i
v
i
t
i
e
s
 
a
n
d

 
s
e
r
v
i
c
e
s
 
t
o
 

b
r
i

n
g
 
t
h
e
 

y
o
u
n
g

 



P
u
b
l
i
c
 
S
p
a
c
e


,
 
i
.
e
.
 

p
l
a
c
e
s
 
w
h
e
r
e
 
t
h
e
r
e
 
i
s
 
n
o
 
e
x
c
l
u
s
i
o
n
b
a
s
e
d

 

 
o
n
 
e
c
o
n
o
m
i
c
 
o
r
 
 
 

a
r
e
 

p
e
r
c
e
i
v
e
d

 
t
o
 

b
e
 
t
h
e
 
c
a
u
s
e
 
o
f
 
a
n
t
i
-
s
o
c
i
a
l
 

b
e
h
a
v
i
o
u
r
 
i

n
c
l
u
d
i

n
g

 

s
u
g
g
e
s
t
e
d

 
t
h
a
t
 
S
t
o
c
k
p
o
r
t
 
r
e
v
o
l
v
e
s
 
a
r
o
u
n
d

 
c
o
f
f
e
e
.
 

W

a
l
k
i

n
g
 
a
r
o
u
n
d

 
t
h
e
 

i

n
c
r
e
a
s
e
 
t
h
e
 
c
l
a
s
s
 

d
i
v
i
s
i
o
n
 
a
m
o
n
g
s
t
 
t
h
e
 

 

y
o
u
n
g
p
e
o
p
l
e
.
 

M
i
d
d
l
e
 
c
l
a
s
s
 

 

t
o
w
n
w
e
 
n
o
t
i
c
e
d

 
t
h
e
r
e
 
i
s
 

v
e
r
y

 
l
i
t
t
l
e
 
o
f
 

w
h
a
t
 

w
o
u
l
d

 

b
e
 
c
l
a
s
s
i
c
a
l
l
y

 
t
e
r
m
e
d

 

t
e
e
n
a
g
e
r
s
 
s
e
e
m

 
t
o
 

b
e
 
i

n
v
i
s
i
b
l
e
,
 

w
h

i
l
e
 
g
r
o
u
p
s
 
o
f
 

w
o
r
k
i

n
g
 
c
l
a
s
s
 
t
e
e
n
a
g
e
r
s
 

s
h
o
p
p
i

 

n
g
w
e
r
e
 
m
e
n
t
i
o
n
e
d

.
 

W
h
e
n
 
a
s
k
e
d

 
a
b
o
u
t
 

 

w
h
e
r
e
 
t
h
e
y
g
o
 
t
o
 
m
e
e
t
 

 T
h
e
 
c
o
u
n
c
i
l

s
 

 

y
o
u
t
h
p
r
o
v
i
s
i
o
n
 
a
l
s
o
 
s
e
e
m
s
 
t
o
 

b
e
 
l
i

m

i
t
e
d

 
a
n
d
 
f
o
c
u
s
e
d

 
o
n

 

f
r
i
e
n
d
s
 
a
n
d

 
r
e
l
a
x

,
 

p
e
o
p
l
e
 

d
r
e
w

 
i

m
a
g
e
s
 
o
f
 
c
o
r
p
o
r
a
t
e
 
c
a
f
e
 
c
h
a
i

n
s
 
a
n
d

 

t
e
e
n
a
g
e
 

p
r
e
g
n
a
n
c
y

 
i

n
f
o
r
m
a
t
i
o
n

.
 

T
h

i
s
 
l
a
c
k

 
o
f
 

y
o
u
t
h
 
a
c
t
i
v
i
t
i
e
s
 
a
p
p
e
a
r
s
 
t
o
 
 

 

 

 

n
g
 
t
o
 

p
e
o
p
l
e
 
i
t
 

w
a
s
 
s
u
r
p
r
i
s
i

 

n
g
h
o
w

 
f
e
w
 
a
c
t
i
v
i
t
i
e
s
 
a
p
a
r
t
 
f
r
o
m

 
 

t
h

i

n
g
 
s
e
t
-
u
p

 
f
o
r
 
t
h
e
m

 
i
s
 
a
 
s
k
a
t
e
-
p
a
r
k
w
h

 

i
c
h
 
t
h
e
y
h
a
v
e
 
t
o
 

 

p
a
y

 
t
o
 
e
n
t
e
r
.
 

w

 

i
t
h
v
e
r
y

 
l
i
t
t
l
e
 

p
r
o
v
i
s
i
o
n
 
f
o
r
 
t
h
e
m
W
h
e
n
 
a
s
k
e
d

.
 

 

,
 
t
h
e
y
m
e
n
t
i
o
n
e
d

 
t
h
e
 
o
n
l
y

 

(cid:2)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:12)
(cid:19)
(cid:8)

(cid:6)
(cid:1)
(cid:14)
(cid:1)
(cid:11)
(cid:22)
(cid:17)
(cid:7)
(cid:6)
(cid:3)
(cid:1)
(cid:12)
(cid:11)
(cid:16)
(cid:3)
(cid:19)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:2)

 

Y
o
u
n
g
p
e
o
p
l
e
 
s
e
e
m

 
t
o
 

b
e
 
a
 

 

p
a
r
t
i
c
u
l
a
r
l
y
m
a
r
g
n
a
l
i
s
e
d
g
r
o
u
p

i

 

 
i

 

n
S
t
o
c
k
p
o
r
t
 

p
o
i

n
t
.
.
.

.

(cid:2)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:6)
(cid:12)
(cid:10)
(cid:7)
(cid:16)
(cid:13)
(cid:6)
(cid:10)
(cid:9)

(cid:1)

(cid:10)
(cid:20)
(cid:1)

(cid:24)
(cid:10)
(cid:22)
(cid:9)
(cid:4)

(cid:1)
(cid:11)
(cid:19)
(cid:10)
(cid:11)
(cid:7)
(cid:19)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:2)

s
o
m
e
t
h

i

n
g
 
t
o
 
a
t
t
r
a
c
t
 

p
e
o
p
l
e
 
t
h
e
r
e
 
a
p
a
r
t
 
f
r
o
m

 
t
h
e
 
s
h
o
p
s
.
 

T
h
e
r
e
 
i
s
 
n
o
 

f
a
m

i
l
y
-
n
a
m
e
 

b
u
s
i

 

n
e
s
s
e
s
 
f
r
o
m
S
t
o
c
k
p
o
r
t

 
a
n
d

 
t
h
a
t
,
 


w
h
a
t
 
i
s
 
l
a
c
k
i

n
g

 
i
s
 
 

(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)

t
h
e
m
b
a
c
k

 

 
t
o
 
l
i
f
e
.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

1
9
7
9

,
 
a
 
l
o
c
a
l
 
n
e
w
s
p
a
p
e
r
 
s
u
g
g
e
s
t
e
d

 
t
h
a
t
 

.
.
.

w
e
 
c
a
n
n
o
t
 
a
f
f
o
r
d

 
t
o
 
l
o
o
s
e
 
t
h
e
 

w
o
u
l
d

 

b
e
 
w
o
r
t
h
w
h

i
l
e
 
r
e
v
i
s
i
t
i

n
g
 
o
l
d
e
r
 

v
i
s
i
o
n
s
 
o
f
 
t
h

i
s
 
s
p
a
c
e
 
a
n
d

 

b
r
i

n
g
n
g

i

o
n
l
y

 
a
 
f
e
w
 
s
k
e
t
c
h
e
d

 
i

m
a
g
e
s
 
o
f
 
l
o
c
a
l
 
s
h
o
p
s
 
o
r
 
m
a
r
k
e
t
 
s
t
a
l
l
s
.
 

A
l
r
e
a
d
y

 
i

n

 
 

a
r
e
a
 
 
t
h
a
t
 
i
t
 
i
s
 
n
o
w
W

.
 

e
 
f
e
e
l
 
t
h
a
t
 
t
h

i
s
 
a
r
e
a
 
h
a
s
 
a
 
l
o
t
 
o
f
 

p
o
t
e
n
t
i
a
l
 
a
n
d

 
t
h
a
t
 
i
t

f
o
r
c
e
d

 
o
u
t
.
 

M
o
s
t
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
s
h
o
p
s
 
t
h
a
t
 

p
e
o
p
l
e
 

 

d
r
e
w
w
e
r
e
 
g
l
o
b
a
l
 

b
r
a
n
d
s
 
a
n
d

 
 

t
r
e
e
s
 
a
n
d

 

b
e
n
c
h
e
s
 
c
o
n
t
r
a
s
t
i

n
g
 
s
t
r
o
n
g
l
y
w

 

i
t
h
 
t
h
e
 

d
e
s
o
l
a
t
e
 
t
r
a
f
fi
c
 
h
e
a
v
y

 

 
c
u
l
t
u
r
e
.
 

O
t
h
e
r
s
 
e
x
p
r
e
s
s
e
d

 
a
 
w
o
r
r
y

 
t
h
a
t
 
s
m
a
l
l
e
r
,
 
l
o
c
a
l
 
s
h
o
p
s
 
w
e
r
e
 

b
e
i

n
g

 

r
e
d
e
v
e
l
o
p
m
e
n
t
 
o
f
 

M

 

e
r
s
e
y
S
q
u
a
r
e
,
 

p
i
c
t
u
r
i

n
g
 
a
n

 
i
d
y
l
l
i
c
 
g
r
e
e
n
 
a
r
e
a
 
f
u
l
l
 
o
f
 

t
h
a
t
 
i
t
 

w
a
s
 

s
e
v
e
n
t
i
e
s
 
a
n
d

 

 
o
u
t
d
a
t
e
d

 
a
n
d
w
a
n
t
e
d
m
o
r
e
 
o
f
 
a
 
c
a
f
e
 
s
t
r
e
e
t

 

I
t
 
i
s
 
i
l
l
u
s
t
r
a
t
i
v
e
 
t
o
 
l
o
o
k

 
a
t
 
a
n
 
a
r
t
i
s
t

s
 
i

m
p
r
e
s
s
i
o
n
 
f
r
o
m

 
t
h
e
 

1
9
7
0

s
 
f
o
r
 
t
h
e
 

m
a
n
y

 

p
e
o
p
l
e
s
e
e
m
e
d

 
c
o
n
t
e
n
t
 

w

i
t
h
 
t
h
e
 
s
h
o
p
p
i

n
g
 
a
r
e
a

,
 
a
 
f
a
i
r
 
n
u
m
b
e
r
 
f
e
l
t
 

w
h
e
r
e
 
i

n
 
t
h
e
 

p
a
s
t
,
 
l
a
r
g
e
 
s
o
c
i
a
l
 
f
e
s
t
i
v
a
l
s
 
t
o
o
k

 

p
l
a
c
e
 
a
n
d

 
c
i
r
c
u
s
e
s
 

p
u
l
l
e
d

 
i

n

.
 

a
l
r
e
a
d
y

 
r
e
f
e
r
e
d

 
t
o
 
S
t
o
c
k
p
o
r
t
 
s
i
m
p
l
y

 
a
s
 

o
u
r
 
s
h
o
p
w
n
d
o
w

i

 

 
t
o
w
n

.
 

W
h

i
l
e
 

c
o
n
s
i
d
e
r
i

n
g
 
t
h
a
t
 

M

 

e
r
s
e
y
S
q
u
a
r
e
 
i
s
 
t
h
e
 
s
i
t
e
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
o
r
i
g
n
a
l
 

i

V

i
l
l
a
g
e
 
G
r
e
e
n

 

t
h
e
 
t
o
w
n

.

1
9
7
8

,
 

n
o
t
 
l
o
n
g
 
a
f
t
e
r
 
t
h
e
 
s
h
o
p
p
i

n
g
 
c
e
n
t
r
e
 
w
a
s
 
b
u
i
l
t
,
 
a
 
l
o
c
a
l
 
n
e
w
s
p
a
p
e
r
 

r
o
a
d

,
 
i
t
 
i
s
 
n
o
t
 
s
u
r
p
r
i
s
i

n
g
 
t
h
a
t
 
n
o
 
o
n
e
 

u
s
e
s
 
i
t
.
 

T
h

i
s
 
i
s
 

p
e
r
h
a
p
s
 
e
v
e
n
 
s
a
d
d
e
r
 

 

a
n
d
w
e
 
f
e
e
l
 
t
h
a
t
 
t
h

i
s
 
s
e
n
s
e
 
o
f
 
c
o
m
m
u
n

i
t
y

 

 
c
a
n
n
u
t
u
r
e
 
a
 
n
e
w
 
v
i
s
i
o
n
 
f
o
r
 

i

 d
o
m
n
a
t
e
s
 
t
h
e
 
c
e
n
t
r
e
 
o
f
 

S
t
o
c
k
p
o
r
t
 
a
n
d

 

d
e
fi
n
e
s
 
i
t
s
 
i
d
e
n
t
i
t
y

.
 

A
s
 
f
a
r
 

b
a
c
k

 
a
s

a
t
 
t
h
e
 
f
e
a
t
u
r
e
l
e
s
s
 
c
o
n
c
r
e
t
e
 

d
e
s
i
g
n
 
a
n
d

 
t
h
e
 
f
a
c
t
 
t
h
a
t
 
o
n
e
 
h
a
s
 
t
o
 
c
r
o
s
s
 
a
 

b
u
s
y

 


f
r
i
e
n
d
l
y


 

w
a
s
 
t
h
e
 
m
o
s
t
 
f
r
e
q
u
e
n
t
l
y
u
s
e
d

 

 
a
d
j
e
c
t
i
v
e
 
f
o
r
 

d
e
s
c
r
i
b
i

 

n
g
S
t
o
c
k
p
o
r
t
 

t
h
a
t
 
t
h
e
 
m
a
i

n
 
f
a
c
t
o
r
 
r
e
s
p
o
n
s
i
b
l
e
 
i
s
 
t
h
e
 

M

e
r
s
e
y
w
a
y

 
s
h
o
p
p
i

n
g
 
a
r
e
a

,
 

w
h

i
c
h

 

a
n
 
a
m
p
h

 

i
t
h
e
a
t
r
e
 
a
n
d
w
a
s
 
m
e
a
n
t
 
t
o
 

b
e
 
f
o
r
 

p
u
b
l
i
c
 

u
s
e
.
 

W
h
e
n
 
o
n
e
 
l
o
o
k
s
 

 a
 
g
r
o
u
p

 
o
f
 

p
e
o
p
l
e
 
a
n
d

 
c
o
l
l
a
b
o
r
a
t
i
o
n
s
 
w

i
t
h

 
i

n
s
t
i
t
u
t
i
o
n
s
.
 
I
t
 
i
s
 
h
e
a
r
t
e
n

i

n
g
 
t
h
a
t

s
m

i
l
i

n
g
 
c
o
n
s
u
m
e
r
s
 
h
o
l
d
i

 

n
g
b
r
a
n
d
e
d

 
s
h
o
p
p
i

 

n
g
b
a
g
s
.
 

T
h
e
r
e
 
i
s
 
l
i
t
t
l
e
 

d
o
u
b
t
 

o
p
p
o
r
t
u
n

i
t
y

 
i
s
 
t
h
e
 
B
e
a
r
 
P
i
t
 
o
n
M

 

 

e
r
s
e
y
S
q
u
a
r
e
 
w
h

i
c
h

 
i
s
 
s
h
a
p
e
d

 
l
i
k
e
 
 

s
i

n
g
l
e
 
i

n
d
i
v
i
d
u
a
l
s
 
s
u
c
h
 
a
s
 
r
u
n
n

i

 

 

n
g
y
o
u
t
h
w
o
r
k
s
h
o
p
s
,
 

w
h

i
l
e
 
o
t
h
e
r
s
 
r
e
q
u
i
r
e
 

(cid:1)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:2)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)

(cid:8)
(cid:10)
(cid:9)
(cid:10)
(cid:7)
(cid:6)
(cid:13)
(cid:5)
(cid:6)
(cid:3)
(cid:1)
(cid:12)
(cid:5)
(cid:10)
(cid:11)
(cid:11)
(cid:6)
(cid:9)
(cid:4)

(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:2)

(cid:1)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:2)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:12)
(cid:10)
(cid:23)
(cid:5)
(cid:19)
(cid:21)
(cid:19)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:18)
(cid:10)
(cid:23)
(cid:19)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:4)
(cid:10)
(cid:1)
(cid:20)
(cid:21)
(cid:10)
(cid:8)
(cid:5)
(cid:19)
(cid:21)
(cid:19)
(cid:1)
(cid:15)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:2)

S
t
o
c
k
p
o
r
t
,
 

w
h

i
l
s
t
 
s
o
m
e
 

d
r
e
w

 
t
h
e
i
r
 
f
r
i
e
n
d
s
 
a
n
d

 
f
a
m

i
l

y,
 
a
 
l
a
r
g
e
 
n
u
m
b
e
r
 

d
r
e
w

 

t
h
a
t
 
a
l
l
o
w
m
u
l
t
i
p
l
e
 
i

 

n
t
e
r
p
r
e
t
a
t
i
o
n
s
 
a
n
d

 

u
s
e
s
.
 

O
n
e
 
e
x
a
m
p
l
e
 
o
f
 
a
 
m
i
s
s
e
d

i
s
s
u
e
s
 
o
f
 
c
o
n
c
e
r
n

.
 

S
o
m
e
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
t
o
p
i
c
s
 
w
e
 
i
d
e
n
t
fi
e
d

 
c
o
u
l
d

 

b
e
 
t
a
c
k
l
e
d
 
b
y

s
u
b
j
e
c
t
 
o
f
 
s
h
o
p
p
i

.
 

n
g
W
h
e
n
 
a
s
k
e
d

 
t
o
 

d
r
a
w

 
t
h
e
 
m
o
s
t
 
i

m
p
o
r
t
a
n
t
 

p
e
o
p
l
e
 
i

n

 

T
h
e
 
m
a
i

n
 
t
h
r
e
a
d

 
t
h
a
t
 
r
a
n
 
t
h
r
o
u
g
h
p
e
o
p
l
e

 


s
 

i

d
r
a
w
n
g
s
 
a
n
d

 
t
e
x
t
s
 
w
a
s
 
t
h
e
 

t
o
w
n
 
c
e
n
t
r
e
.
C
u
r
r
e
n
t
 
t
h
e
o
r
i
s
t
s
 
o
f
 

p
u
b
l
i
c
 
s
p
a
c
e
 
a
g
r
e
e
 
a
n
d

 
a
r
g
u
e
 
f
o
r
 
a
r
e
a
s
 

p
e
o
p
l
e
 
a
n
d

 
t
h
e
n
 
l
e
a
d

 
t
o
 
a
 
l
a
r
g
e
r
 
c
o
m
m
u
n
a
l
 

d
i
s
c
u
s
s
i
o
n
 
t
h
a
t
 
r
e
fi
n
e
s
 
t
h
e
 

t
h
e
r
e
 
w
a
s
 
a
 
c
o
n
s
e
n
s
u
s
 
t
h
a
t
 

p
e
o
p
l
e
 
w
a
n
t
e
d

 
a
 
l
e
s
s
 
r
i
g
i
d
l
y

 


p
r
o
g
r
a
m
m
e
d


 

W

e
 
h
o
p
e
 
t
h
a
t
 
t
h

i
s
 
m
a
p

 
a
n
d

 
t
e
x
t
 

w

i
l
l
 
s
t
i

m
u
l
a
t
e
 

p
e
r
s
o
n
a
l
 
r
e
fl
e
c
t
i
o
n
s
 
f
o
r

 

a
n

 
i

n
d
i
v
i
d
u
a
l

s
 
a
n
n
o
y
a
n
c
e
 
a
t
 
t
h
e
 
g
r
a
f
fi
t
i
 
o
n
 
a
 
m
e
d
i
e
v
a
l
 

w
a
l
l
.
 

p
a
r
t
i
c
u
l
a
r
 

b
u
i
l
d
i

n
g
s
 
l
i
k
e
 
t
h
e
 

b
r
e
w
e
r
y

 
o
r
 

b
y

 

v
e
r
y

 

p
e
r
s
o
n
a
l
 
c
o
n
t
e
x
t
s
 
l
i
k
e
 

5

.
 
 
I
s
o
l
a
t
i
o
n
 
o
f
 

 

y
o
u
n
g
p
e
o
p
l
e
 

a
 
n
u
m
b
e
r
 
o
f
 
i

i

n
d
i
v
i
d
u
a
l
 
h
g
h
 
a
r
o
u
s
a
l
 
s
p
i
k
e
s
 
t
h
a
t
 
s
e
e
m

 
t
o
 

b
e
 
c
a
u
s
e
d
b
y

 

 

4

.
 
 

S
e
m

i
-
P
u
b
l
i
c
 
S
p
a
c
e

d
i
s
t
r
a
c
t
i
o
n
s
 
i

n
 
t
h
o
s
e
 

p
l
a
c
e
s
.
 
I
n
 
a
d
d
i
t
i
o
n
 
t
o
 
t
h
e
s
e
 

b
r
o
a
d

 

p
a
t
t
e
r
n
s
 
t
h
e
r
e
 
a
r
e

3

.
 
 

M
o
n
o
l
i
t
h

i
c
 
s
h
o
p
p
i

n
g

i

n
t
e
r
a
c
t
i
o
n
s
 
i

n
 
t
h
o
s
e
 
a
r
e
a
s
.
 
I
t
 
i
s
 
a
l
s
o
 
a
 
r
e
fl
e
c
t
i
o
n
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
a
m
o
u
n
t
 
o
f
 

v
i
s
u
a
l
 

2

.
 
 

T
h
e
 
h

i
d
d
e
n
 
r
i
v
e
r
 

M

e
r
s
e
y

 

s
e
e
m
s
 
t
o
 
c
o
r
r
e
s
p
o
n
d

 
t
o
 
t
h
e
 
r
e
l
a
t
i
v
e
 

d
e
n
s
i
t
y

 
o
f
 

p
e
o
p
l
e
 
a
n
d

 
t
h
u
s
 
s
o
c
i
a
l
 

1

.
 
 

T
h
e
 
m
a
r
g
n
a
l
i
s
e
d
h

i

 

i
s
t
o
r
y

 
o
f
 

S
t
o
c
k
p
o
r
t

G
r
e
a
t
 

U
n
d
e
r
b
a
n
k

 
a
n
d
S
t
.
 

 

P
e
t
e
r
s
g
a
t
e
 
a
r
e
a
s
 
a
r
e
 

v
e
r
y

 
c
a
l
m

.
 

T
h

i
s
 

p
a
t
t
e
r
n

 
 

H
e
r
e
 
a
r
e
 
t
h
e
 
fi
v
e
 
i
s
s
u
e
s
 
t
h
a
t
 

w
e
 
i
d
e
n
t
i
fi
e
d

 
f
o
r
 
S
t
o
c
k
p
o
r
t
:

t
o
 
s
e
e
 
a
n
d
h
e
a
r
 
t
h
e
 

 

M

e
r
s
e
y

.

M

e
r
s
e
y
w
a
y
 
o
r
 

d
r
i
l
l
i

n
g
 
s
p
y
-
h
o
l
e
s
 
t
h
r
o
u
g
h
 
t
h
e
 
r
o
a
d

 
s
u
r
f
a
c
e
 
t
o
 
a
l
l
o
w
p
e
o
p
l
e
 

 

p
e
o
p
l
e
 
t
o
 
r
e
-
e
n
g
a
g
e
 
w

i
t
h
 
t
h
e
 
r
i
v
e
r
,
 
s
u
c
h
 
a
s
 
c
a
n
o
e
i

n
g
 
t
r
i
p
s
 

u
n
d
e
r
 
t
h
e
 

a
 
w
h
o
l
e
 
r
a
n
g
e
 
o
f
 
c
u
l
t
u
r
a
l
 
a
n
d

 
p
h
y
s
i
c
a
l
 
i

n
t
e
r
v
e
n
t
i
o
n
s
 
t
h
a
t
 
c
o
u
l
d

 
a
l
l
o
w

 

m
a
p
s
.
i

n
c
l
u
d
e
d

 
i
t
 
a
s
 
a
 
g
o
s
t
l
y
 
t
r
a
c
e
 
o
n
 
t
h
e
i
r
 
m
e
n
t
a
l
 

m
a
p
s
.
 

W

e
 
s
u
g
g
e
s
t
 

t
h
e
 
c
o
u
r
s
e
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
r
i
v
e
r
 
a
n
d

 
i

n
c
l
u
d
e
d

 
i
t
 
a
s
 
a
 
g
o
s
t
l
y

 
t
r
a
c
e
 
o
n
 
t
h
e
i
r
 
m
e
n
t
a
l
 
 

a
 
r
i
v
e
r
 
r
u
n
n

i

n
g
 
b
e
l
o
w

 
t
h
e
i
r
 
f
e
e
t
.
 

M
o
s
t
 
a
d
u
l
t
s
 
o
n
l
y
h
a
d

 

 
a
 

v
a
g
u
e
 
i
d
e
a
 
a
b
o
u
t
 

m
a
j
o
r
i
t
y
 
o
f
 
y
o
u
n
g
 
p
e
o
p
l
e
 
t
h
a
t
 

w
e
 
t
a
l
k
e
d

 
t
o
 

 

d
i
d
n
o
t
 

k
n
o
w

 
t
h
a
t
 
t
h
e
r
e
 
w
a
s
 
 

o
n
l
y
 
s
t
o
l
e
n
g
l
i

 

m
p
s
e
s
 
e
x
a
c
e
r
b
a
t
e
 
t
h
e
 

p
r
o
b
l
e
m

.
 
I
n
 
f
a
c
t
,
 

w
e
 
f
o
u
n
d

 
t
h
a
t
 
t
h
e
 

s
u
c
h
 
a
s
 
t
h
e
 
c
l
u
s
t
e
r
 
o
f
 
s
u
p
e
r
m
a
r
k
e
t
s
 
t
h
a
t
 

b
l
o
c
k

 
t
h
e
 
r
i
v
e
r
 

b
a
n
k
s
 
a
n
d

 
a
l
l
o
w

 
 

o
n
e
s
 
i

 

n
M

 

e
r
s
e
y
S
q
u
a
r
e
 
a
n
d

 
t
h
e
 
S
t
o
c
k
p
o
r
t
 

M

a
r
k
e
t
 
a
r
e
a

.
 
I
n
 
c
o
n
t
r
a
s
t
,
 
t
h
e
 

g
r
o
w
t
h
 
a
n
d

 
i
d
e
n
t
i
t
y
 
w
a
s
 
s
u
d
d
e
n
l
y
h

 

.
 

i
d
d
e
n
 
a
w
a
y
M
o
d
e
r
n
d
e
v
e
l
o
p
m
e
n
t
s
 
 

 

 

o
l
d
m
a
r
k
e
t
 
a
r
e
a
 
a
n
d

 
t
h
r
o
u
g
h
o
u
t
 
t
h
e
 
w
h
o
l
e
 
o
f
 

P
r
i

n
c
e
s
 
S
t
r
e
e
t
 

w

i
t
h
 
s
m
a
l
l
e
r
 

p
r
o
j
e
c
t
 

w
e
b

 
s
i
t
e
 
a
n
d

 

d
o
w
n
l
o
a
d

 
t
h
e
 
E
m
o
t
i
o
n
M
a
p

 

 

d
a
t
a

.
 
 

o
f
 
t
o
w
n

.
 

T
h
e
 
r
i
v
e
r
 
w
h

 

i
c
h
h
a
d

 
b
e
e
n
 
t
h
e
 

b
a
s
i
s
 
f
o
r
 
t
h
e
 
t
o
w
n

s
 
f
o
u
n
d
i

n
g

,
 

o
f
 

i

h
g
h
e
m
o
t
i
o
n
a
l
 
a
r
o
u
s
a
l
 
c
l
u
s
t
e
r
s
.
 

T
h
e
r
e
 
a
r
e
 
l
a
r
g
e
 
c
l
u
s
t
e
r
s
 
a
r
o
u
n
d

 
t
h
e
 

 

w
e
 
i
d
e
n
t
i
fi
e
d
fi
v
e
 
o
v
e
r
l
a
p
p
i

n
g

 
i
s
s
u
e
s
 
o
f
 
c
o
n
c
e
r
n

.
 

F
e
e
l
 
f
r
e
e
 
t
o
 
g
o
 
t
o
 
 
t
h
e
 

f
e
w
 
v
i
s
i
b
l
e
 
s
i
g
n
s
 
o
f
 
a
r
e
 
v
e
r
y
 
S
t
o
c
k
p
o
r
t

s
 
i

n
d
u
s
t
r
i
a
l
 
h
e
r
i
t
a
g
e
 
i

n
 
t
h
e
 
c
e
n
t
r
e
 
 

o
v
e
r
a
l
l
 

p
a
t
t
e
r
n
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
e
m
o
t
i
o
n
p
i
l
l
a
r
s
,
 
i
t
 
i
s
 

 

p
o
s
s
i
b
l
e
 
t
o
 

d
i
s
c
e
r
n

 
 
a
 
n
u
m
b
e
r
 
 
 

t
a
l
k
i

n
g
 
t
o
 
o
v
e
r
 

2
0
0

 

p
e
o
p
l
e
 
i

 

n
S
t
o
c
k
p
o
r
t
 
a
n
d

 
a
n
a
l
y
s
i

n
g
 
t
h
e
i
r
 

d
r
a
w
n
g
s
,
 

i

t
h
e
 
b
a
n
k
s
 
h
a
d

 
t
o
 
b
e
 
k
n
o
c
k
e
d

 

d
o
w
n

.
 

T
h

i
s
 
i
s
 
t
h
e
 
r
e
a
s
o
n
w
h
y

 

 
t
h
e
r
e
 
a
r
e
 

t
o
 
a
l
i
g
n
w

 

i
t
h
 
t
h
e
 

 

M
6
0
m
o
t
o
r
w
a
y

 
i

n
 
a
l
m
o
s
t
 
t
h
e
 
s
a
m
e
 
w
a
y

.
 

L
o
o
k
i

n
g
 
a
t
 
t
h
e
 

v
a
l
u
e
 
a
n
d

 
f
o
r
m
 
c
l
u
s
t
e
r
s
 
o
f
 
i
s
s
u
e
s
 
a
n
d

 
c
o
n
c
e
r
n
s
.
 

B
a
s
e
d

 
o
n
 
t
h
e
 
p
r
o
c
e
s
s
 
o
f
 

i

n
t
o
 
o
n
e
 
t
o
w
n

,
 
i
t
 
a
l
s
o
 
m
e
a
n
t
 
t
h
a
t
 
a
l
l
 
t
h
e
 
o
l
d

 
f
a
c
t
o
r
i
e
s
 
a
n
d
m

 

i
l
l
s
 
t
h
a
t
 
l
i

n
e
d

 

 

a
n
d
E
t
h
e
r
o
w

.
 

 

C
u
r
i
o
u
s
l
y,
m
o
d
e
r
n
N
o
r
t
h
 
f
a
c
i

 

 

n
g
m
a
p
s
 
o
f
 

S
t
o
c
k
p
o
r
t
 
a
p
p
e
a
r
 

o
v
e
r
v
i
e
w

,
 
t
h
e
s
e
 
a
p
p
a
r
e
n
t
l
y

 

d
i
s
c
o
n
n
e
c
t
e
d

 
c
o
n
v
e
r
s
a
t
i
o
n
s
 
s
h
o
w

 
t
h
e
i
r
 
t
r
u
e
 

s
e
e
m
s
 
t
o
 
b
e
 
a
 
p
i
v
o
t
a
l
 
p
o
i

n
t
 
f
o
r
 
S
t
o
c
k
p
o
r
t
.
 

N
o
t
 
o
n
l
y
d
i
d

 

 
i
t
 

u
n

i
t
e
 
S
t
o
c
k
p
o
r
t
 

d
o
e
s
 
n
o
t
 
s
t
a
r
t
 
i

 

n
S
t
o
c
k
p
o
r
t
 

b
u
t
 
r
a
t
h
e
r
 
a
t
 
t
h
e
 
c
o
n
fl
u
e
n
c
e
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
r
i
v
e
r
 
G
o
y
t
 

c
o
n
s
t
r
a
i

n
e
d

 
t
o
 
a
 
n
a
r
r
o
w
l
y

 

d
e
fi
n
e
d

 
t
o
p
i
c
.
 

W
h
e
n

 
i
t
 
i
s
 

p
o
s
s
i
b
l
e
 
t
o
 
s
e
e
 
t
h

i
s
 
 

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

T
h
e
 
b
u
i
l
d
i

n
g
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 

M

e
r
s
e
y
w
a
y

 
r
o
a
d

 
i

 

n
1
9
3
4
w
h

 

i
c
h
 
c
o
v
e
r
e
d

 
t
h
e
 
r
i
v
e
r
 

f
o
l
l
o
w
s
 
t
h
e
 

d
e
fi
n

i
t
i
o
n
 
o
f
 
o
l
d
e
r
 
m
a
p
s
 
a
c
c
o
r
d
i

n
g
 
t
o
 
w
h

i
c
h
 
t
h
e
 
r
i
v
e
r
 

M

e
r
s
e
y

 

l
i
v
e
s
 
a
n
d

 
a
l
l
o
w
s
 

u
s
 
t
o
 
s
e
e
 
t
h
e
m
 
a
l
l
 
s
i
m
u
l
t
a
n
e
o
u
s
l
y
w

 

i
t
h
o
u
t
 
b
e
i

n
g

 
 

b
a
s
e
d

 
o
n
h

 

i
s
t
o
r
i
c
 
m
a
p
s
 
o
f
 

S
t
o
c
k
p
o
r
t
 
t
h
a
t
 

p
l
a
c
e
d

 
t
h
e
 
m
a
i

n
 
f
o
c
u
s
 
o
n
 
t
h
e
 

s
o
c
i
e
t
y

 

p
r
o
d
u
c
e
s
a
n
d

 

d
i
s
p
o
s
e
s
 
o
f
 

g
o
o
d
s
.
 

T
h

i
s
 
m
a
p

 
s
u
g
g
e
s
t
s
 
a
 
m
o
d
e
l
 
f
o
r
 
 

r
i
v
e
r
 
a
s
 
a
 
r
e
s
o
u
r
c
e
,
 
s
o
u
r
c
e
 
o
f
 
i
d
e
n
t
i
t
y

 
a
n
d

 
c
o
u
n
t
y

 

b
o
u
n
d
a
r
y

.
 

T
h

i
s
 
m
a
p

 
 

r
e
c
o
r
d
i

n
g
 
t
h
e
 
a
p
p
a
r
e
n
t
l
y

 
t
r
i
v
i
a
l
 
c
o
n
v
e
r
s
a
t
i
o
n
s
 
a
n
d

 
e
v
e
n
t
s
 
o
f
 
o
u
r
 
e
v
e
r
y
d
a
y
 

(cid:4)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:21)
(cid:11)
(cid:8)
(cid:2)

(cid:11)
(cid:12)
(cid:7)
(cid:7)
(cid:8)
(cid:16)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:19)
(cid:12)
(cid:22)
(cid:8)
(cid:19)
(cid:15)
(cid:8)
(cid:19)
(cid:20)
(cid:8)
(cid:24)

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:4)

t
o
p

 

d
o
e
s
 
n
o
t
 
f
a
c
e
 
N
o
r
t
h
 
l
i
k
e
 
m
o
s
t
 
c
o
n
t
e
m
p
o
r
a
r
y
m
a
p
s
.
 

 

T
h

i
s
 

p
r
o
j
e
c
t
i
o
n

 
i
s
 

o
f
 
a
n

 
i

n
c
i

n
e
r
a
t
o
r
 
r
a
t
h
e
r
 
t
h
a
n
 
a
s
k
i

 

n
g
w
i
d
e
r
 

q
u
e
s
t
i
o
n
s
 
a
b
o
u
t
 
h
o
w
 
o
u
r
 
 

s
e
n
s
i
t
i
v
e
l
y
 
c
o
m
b
i

n

i

n
g
 
t
h
e
 
p
a
s
t
 
a
n
d

 
t
h
e
 

p
r
e
s
e
n
t
.
 
 

t
h
e
 
R
i
v
e
r
 

M

e
r
s
e
y

 
r
u
n
s
 
a
c
r
o
s
s
 
t
h
e
 
m
i
d
d
l
e
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 

p
a
g
e
,
 

m
e
a
n

i

n
g
 
t
h
a
t
 
t
h
e
 

d
i
s
c
u
s
s
i
o
n
s
 
t
e
n
d

 
t
o
 
f
o
c
u
s
 
o
n
l
y

 
o
n
 
a
 
s
i

n
g
l
e
 
i
s
s
u
e
,
 
f
o
r
 
e
x
a
m
p
l
e
 
t
h
e
 
b
u
i
l
d
i

n
g

 

f
o
r
 
a
 
c
o
n
v
e
r
s
i
o
n

 
i

n
t
o
 
a
 
c
u
l
t
u
r
a
l
 
c
e
n
t
r
e
 
t
h
a
t
 
c
o
u
l
d

 
s
e
t
 
a
n
 
e
x
a
m
p
l
e
 
f
o
r
 
 
 

I
t
 
i
s
 
i

m
p
o
r
t
a
n
t
 
t
o
 
n
o
t
i
c
e
 
t
h
a
t
 
t
h
e
 
w
h
o
l
e
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
m
a
p

 
i
s
 
o
r
i
e
n
t
a
t
e
d

 
s
o
 
t
h
a
t
 

a
l
i
e
n
a
t
e
d

 
l
a
n
g
u
a
g
e
,
 
t
h
a
t
 
n
e
a
t
l
y

 

p
a
c
k
a
g
e
s
 
o
u
r
 
i
d
e
a
s
.
 
I
n
 
a
d
d
i
t
i
o
n

,
 
t
h
e
s
e
 

n
e
g
l
e
c
t
e
d

 

 
a
n
d
h
a
r
d
l
y
 
f
r
e
q
u
e
n
t
e
d

.
 

T
h

i
s
 
s
p
a
c
e
 
a
p
p
e
a
r
s
 
t
o
 
h
a
v
e
 
t
h
e
 

p
o
t
e
n
t
i
a
l
 

 

i

D
r
a
w
n
g
P
r
o
v
o
c
a
t
i
o
n
s
 
&
E
m
o
t
i
o
n
M
a
p
p
i

 

 

n
g

.
 

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

(cid:4)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

(cid:11)
(cid:17)
(cid:23)
(cid:21)
(cid:17)

(cid:2)

(cid:2)

(cid:19)
(cid:8)
(cid:5)
(cid:7)

(cid:2)

(cid:21)
(cid:11)
(cid:8)
(cid:2)
(cid:15)
(cid:5)
(cid:18)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:4)

Y
e
t
 

w
e
 
l
i
v
e
 
i

n
 
a
 
t
i

m
e
 
w
h
e
n
 
o
u
r
 
o
p
i

n

i
o
n
s
 
a
r
e
 

v
a
l
u
e
d

 

v
e
r
y
 
h
g
h
l
y
.
 

i

t
h
e
 
w
a
y
 
o
f
 

 

n
e
w
d
e
v
e
l
o
p
m
e
n
t
s
.
 

A
n
 
e
x
a
m
p
l
e
 
o
f
 
t
h

i
s
 
t
y
p
e
 
o
f
 
t
h

i

n
k
i

n
g

 
i
s
 

d
i
s
c
u
s
s
i
o
n
s
 
i

n
 
t
h
o
s
e
 
c
o
n
t
e
x
t
s
,
 

w
e
 
t
e
n
d

 
t
o
 

u
s
e
 
a
 

v
e
r
y

 
s
t
r
a
n
g
e
 
s
t
i
l
t
e
d

 
a
n
d

 

 

 m
a
r
k
e
t
 

w
h

 

i
c
h
w
a
s
 
r
e
v
e
r
e
n
t
i
a
l
l
y
 
n
a
m
e
d

 
t
h
e
 


G
l
a
s
s
 
U
m
b
r
e
l
l
a


,
 
i
s
 
t
o
d
a
y

 

f
e
e
l
 
a
b
o
u
t
 

p
a
r
t
i
c
u
l
a
r
 
i
s
s
u
e
s
.
 

C
u
r
i
o
u
s
l
y

 
t
h
o
u
g
h

,
 

 

w
h
e
n
w
e
 
e
n
t
e
r
 
i

n
t
o
 

h
a
s
 
t
o
d
a
y
 
b
e
e
n
 
t
u
r
n
e
d

 
i

n
t
o
 
a
 
v
e
r
y

 

b
r
a
s
h
 
c
l
o
t
h

i

n
g
 
s
h
o
p

.
 

T
h
e
 
n
e
a
r
b
y

 
c
o
v
e
r
e
d

 

E
v
e
r
y
o
n
e
 
f
r
o
m
p
o
l
i
t
i
c
i
a
n
s
 
t
o
 
m
a
r
k
e
t
 
r
e
s
e
a
r
c
h
e
r
s
 
a
r
e
 
f
a
s
c
i

n
a
t
e
d

 
b
y
 
h
o
w
w
e
 
 

 

p
e
r
h
a
p
s
 
v
i
s
i
b
l
e
 
a
t
 
t
h
e
 
s
i
t
e
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
N
o
r
m
a
n
 
c
a
s
t
l
e
,
 
t
h
e
n
 
l
a
t
e
r
 
c
l
o
t
h
m

 

i
l
l
,
 

w
h

i
c
h

 

T
h

i
s
 
m
a
p

 
c
o
l
l
e
c
t
s
 
t
o
g
e
t
h
e
r
 
a
n
d

 
s
h
o
w
s
 
t
h
e
 
r
e
s
u
l
t
s
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
t

w
o
 
a
c
t
i
v
i
t
i
e
s
:
 

o
u
r
 
m
n
d

i

 
a
n
d

 
a
r
e
 
n
e
v
e
r
 
r
e
c
o
r
d
e
d

 

b
e
c
a
u
s
e
 
w
e
 
t
h

i

n
k

 
t
h
e
y
 
a
r
e
 
t
r
i
v
i
a
l
.
 

a
m
o
n
g
s
t
 
t
h
o
s
e
 
t
h
a
t
 
t
h
o
u
g
h

 
i
t
 

d
i
d

 
a
f
f
e
c
t
 
t
h
e
m

,
 
s
o
m
e
 
s
a
w

 
i
t
 
a
s
 
s
t
a
n
d
i

n
g

 
i

n

 

s
u
m
m
e
r
 

2
0
0
7

,
 
a
b
o
u
t
 

2
0
0

 

p
e
o
p
l
e
 
t
o
o
k

 

p
a
r
t
 
i

n
 
s
i

 

x
p
u
b
l
i
c
 
m
a
p
p
i

n
g
 
e
v
e
n
t
s
.
 

e
x
p
r
e
s
s
 
o
u
r
s
e
l
v
e
s
.
 

T
h
e
 
v
a
s
t
 

m
a
j
o
r
i
t
y

 
o
f
 
t
h
e
s
e
 
c
o
n
v
e
r
s
a
t
i
o
n
s
 

q
u
i
c
k
l
y
 
s
l
i
p
 

t
h

i

n
k
 
t
h
a
t
 
t
h
e
 
p
a
s
t
 

w
a
s
 
i

n
fl
u
e
n
c
i

n
g
 
t
h
e
i
r
 
e
v
e
r
y
d
a
y

 
l
i
f
e
 
i

 

n
S
t
o
c
k
p
o
r
t
.
 

E
v
e
n

 

o
p
i

n

i
o
n
s
 
a
n
d

 

d
e
s
i
r
e
s
 
o
f
 
l
o
c
a
l
 

p
e
o
p
l
e
.
 

O
v
e
r
 
a
 

p
e
r
i
o
d

 
o
f
 
t

w
o
 
m
o
n
t
h
s
 
i

n

 

w
e
 
j
u
s
t
 

w
a
n
t
 
t
o
 
t
a
l
k

 
t
o
 
f
r
i
e
n
d
s
 
a
n
d

 
s
t
r
a
n
g
e
r
s
 
t
o
 
h
e
a
r
 
t
h
e
i
r
 
i
d
e
a
s
 
 
a
n
d

 
t
o
 

v
e
r
y
 
s
t
r
o
n
g
l
y
 
r
e
p
r
e
s
e
n
t
e
d

 
i

n
 
p
e
o
p
l
e


s
 

d
r
a
w
n
g
s
.
 

i

W
h
e
n
 
a
s
k
e
d

,
 

m
o
s
t
 

 

d
i
d
n
o
t
 

t
h

i
s
 
a
r
t
 

p
r
o
j
e
c
t
 

p
r
e
s
e
n
t
s
 
a
 

v
i
s
i
o
n
 
o
f
 

S
t
o
c
k
p
o
r
t
 
t
h
a
t
 
r
e
p
r
e
s
e
n
t
s
 
t
h
e
 
e
m
o
t
i
o
n
s
,
 

S
o
m
e
t
i

m
e
s
,
 

w
e
 
h
a
v
e
 
a
 

p
a
r
t
i
c
u
l
a
r
 

p
u
r
p
o
s
e
 
f
o
r
 
c
o
m
m
u
n

i
c
a
t
i

n
g

,
 
b
u
t
 
o
f
t
e
n

 
 

i

l
o
o
m
n
g
 
t
r
a
i

n
 
v
i
a
d
u
c
t
 
a
s
 
a
 
l
a
n
d
m
a
r
k

,
 
t
h
e
 
h

i
s
t
o
r
y

 
o
f
 

S
t
o
c
k
p
o
r
t
 

w
a
s
 
n
o
t

W
h

i
l
s
t
 
c
o
n
v
e
n
t
i
o
n
a
l
 

m
a
p
s
 
s
h
o
w
 
s
t
a
t
i
c
 
a
r
c
h

i
t
e
c
t
u
r
e
 
a
n
d
 
e
x
c
l
u
d
e
 
h
u
m
a
n
s
,
 

 

E
v
e
r
y
d
a
y
w
e
 
e
n
t
e
r
 
i

n
t
o
 

d
i
s
c
u
s
s
i
o
n
s
 
w

 

i
t
h
p
e
o
p
l
e
 
f
o
r
 

d
i
f
f
e
r
e
n
t
 
r
e
a
s
o
n
s
.
 

W
h

i
l
e
 
S
t
o
c
k
p
o
r
t
 
p
r
i
d
e
s
 
i
t
s
e
l
f
 
a
s
 
a
 
h

i
s
t
o
r
i
c
 
t
o
w
n
 
a
n
d
m
a
n
y

 

 

p
e
o
p
l
e
 

d
r
e
w

 
t
h
e
 

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)

 

T
H
E
S
T
O
C
K
P
O
R
T
E
M
O
T
I

 

 

O
N
M
  
A
P

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

R
E
F
L
E
C
T
I

 

 

O
N
S
O
N
T
H
E
E
M
O
T
I

 

 

O
N
M
A
P

 

(cid:2)

(cid:4)
(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:21)
(cid:11)
(cid:8)
(cid:2)
(cid:15)
(cid:5)
(cid:19)
(cid:10)
(cid:12)
(cid:16)
(cid:5)
(cid:14)
(cid:12)
(cid:20)
(cid:8)
(cid:7)

(cid:2)

(cid:11)
(cid:12)
(cid:20)
(cid:21)
(cid:17)
(cid:19)
(cid:24)

(cid:2)

(cid:17)
(cid:9)
(cid:2)
(cid:20)
(cid:21)
(cid:17)
(cid:1)
(cid:13)
(cid:18)
(cid:17)
(cid:19)
(cid:21)

(cid:2)
(cid:2)
(cid:4)

(cid:1)
(cid:11)
(cid:19)
(cid:12)
(cid:20)
(cid:21)
(cid:12)
(cid:5)
(cid:16)

(cid:2)

(cid:16)
(cid:17)
(cid:14)
(cid:7)

(cid:2)
(cid:3)
(cid:2)

(cid:7)
(cid:5)
(cid:16)
(cid:12)
(cid:8)
(cid:14)
(cid:5)
(cid:2)
(cid:6)
(cid:17)
(cid:19)
(cid:5)
(cid:20)
(cid:1)
(cid:11)
(cid:12)

 

 

58

59

blanquis parade

rob van kranenburg

It was, as some Parisians later claimed, a perfect afternoon for a stroll in 
the Tuileries. Finally managing to escape the oppressive indoor drudgery 
to which they had been confined for so long, if not the whole of Paris, 
than certainly a specific political cross-section of the Parisians, welcomed 
this sunny January afternoon with a ferocity normally reserved for their 
traditional afternoon aperitif. The Jardin des Tuileries had always been, 
as it was to remain, a popular resort and few people could resist the 
temptation to walk past the Jeu de Paume towards the Place de la Concorde 
to go for a cafe at the Champs Elysees for although it was sunny, it was 
till bitterly cold. They could still gaze upon the Tuileries Palace, built by 
Catharina de Medici in the 16th century, it was not to survive the year 1871 
when it was thoroughly plundered and destroyed by the Communards. 
But now it stood firm testimony to the power of Kings and Queens over 
their subjects. A monarchical power that was, in the shape of Napoleon III, 
making a desperate attempt to survive by transforming an authoritarian 
Empire into a liberal one, a tactical move, which, as we know, did not 
succeed and led to the proclamation of the Republic on September 4 
1870. But to the people who strolled on the Champs-Elysees that fateful 
January afternoon this was still the Second Empire and they made no 
conscious connection between the amazing spectacle they were about 
to witness and the political earthquake that lay only a few months ahead. 

A few weeks earlier, on January 10 1870, Victor Noire, a journalist from 
the extreme republican newspaper La Lanterne, was killed by Pierre 
Bonaparte, the Emperors cousin. This event profoundly disturbed the 
eternal conspirator Blanqui whose revolutionary republican activism had 
earned him a wide range of dedicated followers. He suddenly realised that 
he only knew his lieutenants personally, and had never actually seen the 
men they commanded in his name. In effect, he did not even know their 
exact number. Desperately wanting to assess the strength of his troops 
personally, he contacted his aide-de-camp. The problem was obvious. 
They could not organise a parade of revolutionaries as if it were a regular 
military army. The solution, however, was equally obvious. You can hide 
a parade of revolutionaries in a parade of afternoon strollers. He said 
farewell to his sister, put a gun in his pocket and took up his post on the 
Champs-Elysees. There the parade of the troops of which he was the 
mysterious general would take place. He knew the officers, now he would 
see the men they led for the first time, marching past in proud display. 
Blanqui mustered his troops for inspection without anyone suspecting 
anything of what was actually happening. In the crowd that watched 
this curious display Blanqui stood leaning against a tree watching his 
friends silently approaching in columns. The promenade was momentarily 
transformed into a parade ground. In the very act of moving, walking men 
became marching soldiers. Marching soldiers only had to drop out of line 
back into the crowd to be transformed into walking men again 
and ultimately into afternoon strollers on a sunny January afternoon. 
The Blanqui parade dispersed as swiftly as it had emerged. 
The unsuspecting onlookers were left with their bewilderment, in doubt 
as to what they had actually seen. They had witnessed a powerful 
manifestation of the existence of an another society that had no 
institutional place in the political organisation of their time. The covert 
world represented by the Blanqui parade erupted for a brief moment in the 
overt world at a time and place when it was least expected. In that brief 
moment, its presence deliberately unmasked, the covert parade coexisted 

60

61

alongside the overt promenade, and it is hard to tell which was the more 
real as the physical acts of strolling and marching seemed to blend into 
an harmonious simultaneity, thus revealing the frightening prospectthat 
they might be interchangeable. In the blurring of the boundaries between 
marching and walking we are made aware of how we are positioned 
within a field of vision and that we might able to construct meaning 
through experiencing the transgression itself. At the same time, however, 
experiencing the transgression strengthens our notions of the very acts 
themselves, we translate the momentary - the simultaneous blending - into 
our everyday notions of walking and marching. In the very moment that we 
gain the opportunity to make sense, we lose the opportunity to integrate it 
fully into our own ways of seeing.

about the author

Rob van Kranenburg is an organiser, investigating the moments of 
emergence of new relationships between existing nodes.

The images on the next few pages are all from the Greenwich Emotion Map,  
2005-2006. The images show multiple views of the final printed map.

62

63

64

65

S
i
t
u
a
t
i
o
n
i
s
t
s
 
i

m
a
g
i
n
e
d

 

,
 
t
h
e
G
r
e
e
n
w
i
c
h
 
E
m
o
t
i
o
n
M
a
p
 
s
u
g
g
e
s
t
s
 

 

P
o
l
y
g
r
a
p
h

,
 

 

 

w
h
e
r
e
 
i
t
 
i
s
 
u
s
e
d
b
y
 
l
a
w
e
n
f
o
r
c
e
m
e
n
t
 
a
g
e
n
c
i
e
s
 
t
o

 
i

d
e
n
t
i
f
y

 
 

c
o
m
m
o
n

 

 

 
i
s
 
a
n
e
l
e
m
e
n
t
 
o
f
 
n
o
v
e
l
t
y
w
h
i
c
h
h
a
s
 
c
a
u
s
e
d
 
t
h
e
p
e
r
s
o
n

s
 

 

 

 

 

 

b
e
i
n
g
a
n
n
o
y
e
d
b
y
o
n
e

s
 
s
u
r
r
o
u
n
d
n
g
s
.
 

i

 

W
h
a
t
 
t
h
e
s
e
e
v
e
n
t
s
 
h
a
v
e
 
i

n

 



e
v
e
n
t
s

 

 

v
a
r
i
e
s
 
f
r
o
m
m
e
e
t
i
n
g
p
e
o
p
l
e

 

 

,
 
t
a
k
i
n
g
a
p
h
o
t
o

 

,
 
c
r
o
s
s
i
n
g
 
r
o
a
d
s
,
 
t
o

 

s
u
b
t
l
e
w
a
y
 
f
o
r
 
t
h
e
m
s
e
l
v
e
s
.
 
F
r
o
m
a
 
c
o
m
m
o
n
 
s
t
a
r
t
i
n
g
p
o
n
t
 
t
h
e

i

 

 

 

 

 

i

o
w
n
b
o
m
e
t
r
i
c
 
d
a
t
a
 
t
o
a
n
a
u
t
h
o
r
i
t
y
 
f
o
r
 
j
u
d
g
i
n
g

 

,
 

 

i

B
o
M
a
p
p
n
g

i

 

 

e
m
p
o
w
e
r
s
 
t
h
e
p
a
r
t
i
c
i
p
a
n
t
s
 
t
o

 
i

n
t
e
r
p
r
e
t
 
t
h
e
i
r
 
b
o
d
y

s
 
m
e
t
r
i
c
s
 
i

 

 

n
a
m
o
r
e

 

 

m
e
a
n
m
o
m
e
n
t
s
 
o
f
 
d
i
s
t
i
n
c
t
i
v
e
a
t
t
e
n
t
i
o
n

 

.
 

 

T
h
e
a
c
t
u
a
l
 
n
a
t
u
r
e
o
f
 
t
h
e
s
e

 

 
 

u
s
e
s
 
t
h
i
s
 
t
e
c
h
n
o
l
o
g
y
v
e
r
y
d
i
f
f
e
r
e
n
t
l
y

 

 

.
 
I

 

n
s
t
e
a
d
o
f
 
h
a
n
d
n
g
o
v
e
r
 
o
n
e

s
 

i

 

 

 

a
n
e
x
p
e
r
i
e
n
c
e
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
c
i
t
y
a
s
 
a
 
s
e
r
i
e
s
 
o
f
 
d
i
s
t
i
n
c
t
 


 

e
v
e
n
t
s

,
 

 

b
y
w
h
i
c
h
w
e

 

 
 

 

t
h
e
p
h
y
s
i
o
l
o
g
i
c
a
l
 
s
y
m
p
t
o
m
s
 
o
f
 
s
t
r
e
s
s
 
i

 

n
d
u
c
e
d
b
y
 
l
y
n
g

i

.
 

 

i

B
o
M
a
p
p
n
g

i

 

 

a
t
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
 
t
o
b
e
c
o
m
e
 
f
o
c
u
s
e
d

.
 

 

 

T
h
i
s
 
v
i
s
i
o
n
o
f
 
t
h
e
e
n
v
i
r
o
n
m
e
n
t
 
a
s
 
a
 
s
t
a
g
e

 

 

p
a
r
t
i
c
i
p
a
n
t
s
 
w
o
u
l
d
w
a
l
k
 
f
o
r
 
u
p
 
t
o
a
n
h
o
u
r
 

 

 

-

-

-

-

w
h
e
r
e
v
e
r
 
t
h
e
y
w
a
n
t
e
d

 

 
i

n
 
t
h
e

 

66

R
a
t
h
e
r
 
t
h
a
n
 
t
h
e
 
c
o
n
t
i
n
u
o
u
s
 
d
r
i
f
t
i
n
g
 
t
h
r
o
u
g
h
 
t
h
e
 
c
i
t
y
 
t
h
a
t
 
t
h
e

 

 

 

p
o
s
i
t
i
o
n
o
n
e
a
r
t
h

 

.
 

T
h
e
 
f
i
n
g
e
r
 
c
u
f
f
 
s
e
n
s
o
r
 

w
a
s
 
d
e
r
i
v
e
d
 
f
r
o
m

 
 
t
h
e

 

 

 
s
t
r
a
n
g
e
r
s
 

a
p
p
e
a
r
s
 
t
o
b
e
m
o
r
e
 
i

 

 

m
p
o
r
t
a
n
t
 
t
h
a
n
 
t
h
e
o
t
h
e
r
 
l
e
v
e
l
s
.

 

 

 

 

w
i
t
h
a
G
l
o
b
a
l
 
P
o
s
i
t
i
o
n
n
g
S
y
s
t
e
m

i

 

 
(
G
P
S
)
 

w
h
i
c
h
 
l
o
c
a
t
e
s
 
t
h
e
w
e
a
r
e
r

s
 
 

 

v
i
e
w
s
 
o
f
 
t
h
e
 
r
i
v
e
r
 
a
n
d
b
e
y
o
n
d

 

.
 

i

 

i

n
c
l
u
d
n
g
a
s
 
i
t
 
d
o
e
s
 
s
u
r
p
r
i
s
e
m
e
e
t
i
n
g
s
 
w
i
t
h
 
f
r
i
e
n
d
s
,
 

 

n
e
i
g
h
b
o
u
r
s
 
a
n
d

 

S
k
i
n
R
e
s
p
o
n
s
e
 
(
G
S
R
)
 

a
n

 

 
i

 

n
d
e
x
o
f
 
e
m
o
t
i
o
n
a
l
 
r
e
s
p
o
n
s
e

 
i

 

n
 
c
o
n
j
u
n
c
t
i
o
n

 

o
f
 
e
m
o
t
i
o
n
s
,
 

 

 

w
h
i
c
h
a
r
e
 
t
r
i
g
g
e
r
e
d
b
y
m
a
n
y
d
i
f
f
e
r
e
n
t
 
s
t
i

 

 

m
u
l
i
 
i

n
c
l
u
d
n
g

i

 
 

 

 

s
o
c
i
a
l
 
s
p
a
c
e

w
h
i
c
h
m
i
g
h
t
 
b
e
 
s
e
e
n
a
s
 
e
p
h
e
m
e
r
a
l
 
a
n
d
 
t
e
m
p
o
r
a
r
y

 

,
 

a
b
o
u
t
 
p
a
r
t
i
c
u
l
a
r
 
l
o
c
a
l
 
f
e
a
t
u
r
e
s
.
 

B
u
t
 
p
e
r
h
a
p
s
 
m
o
s
t
 
s
t
r
i
k
i
n
g
 
i
s
 
t
h
e

 

 

i

p
r
o
m
n
e
n
c
e
o
f
 
a
 
t
h
i
r
d
 
l
e
v
e
l
:
 
t
h
a
t
 
o
f
 
p
e
o
p
l
e

s
 
s
o
c
i
a
l
 
i

n
t
e
r
a
c
t
i
o
n

.
 

T
h
i
s
 
 

 

 

t
h
e
b
u
i
l
t
 
e
n
v
i
r
o
n
m
e
n
t
 
r
e
p
r
e
s
e
n
t
e
d
b
y
 
t
r
a
f
f
i
c
 
c
r
o
s
s
i
n
g
s
 
a
n
d
 
c
o
m
m
e
n
t
s
 
 

 

t
a
s
t
e
a
n
d
 
s
m
e
l
l
 
s
t
i

m
u
l
i
.
 

A
t
 
a
n
o
t
h
e
r
 
l
e
v
e
l
,
 

w
e
 
s
e
e
m

 
t
o
 
s
e
e
 
t
h
e
e
f
f
e
c
t
s
 
o
f
 

 

 

 

i

i

T
h
e
B
o
M
a
p
p
n
g
d
e
v
i
c
e
w
a
s
 
i

 

 

 

 

n
v
e
n
t
e
d
b
y
 
t
h
e
a
r
t
i
s
t
 
C
h
r
i
s
t
i
a
n
N
o
l
d

 

.
 
 

i

I
t
 
c
o
m
b
n
e
s
 
a
 
f
i
n
g
e
r
 
c
u
f
f
 
s
e
n
s
o
r
,
 

 

w
h
i
c
h
 
r
e
c
o
r
d
s
 
t
h
e
w
e
a
r
e
r

s
 
G
a
l
v
a
n
i
c
 

o
v
e
r
 
t
h
e
 
r
i
v
e
r
 
T
h
a
m
e
s
.
 

 

 

T
h
i
s
 
i
s
 
n
o
t
 
a
m
a
p
o
f
 
g
e
o
g
r
a
p
h
i
c
a
l
 
f
e
a
t
u
r
e
s
 
b
u
t
 
 

 

G
r
e
e
n
w
i
c
h
P
e
n
n
s
u
l
a
b
u
t
 

i

 

 

m
a
y
b
e
 
s
u
r
p
r
i
s
e
d
 
t
h
a
t
 
t
h
e
 
c
o
n
t
o
u
r
s
 
f
a
n
o
u
t

 

 

r
e
-
e
x
p
l
o
r
e
d
 
t
h
e
 
l
o
c
a
l
 
a
r
e
a
w
i
t
h
 
t
h
e
a
i
d
o
f
 
a
B
o
M
a
p
p
n
g
d
e
v
i
c
e

i

i

 

 

 

 

 

.
 

c
a
l
m

.
 

P
e
o
p
l
e
 
f
a
m

i
l
i
a
r
 

w
i
t
h
 
t
h
e
a
r
e
a
w

 

 

i
l
l
 
r
e
c
o
g
n
i
s
e
 
t
h
e
o
u
t
l
i
n
e
o
f
 
t
h
e

 

 

 

 

 

w
i
t
h
 
t
h
e
a
r
t
i
s
t
 
C
h
r
i
s
t
i
a
n
N
o
l
d
 
t
o
 
c
r
e
a
t
e
a
n
e
w
m
a
p
o
f
 
t
h
e
a
r
e
a

 

 

 

 

 

.
 

B
a
c
k
e
d

 
 

m
a
p

 
i

 

 

n
a
g
r
a
d
i
e
n
t
 
o
f
 
a
r
o
u
s
a
l
.
 

T
h
e
 
i

n
t
e
n
s
e
 
r
e
d
a
r
e
a
s
 
i

 

 

n
d
i
c
a
t
e
h
o
t
s
p
o
t
s
 

 

b
y
a
 
s
e
r
i
e
s
 
o
f
 

 

w
e
e
k
l
y
g
r
o
u
p
w
o
r
k
s
h
o
p
s
,
 
t
h
e
y

 
i

n
d
i
v
i
d
u
a
l
l
y
o
r
 
i

 

 

n
p
a
i
r
s
 

o
f
 
c
o
m
m
u
n
a
l
 
a
r
o
u
s
a
l
,
 

 

 

 

w
h
i
l
e
 
t
h
e
d
a
r
k
b
l
u
e
p
o
o
l
s
 
s
h
o
w
a
r
e
a
s
 
o
f
 
c
o
m
m
u
n
a
l
 

 

 

 

 

p
e
r
s
o
n
a
l
 
r
e
s
p
o
n
s
e
a
p
p
e
a
r
s
 
t
o
b
e
 
c
a
u
s
e
d
b
y
a
v
a
r
i
e
t
y
o
f
 
v
i
s
u
a
l
,
 

 

 

 

 

a
u
d
i
t
o
r
y

,
 

I

,
 

n
d
e
p
e
n
d
e
n
t
 
P
h
o
t
o
g
r
a
p
h
y
m
o
r
e
 
t
h
a
n
5
0
G
r
e
e
n
w
i
c
h
 
r
e
s
i
d
e
n
t
s
 
w
o
r
k
e
d

 

 

 

 

o
f
 
i

 

n
d
i
v
i
d
u
a
l
 
r
e
s
p
o
n
s
e
 
t
o
 
f
o
r
m
a
 
c
o
m
m
u
n
a
l
 
s
k
i
n
 
t
h
a
t
 
c
o
v
e
r
s
 
t
h
e
e
n
t
i
r
e

 

 

 

 
l
e
v
e
l
,
 
t
h
e
m
a
p
 
s
h
o
w
s
 
a
 
s
e
n
s
o
r
y
 
s
p
a
c
e
o
f
 
e
m
b
o
d
i
e
d
e
x
p
e
r
i
e
n
c
e
w
h
e
r
e

 

 

 

 

 

a
n
d
M
a
r
c
h
2
0
0
6

 

.
 
I

 

 

 

n
a
p
r
o
j
e
c
t
 
o
r
g
a
n
i
s
e
d
b
y
 
t
h
e
 
l
o
c
a
l
 
a
r
t
s
 
o
r
g
a
n
i
s
a
t
i
o
n

 

 

e
m
o
t
i
o
n
a
l
 
d
a
t
a
o
f
 
a
l
l
 
t
h
e
p
a
r
t
i
c
i
p
a
n
t
s
.
 

 

T
h
e
 
c
o
n
t
o
u
r
s
 
c
o
n
n
e
c
t
 
p
o
n
t
s
 

i

 

 

c
e
p
t
u
a
l
 
l
e
v
e
l
s
 
t
h
a
t
 
c
a
n
b
e
p
a
r
t
i
a
l
l
y
u
n
r
a
v
e
l
l
e
d
b
y
 
t
h
e
v
i
e
w
e
r
.
 
 

 

 

 

 

A
t
 
a
b
a
s
i
c
 
 

l
o
c
a
l
 
r
e
s
i
d
e
n
t
s
 
f
r
o
m

 

 

i

 
t
h
e
G
r
e
e
n
w
i
c
h
P
e
n
n
s
u
l
a
b
e
t
w
e
e
n
O
c
t
o
b
e
r
 
2
0
0
5

 

 

 

 

t
h
e
y
w
a
n
t
e
d

.
 

 

 

T
h
e
 
c
o
l
o
u
r
e
d
 
s
u
r
f
a
c
e
o
f
 
t
h
e
m
a
p
 
r
e
p
r
e
s
e
n
t
s
 
t
h
e
 
c
o
m
b
n
e
d

i

 

 

T
h
e
G
r
e
e
n
w
i
c
h
 
E
m
o
t
i
o
n
M
a
p

 

,
 

 

 

v
i
s
i
b
l
e
o
n
 
t
h
e
w
e
b
s
i
t
e
a
n
d
h
e
r
e
 
i

 

 

 

n
p
r
i
n
t
e
d

 

A

l
l
 

 

 

m
a
p
s
 
a
r
e
a
 
s
n
a
p
s
h
o
t
 
o
f
 
a
p
l
a
c
e
a
t
 
a
 
s
p
e
c
i
f
i
c
 
m
o
m
e
n
t
.
 

 

T
h
i
s
 
i
s
 

f
o
r
m

,
 
i
s
 
a
 
c
o
m
p
l
e
x
a
s
s
e
m
b
l
y
o
f
 
i

 

 

n
d
i
v
i
d
u
a
l
 
e
x
p
e
r
i
e
n
c
e
s
 
a
t
 
d
i
f
f
e
r
e
n
t
 
p
e
r
-

 

 

e
s
p
e
c
i
a
l
l
y
 
t
r
u
e
o
f
 
t
h
e
G
r
e
e
n
w
i
c
h
 
E
m
o
t
i
o
n
M
a
p

 

,
 

 

w
h
i
c
h
w
a
s
 
c
r
e
a
t
e
d
b
y

 

 

 

 

i

s
h
o
w
s
 
t
h
e
 
s
t
a
r
t
i
n
g
p
o
n
t
 
f
r
o
m
w
h
i
c
h
p
e
o
p
l
e
 
c
h
o
s
e
 
t
o
w
a
l
k
w
h
e
r
e
v
e
r
 

 

 

 

 

t
h
e
p
a
r
t
i
c
i
p
a
n
t
s
 
w
a
l
k
e
d

.
 

 

 

 

T
h
e
m
o
s
t
 
d
e
n
s
e
a
r
e
a
n
e
a
r
 
t
h
e
 
c
e
n
t
r
e
o
f
 
t
h
e
m
a
p

 

 

 

G
R
E
E
N
W
I
C
H

 
 

E
M
O
T
I

O
N

 
 

M
A
P

b
y
 
C
h
r
i
s
t
i
a
n
N
o
l
d

 

 

 

 

 

i

i

D
r
i
f
t
i
n
g
w
i
t
h
 
t
h
e
B
o
M
a
p
p
n
g
e
q
u
p
m
e
n
t
 
c
r
e
a
t
e
s
 
v
e
r
y
d
i
f
f
e
r
e
n
t
 

i

 

m
a
p
s
.
 

G
r
e
e
n
w
i
c
h
 
E
m
o
t
i
o
n
M
a
p
O
n
 
t
h
e
m
a
p

.
 

 

 

 

,
 
t
h
e
b
l
a
c
k
 
l
i
n
e
s
 
s
h
o
w
w
h
e
r
e
a
l
l
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
t
h
e
 
r
e
s
u
l
t
i
n
g
m
a
p
s
 
t
e
n
d
e
d
 
t
o
b
e
d
i
s
a
p
p
o
n
t
i
n
g
l
y
u
n
c
o
m
m
u
n
i
c
a
t
i
v
e

i

 

.

 

 

t
h
e
u
r
b
a
n
d
r
i
f
t
 
t
h
r
o
u
g
h
 
t
h
e
 
c
i
t
y
W
h
i
l
e
 
t
h
e
s
e
 
i

.
 

d
e
a
s
 
a
r
e
v
e
r
y

 

 
i

n
t
e
r
e
s
t
i
n
g

,
 

p
h
y
s
i
c
a
l
 
s
p
a
c
e
?

b
e
t
w
e
e
n
 
e
m
o
t
i

o
n
s
 
a
n
d

 

W
h
a
t
 
i
s
 
t
h
e

 
r
e
l
a
t
i

o
n
s
h

i

p

 

 

 

 

T
h
i
s
 
q
u
e
s
t
i
o
n
h
a
s
 
b
e
e
n
a
 
c
o
n
c
e
r
n
o
f
 
t
h
e
o
r
i
s
t
s
 
f
r
o
m
m
a
n
y
d
i
s
c
i
p
l
i
n
e
s
 

 

 

 

1
9
6
0
s
 
w
i
t
h
 
t
h
e
i
r
 
n
o
t
i
o
n
o
f
 
p
s
y
c
h
o
g
e
o
g
r
a
p
h
y
a
n
d
 
t
h
e
i
r
 
c
o
n
c
e
p
t
u
a
l
 
t
o
o
l
,
 

 

 

b
u
t
 
w
a
s
 
p
e
r
h
a
p
s
 
m
o
s
t
 
d
i
r
e
c
t
l
y
a
d
d
r
e
s
s
e
d
b
y
 
t
h
e
S
i
t
u
a
t
i
o
n
i
s
t
s
 
i

 

 

n
 
t
h
e
 
l
a
t
e

 

E
m
o
t
i

 

o
n
M
a
p

 
c
r
e
a
t
e
d
?

 

H
o
w
w
a
s
 
t
h
e
G
r
e
e
n
w
i
c
h

 

 

t
r
a
c
k
s
 
w
e
r
e
g
a
t
h
e
r
e
d

 

 

 

i

,
 
c
o
m
b
n
e
d
a
n
d
o
v
e
r
l
a
i
d
 
t
o
 
c
r
e
a
t
e

 
 
t
h
e
 
c
o
m
m
u
n
a
l
 
 

 

 

 

i

 
t
h
e
n
a
d
d
a
n
n
o
t
a
t
i
o
n
s
 
t
o
p
o
n
t
s
 
a
l
o
n
g
 
t
h
e
i
r
 
t
r
a
c
k
 
t
h
a
t
 
t
h
e
y
 
c
o
n
s
i
d
e
r
e
d

 
 

m
e
m
o
r
a
b
l
e
o
r
 
i

 

m
p
o
r
t
a
n
t
.
 
I

 

n
 
t
h
i
s
 
w
a
y
m
o
r
e
 
t
h
a
n
5
0

 

 
i

n
d
i
v
i
d
u
a
l
 
a
n
n
o
t
a
t
e
d

t
h
e
i
r
 
e
x
p
e
r
i
e
n
c
e
s
 
o
n
 
t
h
e
w
a
l
k

 

.
 

A
s
 
a
 
r
e
s
u
l
t
 
o
f
 
t
h
i
s
 
r
e
f
l
e
c
t
i
o
n

 

,
 
t
h
e
y
w
o
u
l
d

 

 

 

t
a
k
i
n
g
p
l
a
c
e
a
t
 
t
h
e
 
s
a
m
e
 
t
i

m
e

.
 
 

 

s
e
n
s
e
o
f
 
i
t
.
 
I

 

 

n
 
t
h
e
w
o
r
k
s
h
o
p
s
 
e
a
c
h
p
a
r
t
i
c
i
p
a
n
t
 
s
t
u
d
i
e
d
 
t
h
e
i
r
 
o
w
n
 
t
r
a
c
k

 

a
n
d
 
t
h
e
n
 
t
a
l
k
e
d

 
i

 

 

n
 
t
h
e
g
r
o
u
p
a
b
o
u
t
 
t
h
e
i
r
 


e
m
o
t
i
o
n
m
a
p

 


 
i

n
 
r
e
l
a
t
i
o
n
 
t
o

i

 

n
d
e
c
i
s
i
o
n
w
h
i
c
h
 
c
o
m
p
e
t
e
s
 
f
o
r
 
a
t
t
e
n
t
i
o
n
w
i
t
h
 
t
h
e
 
f
a
m

 

 

i
l
y
a
r
g
u
m
e
n
t
 

 

 

 

c
a
n
b
e
p
o
s
i
t
i
v
e
o
r
 
n
e
g
a
t
i
v
e
a
n
d
 
r
e
q
u
i
r
e
s
 
a
c
t
i
v
e
 
i

 

n
t
e
r
p
r
e
t
a
t
i
o
n
 
t
o
m
a
k
e

 

W

i

i
t
h
n
 
t
h
i
s
 


e
v
e
n
t
 
s
p
a
c
e


,
 

a
 
f
o
r
k
 
i

n
 
t
h
e
 
r
o
a
d
 
c
a
u
s
e
s
 
a
m
o
m
e
n
t
 
o
f
 

 

i

 

n
t
e
n
s
i
t
y
o
f
 
p
h
y
s
i
o
l
o
g
i
c
a
l
 
r
e
s
p
o
n
s
e
a
t
 
a
n
y
p
a
r
t
i
c
u
l
a
r
 
p
o
n
t
.
 

i

 

 

T
h
e
 
r
e
s
p
o
n
s
e

e
n
v
i
r
o
n
m
e
n
t
 
a
c
t
i
v
e
l
y

 
i

 

n
t
e
r
a
c
t
i
n
g
w
i
t
h
p
e
o
p
l
e

 

,
 

o
b
j
e
c
t
s
 
a
n
d
p
l
a
c
e
s
.
 

 

c
o
n
c
e
p
t
 
o
f
 
t
h
e

 


w
a
l
k


 

o
r
 


 

d
r
i
f
t

.
 
I
t
 
s
u
g
g
e
s
t
s
 
a
n
e
m
b
o
d
i
e
d
b
e
i
n
g
w
i
t
h
n
 
t
h
e

i

 

 

 

 

t
h
e
w
e
a
r
e
r

s
 
g
e
o
g
r
a
p
h
i
c
a
l
 
l
o
c
a
t
i
o
n
w
h
i
l
e
 
t
h
e
h
e
i
g
h
t
 
i

 

 

n
d
i
c
a
t
e
s
 
t
h
e

 

 

w
a
l
k
 
r
e
p
r
e
s
e
n
t
e
d
v
i
s
u
a
l
l
y
a
s
 
a
p
e
r
s
o
n
a
l
 


 

 

e
m
o
t
i
o
n
m
a
p

 


.
 

T
h
e
 
t
r
a
c
k
 
s
h
o
w
s

 

 

f
o
r
 
e
v
e
n
t
s
 
s
u
g
g
e
s
t
s
 
a
n
a
c
t
i
v
e
e
n
g
a
g
e
m
e
n
t
 
n
o
t
 
c
o
v
e
r
e
d
b
y
 
t
h
e
n
o
r
m
a
l
 
 

 

 

 
l
o
c
a
l
 
a
r
e
a

.
 

i

O
n
 
r
e
t
u
r
n
n
g
 
t
o
 
t
h
e
w
o
r
k
s
h
o
p
b
a
s
e

 

 

,
 
t
h
e
y
 
c
o
u
l
d
 
s
e
e
 
t
h
e
i
r
 

socially engaged art: 

the conscience of  

urban developement

sophie hope

I strap a small device onto two fingers of my right hand. It is a Galvanic Skin 
Response sensor that measures my emotions and is connected to a Global 
Positioning System so that I can measure my physiological reactions to the 
environment I am walking through. The peaks and troughs, on a resulting 
map record my arousal levels, feelings of excitement and indifference. 
The couple I am walking with live in the nearby Millennium Village. We 
are walking around East Greenwich, an area of London that has changed 
dramatically over the past 50 years and is due to morph again over the next 
twenty-five  years into A new 1.4 million square metre master-planned 
community   [ 1  ]. 
            The Millennium Dome, now branded the O2, is being developed 
into an entertainment, music, sport and leisure attraction by the American 
company, Anschutz Entertainment Group. Just beyond the Dome, the 
old hospital in East Greenwich is being converted into housing by English 
Partnerships. It is a strange environment, a combination of desolate 
wasteland, manicured park lawns and regimented lines of perfectly pruned 
trees. I used to bus or walk through this dormant prime real estate on my 
way to the station everyday when I lived near here. Large white domed 
structures hide behind high blue fences where I used to imagine secret 
tests and inventions were taking place. Now, well-established trees and 
shrubs have grown through the old concrete of these abandoned car 

parks. As we walk around we discuss the changes in the area: the Beckham 
Football Academy; the active industrial buildings and factories; the first 
communications cable to be laid across the Atlantic and the progression 
of technologies since. Is this just like any other walk on a summers 
afternoon? What is the significance of us mapping this walk? Who will use 
the data we are producing?
             The experience I am describing was part of the Greenwich Emotion 
Map, a project by Christian Nold and one element of his ongoing Bio Mapping 
project. The final printed map includes the emotion data as well as images 
of the places visited by people on their walk, annotated with descriptions
 of their experiences. Christian was commissioned by Independent 
Photography (an arts organisation based in East Greenwich) as part of their 
programme Peninsula  [ 2 ]. While Peninsula did not receive funding directly 
from the regeneration funds in the area, it was seen as a valuable asset to
 its development, as a member of the Greenwich Peninsula Partnership 
points out: The role of projects like Peninsula is to take the fear away 
from these changes by getting people involved in whats going on locally 
... People dont like coming to meetings, its a way of breaking down  those 
barriers and giving people a voice... Independent Photography  are like 
the conscience of the area, (a constant reminder that) its not just about 
maximising profits  its a really good way of ensuring that that conscience 
is always there....  I will use the Greenwich Emotion Map as an example 
of a publicly funded art project in order to sketch a wider context in which 
much art takes place in the UK today and explore the possible meaning of 
criticality for an art practice that is approved, supported and funded to aid 
social change. 

 

68

69

the context

Socially engaged art practices are influenced by histories of activist, 
community, performance and conceptual art, all of which have challenged 
(to varying degrees of success) the notion of an institution of art based 
on individual production that remains at a critical distance from daily life. 
There are legacies of artists opening up their work to involve participants 
throughout the 20th Century. Artists have used people in the making of 
their own work, for example, when communities in Pasadena and Los 
Angeles built walls of ice for Allan Kaprows Fluids happening (1967) or  
when 30 workers were hired by Santiago Serra who arranged them in 
a line according to their skin colour (2002). Artists have also tried to hand 
over authorship such as Yoko Ono in her instruction pieces (1961-2) or 
through the work of Tim Rollins and K.O.S. (1980s-now). Many projects 
that are considered socially engaged today embody a variety of types of 
participation and complex networks of ownership (the same project may 
be at times participant-led and at others artist led). Indeed, this is carried 
over into cultural policy in the UK, which could be seen to be reliant on the 
somewhat contradictory notion of art as being something for everyone as 
long as it is judged as the produce of individual artistic genius.  
            Increasingly in the UK, people working in diverse aspects of 
contemporary urban society, from property developers to park wardens 
are turning to the arts for new ideas, regeneration, problem solving and 
community bridge building. The employment of artists in these (traditionally 
non-art) fields, where there are other issues and agendas at stake, is 
becoming the norm. Alongside the high profile, large-scale capital projects 
that emerged from the Lottery Act of 1993, there has been a spate of 
commissioned, community-based arts projects promoted as the road 
to urban renewal. These projects derive from New Labour cultural policy 
that has understood art and culture as central to making society better. 
According to a recent report by Ixia  [ 3 ], approximately 61% of Local 
Authorities in England have public art policies linked to the local planning 

system and increasingly other public sector and commercial organisations 
are commissioning public art, such as the commercial developers Land 
Securities. The evaluation of PROJECT  [ 4 ]  investigated the role of art in 
regeneration finding that: Public art was seen by some developers as 
bringing in to a scheme elements which give distinctiveness, character and 
identity, because these are indices of value and quality, and therefore add 
commercial value. For others, public art was seen as a way of improving  
a developments chance of receiving planning permission and as  
a means of engaging local communities within the process of developing  
a regeneration project  [ 5 ]. While the links between art and social inclusion 
remain, Social inclusion and the arts work together. DCMS aims to extend 
access to high quality arts. To achieve this, issues of social inclusion are 
at the heart of much that DCMS does   [ 6 ], the recent McMaster report 
highlighted a shift in policy towards excellence and judgement of art 
over instrumentality and monitoring. The focus is back on the art rather 
than using art as a tool for social change: The driver must be not the 
achievement of simplistic targets, but an appreciation of the profound 
value of art and culture. Having said that, McMaster also asks that: 
Artists, practitioners and cultural organisations need to explore ways  
of communicating more effectively with their audience  [ 7 ].
            Despite this slight shift away from the instrumentalisation of 
culture, short-term arts programmes in deprived neighbourhoods 
continue to be endowed with the potential to reduce crime rates, build 
private/public sector partnerships, improve community relations and create 
new resources. These projects are based on the notion of the artist as 
an external agent, able to enter into a context with fresh eyes, offering 
ideas and solutions. When commissioned as part of regeneration schemes, 
a socially engaged art project can also become a lucrative marketing device 
to promote an area to potential businesses and buyers. Art is assumed 
to provide a positive transformation from bad to good, unbearable to 
bearable, socially excluded to included. This simplistic stance brushes over 
the complex, problematic relationships embedded in urban change in the 

70

71

quest to create a glossy picture of participation and collaboration. Certain 
artists are now engaged in a serious and rigorous critique that reflexively 
approaches the role that cultural work has in creating the illusion of social 
inclusion while actually increasing the division in wealth and poverty.
             One of the loudest criticisms of this current situation (that 
shares some of the suggestions put forward by McMaster) lambastes the 
instrumentalisation of culture and calls for the reclamation and recognition 
of artistic autonomy.  In their recent essay, Championing Artistic Autonomy, 
(2006) The Manifesto Club, for example, argue for artistic autonomy from
 physical, political and financial restraints (in order for the artist to) 
realise a creative vision  [ 8 ]. The Manifesto Club was set up to challenge 
growing policy regulations, instrumentalism and market-based thinking, 
all of which contribute to a culture of restraint. My question is, how does 
this fight for autonomy relate to an art practice that disputes the status 
of singular authorship of the artist and seeks to go one step further than 
challenging this culture of restraint by coming up with alternatives to 
effect change? Rather than react to the current climate in a way that 
reclaims artistic autonomy, I would argue there is a need to urgently 
review the politics of social engagement through art by re-examining 
the critical potential of a socially engaged art within this funded system 
of regeneration.

strategies of critique

In the next section of this essay I locate the critical aspects of the Geenwich 
Emotion Map along four co-ordinates of criticality. These four analyses are 
based on my interpretations of three descriptions of public art by Suzanne 
Lacy, Mark Hutchinson and Declan McGonagle (each of whom break down 
their descriptions into four positions, stages or dimensions) [ 9 ] .
They are: anthropology, reciprocity, co-production and (f) utility. Rather 
than insist that one mode of working is better than any other, I conclude 
by insisting on a combined approach as demonstrated in the Greenwich 
Emotion Map.

 

anthropology

This approach, takes as its model the anthropologist or participant 
observer. By entering a community to investigate it, the artist collects 
readings, recordings and evidence and turns this into their own artwork 
which does not filter back into the community. The work is about  
a certain community rather than made with or for a certain community. 
This approach can be seen in State Britain by Mark Wallinger (2006), for 
example, where the work directly references Brian Haws Parliament Square 
protest but did not involve him. This particular approach does not involve  
a critique of the anthropologists (artists) own position. The focus of 
attention is elsewhere, on the subject matter itself (for example, the issue 
of freedom of expression and civil liberties in the case of State Britain). 
              This approach prioritises a notion of artistic autonomy but does not 
focus on the artists own implicated role in both effecting and being effected 
by the community she/he enters. This way of working acknowledges the 
power relations between the professional, paid artist and unpaid subject 
and does not try to hide this fact. Indeed, this rejection and distancing from 
the everyday could be seen as a repost to the commonly adopted phrase 

72

73

in current social and cultural plans and policies: the use of art. By extracting 
the issues away from the place they came from, the work is presented as 
having no direct use-value for those communities who supplied the source 
material. This is not necessarily a negative aspect and may indeed be  
a more honest approach than one that attempts co-production. We can see 
an element of anthropology in the Greenwich Emotion Map as Nold, coming 
from outside of that community, adopts the role of facilitator, providing the 
tools to gather information about a group of people that he then collates, 
designs and presents as an alternative map of the area. While the map is 
authored by Nold (his name appears on the front of the map), the numerous 
participants are acknowledged inside and indeed, the contents of the map  
is reliant upon them. 

 

reciprocity

This stage builds on the anthropological approach in that an artist 
demonstrates some kind of responsibility towards the community they  
are working with/on whilst retaining authorial control. Martha Rosler points 
out how some people prefer to let communities or participants author and 
lead projects (removing the artist-as-author from the centre of things) 
while others present any interaction or community liaison as a fictionalised 
representation (re-establishing authorial control). Rosler finds it hard to 
agree with either of these stances, preferring a more complex dynamic 
between people  [ 10 ] . This could also be the case with the Greenwich 
Emotion Map. Nold incorporates other peoples stories whilst mapping 
their emotions and creates a collective narrative of the area. During this 
stage, the artist becomes more self-critical of her/his own position but this 
ability or permission to be critical often remains limited information for the 
amusement of the artists only. This has been termed by Lefebvre as critical 
knowledge  [ 11 ]  and refers to the idea that those with critical knowledge 
are those who are in on the act. Are the participants of Emotion Map 

critically engaged with the tools and conceptual aims of the project or are 
they just using those tools without that bigger picture in mind? 
              Critical Knowledge that remains with the artist can sometimes be 
cringe-worthy to watch, for example in the film Czech Dream (2004),  
a series of posters advertised the opening of a new cheap hypermarket on 
the outskirts of Prague where, during the grand opening, the film makers  
Vit Klusak and Filip Remunda documented the disappointed faces of 
expectant shoppers as they ran towards its fake facade. In this instance,  
the film-makers have the upper hand and in the making of an interesting 
film, patronise the jubilant Czech shoppers looking for a bargain.  
The critical engagement remains the priviledge of the filmmakers and 
viewers of the film afterwards. It is hard to say who of those people who 
turned up to the staged opening had the critical knowledge to reflect 
on how the project drew attention to the reactions to rapidly advancing 
capitalism in Eastern Europe, and how many were sucked into the prank 
and turned up to the opening of a new hypermarket they saw advertised to 
do their weekly shop. Maybe the critical knowledge comes later, once you 
have calmed down and got over your embarrassment, shock or rage that 
comes with being fooled. 
              In a reciprocal arrangement, however, artists and participants are 
able to recognise (and exploit) the needs and expectations of each other.  
An artist may use people for the making of their own work while  
a participant may use the project for their own personal or financial 
gain. According to Nold, the Greenwich Emotion Map asks: How will our 
perceptions of our community and environment change when we become 
aware of our own and each others intimate body states? . One of the 
participants in the project expressed how as an older person she had not 
had much contact with technology and that the project made her aware 
of how this technology in the hands of the wrong people has different 
connotations. She talked about how easy it is for the powers that be, to 
know who you are, where you are and how you feel. This reflects Nolds 
intentions for the project in finding a new way of using this technology, 

74

75

reclaiming it and devising alternative ways of mapping an area. According to 
another participant, however, the technology became redundant after their 
direct involvement in the initial mapping exercise and did not provide any 
conclusions or directions.
            This leads us to deduce that participation in an art project does not 
automatically result in the politicisation and activation of the participant 
and could even lead to further de-politicisation if conceived as a mirage of 
social inclusion rather than the real thing. Walter Benjamin in his essay,  
The Author as Producer of 1934 describes how production  is able first 
to induce other producers to produce, and second to put an improved 
apparatus at their disposal. And this apparatus  is better the more 
consumers it is able to turn into producers, - that  is, readers or spectators 
into collaborators   [ 12 ]. This statement would perhaps ring true to 
many practising artists today as something that inspires them to develop 
projects, create platforms and facilitate collective production. It could 
also refer to New Labour policies of social inclusion and the rising trend of 
corporate social responsibility through which much socially engaged art is 
funded to build bridges with local communities. This top-down process of 
empowerment, however, has been heavily criticised by the communities 
of consumers themselves, as being patronising and vacuous. Through the 
veil of social inclusion (often delivered through community consultation 
and socially engaged or public art) participants experience the realities of 
regeneration such as increased control, privatisation of public space and 
rising house prices. Recognising the reciprocal nature of engaged art opens 
up the possibility of understanding the work in different terms that leave 
the artists intentions and integrity intact and unchallenged (if this is what 
the artist wants to achieve), while others take from it what they want.

co-production

Moving on from recognising reciprocity, co-production involves participants 
becoming co-producers or co-authors, which further challenges the artist 
as sole author. In opening up the work to others for their input there is 
sometimes also a focus on an analysis and negotiation with the systems  
and structures that support the artistic process. This can be seen to some 
extent in the Battle of Orgreave (2001) for example, initiated by Jeremy 
Deller and filmed by Mike Figgis which was built on contributions and 
performances of those at the original battle on 18 June 1984 and 
re-enactors. The re-enactment and subsequent film screened on  
Channel 4 was a reminder of that day told predominantly by people  
who had lived it and for whom the repercussions are still being felt. 
A tactic used in the Greenwich Emotion Map, was to engage those involved 
directly in regeneration decision-making processes as participants in the 
work itself. The Greenwich Emotion Map and other Peninsula projects, for 
example, have involved both local residents, politicians and developers  
in joint workshops. This way it is possible to question the values placed  
on art with a wider community of people allowing these values to be 
disrupted and challenged not just by artists but also by those involved in  
its production.
              Working in the context of a comparatively prosperous publicly 
funded cultural sector (in relation to other countries), has meant the critical 
aspect of socially engaged art practice has had to shift a gear from direct 
action  (to activate and empower individuals) to question the very nature 
and meaning of a socially inclusive agenda being applied to art. Rather than 
becoming the vehicle through which urban developers can market their 
social responsibility, do such projects as Emotion Map have the potential  
to demand a more thorough, democratic involvement of different people  
in the inevitable development of the master-planned community?  
This marks a shift in the focus of the critique to a questioning of the means 
of production, thereby unravelling the reason why the money is there 

76

77

for the socially engaged art project in the first instance. The critique now 
involves a probing of the motivations of corporations and governments to 
empower and make producers of us all and questions the artists role and 
position in carrying out these objectives.
            The Greenwich Emotion Map does this by inviting people to question 
the nature of surveillance technologies by surveying and mapping their 
own movements through public spaces. It provides an alternative, multi-
authored set of identities to the branded, slick and marketable identity of 
The Greenwich Peninsula dreamt up by remote developers.   
            Equally, it could be seen to be paving the way for clever market 
research techniques to help companies decide which areas are emotionally 
productive and therefore ideal advertising locations. To some participants 
the Greenwich Emotion Map is enticing people to take an active role in 
the changes in their area, to others it provides a diversion and illusion of 
participation. How does Emotion Maps usefulness to the developers of the 
Greenwich Peninsula balance with a collectively produced critique of the 
development of the Peninsula and how is that critique taken on board (or 
ignored) by the developers? 

(f)utility

This fourth approach incorporates elements of anthropology, reciprocity 
and co-production whilst becoming open for interpretation, redirection 
and transformation. The work takes off in all directions, each of which 
is equally significant.  As we have seen, the Greenwich Emotion Map is 
schizophrenic in showing at times a useful community friendly face and 
at others a ruthless but all-important streak of irony (importantly  this 
latter aspect is developed by the participants as well as the artist). 
By proposing models for activism, this fourth stage is analogous with 
Benjamins apparatus for turning consumers into producers. The resulting 
Ordnance Survey-style Greenwich Emotion Map has the potential to become 

an apparatus/tool for those involved to consider the implications 
of such a device.  The official style of the map invites serious interaction 
while yielding surprising findings that you would not usually associate with 
a formal navigational tool. The map also demonstrates how map-readers 
can become the cartographers of their own environments.The participants 
became producers in a process they would usually be the unwitting 
consumers of. The Greenwich Emotion Map attempts to incorporate 
a complex unearthing of social relations that make up the meaning and 
transformation of a place.
              How is the map, the walk and the technology of the Greenwich 
Emotion Map used, adopted and manipulated ? There have been 
discussions locally about this technology being used to map the content 
of local meetings in order to adopt a visual mode of communicating key 
issues or concerns to other groups and decision-makers. The Senior 
Regeneration Manager at English Partnerships and one of the participants 
of Emotion Map project, thought the emotion topography was interesting 
and could see how this could translate back to a developer and to 
architects: You could be mindful of this when designing... (it might) take 
a bit of a leap for some developers and planners in order to justify it as 
a meaningful consultation exercise ... I came away thinking - that was 
a serious study in human behaviour .
              Returning to Walter Benjamin, the Greenwich Emotion Map has 
the potential to be understood as an improved apparatus  [13 ], or 
a tool for turning consumers into producers that has introduced a shared, 
bottom-up notion of production that acts as an alternative to more 
dominant processes of change and regeneration happening in the area. 
The future use of the technology and the maps will determine to what 
extent the users turn themselves into producers. There is often value  
placed on the useful and useless aspects of art depending on the context 
in which it is produced or presented. For example, in an art context, one 
might claim the useless aspect is of utmost importance, adding to the 
ambivalence and ambiguity of the work. When at a meeting with a group 

78

79

of planners one might stress the function of the work and its ability to add 
economic and cultural value to an area. Both aspects are important in that 
they hide the useless element to those who like to see only the functional 
side and the useful aspect of the project to those who deem such claims to 
be unworthy of art. In the case of the Greenwich Emotion Map, uselessness 
in terms of not providing a clear outcome or conclusion, is not necessarily 
a negative aspect. 
            As in the anthropological approach, it was the artists intention to 
provide possibilities and questions rather than solutions and conclusions. 
Pointlessness and uselessness could be a valuable strategy of resistance in 
a society that demands productivity, outcomes and quantifiable results.
            It could be argued that an art that ignores or hides its useful side is 
unable to be political and that an art that purely promotes its functionality 
looses out on being able to be critical. Do we then need to acknowledge 
and revel in both the useful and useless acts in order to claim the political 
and critical aspects of art ? It is the element of surprising functionality that 
is significant here, that is, being useful in an unexpected way, rather than 
providing a useful service or carrying out a set of instructions.  How can the 
Greenwich Emotion Map be useful in an unexpected way?  
Emotion Map is not an obvious consultation exercise; on the one hand it 
evolves into a useful study and on the other it remains abstract and useful 
only for those taking part. For Emotion Map then, it is both the potential 
readability and unreadability that is important. The use-value remains 
the primary ownership of those taking part (the map-writers and readers) 
and the project resists co-option (due to its illegibility as an obvious piece 
of consultation) by those who wish to use it as a box-ticking tokenistic 
consultation exercise.
            Political action lies in the possibility of finding something pragmatic 
in what appears to be absurd and to discover the absurd in the everyday. 
The critical potential of projects such as Emotion Map lies in the different 
(conflicting) directions experiences take and the ability for the people 
involved to respond and adapt to these influences and triggers. 

By acknowledging that at times work will be artist-led and at others by 
participants, new opportunities to represent, reciprocate and co-produce 
emerge. This combined model of a critical socially engaged art that is funded 
to do a job owes it to all involved that these triggers are unexpected. 
By acknowledging and exploring these different uses, approaches and 
values, funding can be used to expose some of these contradictions in the 
process of regeneration. Furthermore, the Emotion Map demonstrates 
how such projects could reflect the conscience of regeneration and urban 
development back onto those who have outsourced it in the first place. 

about the author

Sophie Hope is a PhD researcher, investigating the relationships between art 
and society through research, writing, teaching and listening.

80

81

notes

[ 1 ]     Our Vision Greenwich Peninsula. Meridian Delta Limited.

[ 2 ]    Peninsula was a series of six artists commissions that involve local 
people in investigating the Greenwich Peninsula and its regeneration from 
2005 7. The project received funding from Arts Council England, Heritage 
Lottery and City Parochial Foundation. 

[ 3 ]    Ixia (2007) Public Art and the Planning System and Process. Online at: 
http://www.ixia-info.com/research/index.htm 

[ 4 ]    Comedia (2006) PROJECT Evaluation Report. Online at: 
http://www.publicartonline.org.uk/archive/project/evaluation/reports.php 

[ 5 ]    Ixia (2007) Public Art and the Planning System and Process. Online at:
http://www.ixia-info.com/research/index.htm 
{p. 10-11}. 

[ 6 ]    http://www.culture.gov.uk/what_we_do/Arts/arts_and_
communities/ 

[ 7 ]    Sir Brian McMaster (2008) Supporting Excellence in the Arts. From 
Measurment to Judgement.

[ 8 ]   Artquest, December (2006).

[ 9 ]   The four methods I explain here are interpretations of three other 
descriptions of socially engaged / new genre / public art by Suzanne Lacy.
- See Debated Territory: Toward a Critical Language for public Art. In S. Lacy 
(ed.) (1994) Mapping the Terrain. Seattle, Bay Press. 
- See Mark Hutchinson (2002) Four Stages of Public Art {Third Text, Vol. 16, 
Issue 4 / p. 329-43}
- See Declan McGonagle (2007) in D. Butler and V. Reiss, (eds.) (2007) Art of 
Negotiation. Manchester, Cornerhouse {p. 6 9} 
Each of their descriptions are also broken down into four positions, stages  
or dimensions.

[ 10 ]  Rosler, M. (1994) Place, Position, Power, Politics, in C. Becker (ed.)  
The Subversive Imagination: The Artist, Society and Social Responsibility. 
London: Routledge {p. 72}.
 
[ 11 ]   Lefebvre, H. (1947)(current edition 2006)Critique of Everyday Life: 
From Modernity to Modernism (Towards a Metaphilosophy of Daily Life. Vol 
3) .  
London, Verso Books {p. 65}. 

[ 12-13 ]  Walter Benjamin (1934) The Author as Producer.

The image on this and the next few pages are all from the Brentford Biopsy, 2008. 
The images show multiple views of the 10 meter long printed banner map which was 
designed with the local participants which included the mayor, priest, historians and 
landscape architects.

82

83

(cid:54)
(cid:32)
(cid:56)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:43)

(cid:46)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)

(cid:34)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)
(cid:44)
(cid:52)
(cid:45)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:56)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:34)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:47)
(cid:51)
(cid:52)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:45)
(cid:15)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:35)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:32)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:49)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:47)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:56)
(cid:8)

2
.
 
P
e
o
p
l
e

C
o
m
m
u
n
i
t
y
,
 
C
l
a
s
s
&
F
i
c
t
i
o
n
s

 

 

(cid:57)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:55)
(cid:47)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:39)
(cid:52)
(cid:44)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:59)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:49)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:59)
(cid:1)

(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:15)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:35)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:25)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)
(cid:43)
(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:32)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:54)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)

(cid:1)
(cid:59)

(cid:39)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:34)
(cid:59)
(cid:6)
(cid:1)
(cid:59)
(cid:37)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:56)
(cid:59)
(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:54)
(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:44)
(cid:46)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:48)
(cid:52)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:43)
(cid:56)
(cid:52)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:41)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:4)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)
(cid:14)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:16)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:35)
(cid:5)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:44)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:38)
(cid:45)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:56)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:8)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:25)
(cid:45)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:54)
(cid:36)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:38)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:52)
(cid:44)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:56)
(cid:47)
(cid:46)
(cid:50)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:41)

(cid:1)

(cid:34)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:52)
(cid:43)
(cid:51)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:32)
(cid:47)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:50)
(cid:8)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:47)
(cid:46)
(cid:54)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:37)
(cid:52)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:35)
(cid:45)
(cid:46)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:38)
(cid:46)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:54)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:47)
(cid:52)
(cid:33)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:40)

(cid:34)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:43)

(cid:46)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:43)
(cid:56)
(cid:1)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:43)

(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:50)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:38)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:54)

(cid:59)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:57)

(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)

(cid:43)
(cid:43)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:39)
(cid:52)
(cid:44)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:34)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)
(cid:44)
(cid:52)
(cid:45)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:56)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:35)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:57)

(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:32)
(cid:34)
(cid:42)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:47)
(cid:52)
(cid:33)

(cid:43)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:34)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:47)
(cid:32)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:54)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:34)
(cid:39)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:24)
(cid:36)
(cid:51)
(cid:54)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:42)
(cid:5)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:49)
(cid:52)
(cid:50)
(cid:39)
(cid:33)
(cid:56)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)
(cid:52)
(cid:50)
(cid:40)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:47)
(cid:46)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:41)

(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:1)
(cid:4)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)
(cid:14)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:16)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:35)
(cid:5)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:47)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:52)
(cid:49)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:32)
(cid:47)
(cid:32)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:59)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:54)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:32)
(cid:56)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:43)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:40)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:43)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:50)
(cid:52)
(cid:38)
(cid:38)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)

(cid:1)
(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:34)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)
(cid:44)
(cid:52)
(cid:45)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:56)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:52)
(cid:34)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:46)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)

(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)

(cid:1)

(cid:32)

(cid:1)
(cid:43)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:47)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:54)
(cid:45)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:54)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:36)
(cid:54)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:54)
(cid:32)
(cid:42)
(cid:1)
(cid:4)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:21)
(cid:50)
(cid:50)
(cid:52)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:47)
(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:50)
(cid:40)
(cid:53)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:56)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:54)
(cid:15)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:35)
(cid:59)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:52)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:44)
(cid:38)
(cid:39)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:54)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:56)
(cid:32)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:36)
(cid:54)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:54)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:52)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:32)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:15)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:35)
(cid:59)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:33)
(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:35)
(cid:32)
(cid:56)

(cid:1)
(cid:43)

(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:47)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:46)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:47)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:51)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:57)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:54)
(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:38)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:32)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:38)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:33)
(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)
(cid:43)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:43)
(cid:40)

(cid:43)

(cid:42)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:35)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:8)
(cid:3)
(cid:1)
(cid:14)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:54)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:32)
(cid:54)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:45)
(cid:28)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:1)
(cid:9)
(cid:6)
(cid:1)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:32)
(cid:35)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:33)
(cid:32)
(cid:35)
(cid:6)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:54)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:38)
(cid:36)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:33)
(cid:38)
(cid:33)
(cid:46)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:34)
(cid:42)
(cid:36)
(cid:51)

(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:49)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:47)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:44)
(cid:50)
(cid:6)
(cid:1)

(cid:54)
(cid:39)

(cid:40)
(cid:43)

(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:46)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:54)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:49)
(cid:46)

(cid:43)
(cid:43)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:54)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:54)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)
(cid:29)
(cid:49)
(cid:32)
(cid:2)
(cid:34)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:45)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:33)
(cid:32)
(cid:34)
(cid:42)
(cid:38)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:24)
(cid:46)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:44)
(cid:52)
(cid:34)
(cid:39)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:54)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:43)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:36)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:43)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:44)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:49)
(cid:32)
(cid:54)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:54)
(cid:39)
(cid:34)
(cid:39)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:45)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:44)
(cid:54)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:44)
(cid:40)
(cid:55)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:54)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:34)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:33)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:44)
(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:33)
(cid:38)
(cid:44)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:32)
(cid:42)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:35)
(cid:49)
(cid:32)
(cid:54)
(cid:45)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:47)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:34)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:33)
(cid:56)
(cid:44)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:56)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:57)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)

(cid:43)
(cid:40)

(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:33)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:54)
(cid:45)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:54)
(cid:39)
(cid:34)
(cid:39)
(cid:35)
(cid:52)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:28)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:56)
(cid:23)
(cid:32)
(cid:47)
(cid:47)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:32)
(cid:34)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:53)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:56)
(cid:54)
(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:34)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:38)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:47)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:54)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:43)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:43)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:45)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:38)
(cid:56)
(cid:38)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:34)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:12)
(cid:1)
(cid:3)
(cid:19)
(cid:52)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:50)
(cid:40)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:33)
(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)
(cid:43)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)
(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:54)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:35)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:33)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:27)
(cid:52)
(cid:33)
(cid:33)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:39)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:32)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:43)
(cid:37)
(cid:7)
(cid:50)
(cid:52)
(cid:2)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:15)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:35)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:57)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)
(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:38)
(cid:46)
(cid:33)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:54)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:44)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:1)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:40)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)

(cid:1)

(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:15)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:35)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:43)
(cid:40)

(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:54)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:42)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:45)
(cid:15)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:35)
(cid:54)
(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:48)
(cid:52)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:36)
(cid:55)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:15)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:35)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)
(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:54)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:56)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:47)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:40)

(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)

(cid:1)

(cid:47)
(cid:49)
(cid:32)
(cid:38)
(cid:44)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:34)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:47)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:52)
(cid:34)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:20)
(cid:38)
(cid:39)
(cid:28)
(cid:51)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:56)
(cid:54)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)
(cid:43)
(cid:43)
(cid:1)

(cid:38)
(cid:36)
(cid:51)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:57)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:44)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)

(cid:1)
(cid:43)

(cid:46)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:32)
(cid:58)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:34)
(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)
(cid:21)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:45)
(cid:47)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:34)
(cid:52)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:51)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:59)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:56)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:56)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:54)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:35)
(cid:35)
(cid:46)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:47)
(cid:32)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:13)
(cid:59)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:41)

(cid:57)
(cid:36)
(cid:44)
(cid:32)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:56)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:49)
(cid:32)
(cid:54)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:52)
(cid:38)
(cid:38)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:57)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:59)

(cid:1)

(cid:15)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:35)
(cid:29)
(cid:46)
(cid:54)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:50)
(cid:59)
(cid:1)
(cid:36)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:38)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:44)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:43)

(cid:46)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)
(cid:43)

(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:44)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:42)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:47)
(cid:32)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:52)
(cid:50)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:25)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:50)
(cid:52)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:40)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:14)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:56)
(cid:47)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:52)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:47)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:46)
(cid:50)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)

(cid:54)
(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:45)
(cid:34)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:44)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:54)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:33)
(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:47)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:46)
(cid:34)
(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:54)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)

(cid:57)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:55)
(cid:47)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:54)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:33)
(cid:52)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)
(cid:43)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:53)
(cid:40)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:32)
(cid:44)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:44)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:56)
(cid:47)
(cid:46)
(cid:54)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:34)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:36)
(cid:15)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:35)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:17)
(cid:49)
(cid:32)
(cid:54)
(cid:54)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)

(cid:1)

(cid:34)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:54)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:47)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:54)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:40)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:43)

(cid:45)
(cid:53)
(cid:46)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:23)
(cid:46)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:15)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:35)
(cid:44)
(cid:38)
(cid:39)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:46)
(cid:46)
(cid:42)

(cid:1)
(cid:43)
(cid:40)

(cid:42)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:45)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:52)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:13)
(cid:59)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:59)
(cid:31)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:52)
(cid:45)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:40)

(cid:44)

(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:47)
(cid:46)
(cid:54)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:56)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:35)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:40)

(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:50)
(cid:40)
(cid:44)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:44)
(cid:32)
(cid:33)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:54)
(cid:44)
(cid:52)
(cid:34)
(cid:39)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:34)
(cid:34)
(cid:52)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:45)
(cid:32)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:43)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:45)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:52)
(cid:33)
(cid:51)
(cid:43)
(cid:36)
(cid:54)
(cid:32)
(cid:56)
(cid:50)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)
(cid:29)
(cid:32)
(cid:42)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)

(cid:43)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)
(cid:43)

(cid:46)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)

3
.
 
S
o
c
i
a
l
 
S
p
a
c
e

S
e
n
s
o
r
y
C
i
t
y
:
 
 

 

 

R
o
a
d
s
v
s
.
 
P
u
b
l
i
c
S
p
a
c
e

 

(cid:1)

(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:54)
(cid:54)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)
(cid:43)
(cid:43)
(cid:1)

(cid:46)
(cid:33)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:35)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:56)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:43)

(cid:46)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:56)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:57)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)
(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:32)
(cid:34)
(cid:42)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:47)
(cid:52)
(cid:33)

(cid:43)
(cid:40)

(cid:34)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:47)
(cid:32)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:45)
(cid:15)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:35)
(cid:1)
(cid:4)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)
(cid:28)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:10)
(cid:5)
(cid:8)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:44)
(cid:46)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:33)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:30)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:42)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)
(cid:59)

(cid:1)

(cid:17)
(cid:49)
(cid:32)
(cid:54)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:34)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:54)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:50)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:51)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:59)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:44)

(cid:59)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:33)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:42)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)
(cid:43)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:40)

(cid:44)
(cid:32)
(cid:38)
(cid:45)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:30)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:56)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:52)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:54)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:53)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:32)
(cid:38)
(cid:36)
(cid:13)
(cid:1)
(cid:25)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:54)
(cid:32)
(cid:56)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:15)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:35)
(cid:54)
(cid:39)
(cid:34)
(cid:39)
(cid:54)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)
(cid:43)
(cid:43)
(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:38)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:52)
(cid:33)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:34)
(cid:34)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:52)
(cid:43)
(cid:51)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:45)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:52)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:38)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)

(cid:43)

(cid:6)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:40)

(cid:41)

(cid:1)

(cid:34)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:1)
(cid:4)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)
(cid:14)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:16)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:35)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:28)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:56)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:43)
(cid:56)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:38)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:38)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:38)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:38)
(cid:49)
(cid:32)
(cid:47)
(cid:39)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)

(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:54)

(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)

(cid:1)
(cid:43)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:43)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)

(cid:40)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:38)
(cid:49)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)

(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:45)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:55)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:36)
(cid:54)
(cid:56)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:50)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:57)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:40)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:56)
(cid:36)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:1)

(cid:23)
(cid:32)
(cid:47)
(cid:47)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:45)
(cid:28)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:10)
(cid:5)
(cid:1)
(cid:33)
(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:43)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:49)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:33)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:54)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:57)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)

(cid:1)
(cid:43)

(cid:32)
(cid:34)
(cid:42)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:38)
(cid:49)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)
(cid:44)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:56)
(cid:1)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)

(cid:43)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:14)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:45)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:47)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:35)
(cid:49)
(cid:32)
(cid:54)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:52)
(cid:47)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:54)
(cid:44)
(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:47)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:40)

(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:35)
(cid:52)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:54)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:54)
(cid:45)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:46)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:34)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:47)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:44)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)

(cid:54)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)
(cid:43)
(cid:40)

(cid:40)

(cid:53)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:45)

(cid:1)

(cid:57)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:15)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:35)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:47)
(cid:32)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:54)
(cid:39)
(cid:34)
(cid:39)
(cid:54)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)
(cid:43)
(cid:43)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:34)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:49)
(cid:32)
(cid:44)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)
(cid:43)

(cid:56)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:35)
(cid:53)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:40)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:34)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)
(cid:44)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:58)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:32)
(cid:44)
(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:50)
(cid:40)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:47)
(cid:46)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:32)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)

(cid:1)

(cid:37)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)

(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:46)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:44)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:32)
(cid:43)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:57)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:50)
(cid:52)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:48)
(cid:52)
(cid:32)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:56)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:43)

(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:45)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:33)
(cid:52)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)
(cid:43)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:53)
(cid:40)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:21)

(cid:45)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:32)
(cid:34)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)
(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:32)
(cid:34)
(cid:42)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:47)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:53)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:56)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:38)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:56)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:56)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:39)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:44)
(cid:45)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:46)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:56)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:57)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:50)
(cid:52)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:34)
(cid:39)

(cid:40)
(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:35)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:54)
(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:47)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:53)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)
(cid:43)

(cid:46)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:34)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)
(cid:44)
(cid:52)
(cid:45)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:56)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:34)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:41)

(cid:32)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:34)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:15)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:35)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:56)
(cid:36)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)

(cid:43)
(cid:40)

(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)

(cid:34)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)
(cid:44)
(cid:52)
(cid:45)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:56)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:57)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:43)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:40)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:36)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:54)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)

4
.
 
F
u
t
u
r
e
V
i
s
i
o
n
s

 

 

 

 

B
u
i
l
t
E
n
v
i
r
o
n
m
e
n
t
+
P
e
o
p
l
e
+
S
o
c
i
a
l
 
S
p
a
c
e
=
?

 

 

 

 

(cid:1)

(cid:57)
(cid:36)
(cid:54)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:35)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:59)

(cid:39)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:34)
(cid:59)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)

(cid:1)
(cid:59)
(cid:37)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:56)
(cid:59)
(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:54)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)

(cid:1)

(cid:54)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)
(cid:46)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:48)
(cid:52)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:43)
(cid:56)
(cid:52)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:22)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:34)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)
(cid:44)
(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:54)
(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:46)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:45)
(cid:53)
(cid:46)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:54)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)
(cid:43)

(cid:46)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:33)
(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:35)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:34)
(cid:52)
(cid:50)
(cid:50)
(cid:40)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:42)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:34)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:50)
(cid:52)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:45)
(cid:26)
(cid:52)
(cid:33)

(cid:43)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:34)
(cid:28)
(cid:47)
(cid:32)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:13)
(cid:1)

(cid:49)
(cid:36)

(cid:43)
(cid:40)

(cid:34)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)

(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:43)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:35)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:46)
(cid:54)
(cid:32)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:47)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:56)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:32)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:47)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:54)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:54)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:43)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:56)
(cid:38)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:47)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:44)
(cid:46)
(cid:53)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:45)
(cid:54)
(cid:39)
(cid:46)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:15)
(cid:56)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:33)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:56)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:47)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:6)
(cid:1)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:54)
(cid:36)
(cid:60)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:32)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:51)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:52)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:54)
(cid:39)
(cid:34)
(cid:39)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:43)
(cid:43)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:36)
(cid:43)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:45)
(cid:15)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:35)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:54)
(cid:32)
(cid:56)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:45)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:49)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)

(cid:1)
(cid:43)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:53)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:34)
(cid:50)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:57)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:46)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:56)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:37)
(cid:52)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:6)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:39)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:40)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:34)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)
(cid:44)
(cid:52)
(cid:45)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:56)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:34)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:32)
(cid:43)
(cid:50)
(cid:6)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:49)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:43)
(cid:40)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:44)
(cid:46)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:54)
(cid:32)
(cid:56)
(cid:50)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)
(cid:21)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:43)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:36)
(cid:55)
(cid:47)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)
(cid:43)

(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)

(cid:43)
(cid:40)

(cid:45)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

 

H

1
.
 

B
u
i
l
t
E
n
v
i
r
o
n
m
e
n
t

i
s
t
o
r
y
,
 
I
n
d
u
s
t
r
y
&
D
e
v
e
l
o
p
m
e
n
t

 

 

(cid:1)

(cid:39)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:56)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:15)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:35)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:43)

(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:54)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:35)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:53)
(cid:56)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:52)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:54)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)

(cid:1)

(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:35)
(cid:6)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:54)
(cid:36)

(cid:43)
(cid:43)
(cid:1)

(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:15)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:35)
(cid:59)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:38)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:38)
(cid:49)
(cid:32)
(cid:47)
(cid:39)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)

(cid:40)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)

(cid:47)
(cid:46)
(cid:50)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)

(cid:6)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:43)
(cid:56)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:57)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:55)
(cid:47)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:54)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:52)
(cid:49)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:49)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:52)
(cid:34)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:35)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:50)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:56)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:38)
(cid:49)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:34)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:55)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:54)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:56)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:47)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:47)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:46)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:45)
(cid:28)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:11)

(cid:1)

(cid:8)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:53)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:34)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:55)
(cid:32)
(cid:58)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:51)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:44)
(cid:32)
(cid:42)
(cid:36)
(cid:52)
(cid:47)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:43)

(cid:46)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)

(cid:34)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)
(cid:44)
(cid:52)
(cid:45)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:56)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:50)
(cid:52)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:35)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:32)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:33)
(cid:46)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:50)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)
(cid:18)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:40)
(cid:38)
(cid:39)
(cid:51)
(cid:6)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:21)
(cid:50)
(cid:50)
(cid:52)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:52)
(cid:34)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:38)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:34)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)
(cid:44)
(cid:52)
(cid:45)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:33)
(cid:52)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)
(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:35)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:44)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)
(cid:43)
(cid:1)

(cid:61)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)

(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)
(cid:43)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:35)
(cid:33)
(cid:46)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:36)
(cid:53)
(cid:46)
(cid:42)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:53)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:50)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:35)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:38)
(cid:52)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:54)
(cid:39)

(cid:40)
(cid:43)

(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:40)

(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:45)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:57)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:54)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:43)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:35)
(cid:56)
(cid:46)
(cid:34)
(cid:34)
(cid:52)
(cid:49)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:32)
(cid:47)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:14)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:36)
(cid:55)
(cid:32)
(cid:44)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:54)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:50)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:56)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:34)
(cid:36)
(cid:47)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:45)
(cid:53)
(cid:46)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:45)
(cid:47)
(cid:46)

(cid:43)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:34)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:50)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:52)
(cid:44)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)

(cid:44)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:33)
(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)

(cid:1)
(cid:41)

(cid:52)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:1)
(cid:37)
(cid:36)
(cid:54)

(cid:1)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:32)
(cid:35)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:54)
(cid:32)
(cid:56)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:57)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:50)
(cid:52)
(cid:36)

(cid:1)

(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:36)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:38)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:56)
(cid:1)
(cid:50)
(cid:51)
(cid:49)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:56)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:52)
(cid:44)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:47)
(cid:46)
(cid:50)
(cid:50)
(cid:40)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:54)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:35)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:34)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:15)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:35)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:57)

(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:44)
(cid:47)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:50)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:46)
(cid:37)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:1)
(cid:59)

(cid:1)

(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)
(cid:36)
(cid:56)
(cid:59)
(cid:6)
(cid:1)
(cid:43)

(cid:43)

(cid:46)
(cid:34)
(cid:32)

(cid:43)
(cid:1)

(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:1)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)

(cid:40)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:45)
(cid:15)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:51)
(cid:37)
(cid:46)
(cid:49)
(cid:35)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:38)
(cid:35)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:34)
(cid:49)
(cid:40)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:32)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:59)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:32)
(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:37)
(cid:52)

(cid:43)
(cid:59)
(cid:6)
(cid:1)
(cid:59)
(cid:38)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)

(cid:59)
(cid:6)
(cid:1)

(cid:34)
(cid:46)
(cid:44)
(cid:44)
(cid:52)
(cid:45)
(cid:40)
(cid:51)
(cid:56)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:33)
(cid:32)
(cid:34)
(cid:42)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)
(cid:52)
(cid:47)
(cid:33)
(cid:56)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:35)
(cid:46)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:33)
(cid:46)
(cid:52)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:46)
(cid:47)
(cid:36)
(cid:54)
(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:39)
(cid:32)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:44)
(cid:46)
(cid:53)
(cid:36)
(cid:35)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:43)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:59)

(cid:54)
(cid:32)
(cid:51)
(cid:36)
(cid:49)
(cid:56)
(cid:59)
(cid:1)
(cid:32)
(cid:45)
(cid:35)

(cid:1)
(cid:59)

(cid:47)
(cid:39)
(cid:46)
(cid:51)
(cid:46)
(cid:38)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:34)
(cid:59)
(cid:8)
(cid:1)

(cid:40)

(cid:57)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:1)
(cid:35)
(cid:40)
(cid:50)
(cid:34)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:45)
(cid:36)
(cid:34)
(cid:51)
(cid:40)
(cid:46)
(cid:45)
(cid:33)
(cid:36)
(cid:51)
(cid:54)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)
(cid:45)
(cid:1)
(cid:51)
(cid:39)
(cid:36)
(cid:20)
(cid:38)
(cid:39)
(cid:28)
(cid:51)
(cid:49)
(cid:36)
(cid:36)
(cid:51)
(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:1)

(cid:40)

l

i

 

 

f
r
u
s
t
r
a
t
i
o
n
a
t
 
n
o
t
 
b
e
n
g
a
b
e
 
t
o
u
n
d
e
r
s
t
a
n
d
e
v
e
r
y
t
h
n
g
.
 
Y
e
t
 
i
f
 

 

 

i

 

w
e
m
a
k
e

 

i

i

 

 

a
n
d
m
e
a
n
n
g
 
f
o
r
 
a
w
d
e
r
 
a
u
d
e
n
c
e
w
h
o
a
r
e

 

i

 

 
i

n
t
e
r
e
s
t
e
d

 
i

 

 

n
n
e
w
w
a
y
s
 
t
o

 

i
l
l

u
s
t
r
a
t
i
o
n
s
,
 
y
e
t
 
t
h
e
r
e

 
i
s
 
a

 
l

o
t
 

 

 

w
e
a
r
e
m
i
s
s
i
n
g
.
 

W
e
 
f
e
e

l
 

a
 
s
e
n
s
e
o
f
 
 

 

h
o
w

 

 
t
o
 
s
i
t
u
a
t
e
 
t
h
e
c
o
n
t
e
n
t
 
o
f
 
t
h
i
s
 
m
a
p
 
t
h
a
t
 
s
h
o
u
d
a
l
s
o
g
v
e

 

i

l

 

 

 
i
t
 
a
v
a
u
e

l

 

 
s
u
c
h
a
s
 
l

 

o
c
a

l
 
l

 

 

 

a
n
d
m
a
r
k
s
 
a
n
d
w
e
c
a
n
u
n
d
e
r
s
t
a
n
d
 
t
h
e
p
h
o
t
o
s
 
a
n
d

 

 

i
t
 

w

i

 

i
t
h
n
 
t
h
e
p
r
o
c
e
s
s
 
o
f
 
p
o

l
i
t
i
c
s
.
 
I
t
 
i
s
 
t
h
i
s
 
c
o
m
p
e
x

l

 

i

 

i
t
y
a
n
d
d
ffi
c
u
l
t
y
o
f
 
 
 
 

 

"

i
s
 
w

i
l
l
 

 

n
o
d
o
u
b
t
 
f
r
u
s
t
r
a
t
e
 
t
h
o
s
e
p
e
o
p
e

 

l

 
l

i

o
o
k
n
g
 
t
o
 
t
h
i
s
 
o
b
e
c
t
 
f
o
r
 
e
a
s
i
l

j

y

 
 

 

 

q
u
e
s
t
i
o
n
 
t
h
e
m
a
n
d
 
t
h
e
n
a
r
t
i
c
u
a
t
e
a
n
d
 
s
h
a
r
e
 
t
h
e
m

l

 

 
t
h
r
o
u
g
h
a
p
o

 

 

l
i
t
i
c
a

l
 
 

i

 

l

l

m
p
e
m
e
n
t
a
b
e
a
c
t
i
o
n
p
o
n
t
s
.
 
I

 

i

n
 
f
a
c
t
,
 
t
h
e
b
e
s
t
 

 

m
e
t
a
p
h
o
r
 
f
o
r
 
t
h
i
s
 
o
b
e
c
t
 

j

p
r
o
c
e
s
s
 
w
h
e
r
e
 
t
h
e
i
r
 
p
e
r
s
o
n
a

l
 

 

e
x
p
e
r
i
e
n
c
e
s
 
a
r
e
v
a
u
e
d
a
n
d
n
o
t
 
 

 

l

 

 
i
s
 
a
c
t
u
a

l
l

 

y
a
s
 
a
 
f
o
r
e
g
n

i

 
l

 

a
n
g
u
a
g
e
n
e
w
s
p
a
p
e
r
 
d
e
d
c
a
t
e
d
 
t
o
 
r
e
p
o
r
t
i
n
g
o
n

 

i

 
 

d
i
s
r
e
g
a
r
d
e
d
.
 

 

"
e
c
h
a

l
l

e
n
g
e
 
t
h
a
t
 
t
h
i
s
 
m
a
p
p
r
e
s
e
n
t
s
 
t
o
a

 

 

l
l
 
t
h
e

 
l

o
c
a

l
 

B
r
e
n
t
f
o
r
d
.
 

W
h
e
n

 
l

 

i

o
o
k
n
g
a
t
 
t
h
e
n
e
w
s
p
a
p
e
r
 

 

w
e
 
r
e
c
o
g
n
i
s
e
a

 

 
l

o
t
 
o
f
 

w
o
r
d
s
 

l

s
t
a
k
e
-
h
o
d
e
r
s
 
i
s
 
h
o
w

 

 
t
o
u
s
e
 
t
h
i
s
 
d
o
c
u
m
e
n
t
 
p
r
o
d
u
c
t
i
v
e
y
a
n
d

l

 

 
i

l

n
c
u
d
e

 

w
w
w
.
p
u
b

l
i

i

c
b
o
p
s
y
.
n
e
t

 

 

 

 

s
e
e
a
n
d
 
r
e
fl
e
c
t
 
u
p
o
n
a
n
d
n
o
t
 
t
o
a
t
t
e
m
p
t
 
t
o
u
n
t
a
n
g
e
o
r
 
r
e
s
o
v
e
 
t
h
e
m

l

 

 

l

.
 
 

c
e
n
t
r
a

l
 

i

a
m

 

 

 

l

 
i
s
 
t
o
h
o
d
u
p
 
t
h
e
c
o
m
p
e
x
n
e
t
w
o
r
k
o
f
 
l

 

l

 

o
c
a

l
 
i
s
s
u
e
s
 
f
o
r
 
a

l
l
 
t
o

 

i

n
s
t
r
u
m
e
n
t
s
 
o
r
 
v
i
s
u
a

l
i
s
a
t
i
o
n
s
 
i
s
 
t
h
e
 
f
a
c
t
 
t
h
a
t
 
t
h
i
s
 
p
r
o
e
c
t
 
d
o
e
s
 
n
o
t
 
 

j

i

 

 

n
o
r
d
e
r
 
t
o
p
e
r
s
u
a
d
e
p
e
o
p
e
 
t
o

 

l

 
i

l

m
p
e
m
e
n
t
 
o
r
 
b
u

i
l

d
 
s
o
m
e
t
h
n
g
.
 
I

i

n
 
f
a
c
t
,
 
i
t
s
 

 

 

l

h
o
d
a
p
a
r
t
i
c
u
a
r
 
l

l

o
c
a

l
 

a
g
e
n
d
a
.
 
I
t
 
d
o
e
s
 
n
o
t
 
fi
l
t
e
r
 
t
h
e
c
o

 

l
l

e
c
t
e
d

 
i

n
f
o
r
m
a
t
i
o
n

 

 

l

l

 

 

i

 

 

 d
p
e
e
o
c
i
p
s
i
e
o
 
n
t
o
m
 
f
o
a
c
k
u
n
s
g
 
m
h
o
a
r
s
e
 
t
 
o
s
t
b
r
o
e
n
b
g
a
y
s
e
o
d
n
.
 
 
t
T
h
o
e
d
i
r
o
 
o
 
t
w
h
i
n
s
,
e
 
x
p
e
r
i
e
n
c
e
s
,
 
r
e
fl
e
c
t
 
a
n
d

w
e
fi
r
s
t
 
h
a
v
e
 
t
o
e
n
a
b
e

 

l

 

 

 

 

 

o
u
r
 
e
n
v
i
r
o
n
m
e
n
t
 
i
s
 
t
h
e
 
f
o
u
n
d
a
t
i
o
n
 
s
t
o
n
e
u
p
o
n
w
h
c
h
a
n
y
d
e
m
o
c
r
a
t
i
c

 

 

 

i

 

 

 

 

u
n
d
e
r
 
a
C
r
e
a
t
i
v
e
C
o
m
m
o
n
s
 
L
c
e
n
s
e
.

i

l

o
f
 
p
e
o
p
e
'
s
 
s
e
n
s
o
r
y
a
n
d
e
m
o
t
i
o
n
a

 

 

l
 

e
x
p
e
r
i
e
n
c
e
s
 
a
s
 
a
n
e
s
s
e
n
t
i
a

 

l
 

p
a
r
t
 
o
f
 
a

l
l
 

p
o

l
i
t
i
c
a

l
 

d
i
s
c
u
s
s
i
o
n
s
.
 

 

 

 

H
o
w
e
a
c
h
o
n
e
o
f
 
u
s
 
'
f
e
e
l
s
'
 
a
b
o
u
t
 
e
a
c
h
o
t
h
e
r
 
a
n
d

 

 

"

 

i
s
 
m
a
p
u
s
e
s
 
d
a
t
a
 
f
r
o
m

 

 
t
h
e
O
p
e
n
S
t
r
e
e
t
 

 

 

M
a
p
p
r
o
e
c
t
 

j

W
h

i
l

e
 
s
o
m
e
o
f
 
t
h
e

 

 
 
i

 

n
s
t
r
u
m
e
n
t
s
 
u
s
e
d
 
t
o
c
r
e
a
t
e
 
t
h
i
s
 
m
a
p
,
 
s
u
c
h
a
s
 
t
h
e

 

 

 

c
a
r
e
a
b
o
u
t
 
i
t
.
 

 

"
e
h
o
p
e

 
i
s
 
t
h
a
t
 
a

 

l
l
 
t
h
e
B
r
e
n
t
f
o
r
d
 
s
t
a
k
e
h
o
d
e
r
s
 
s
u
c
h
a
s
 

 

l

 

o
r
 
S
e
n
s
o
r
y
M
a
p
p
n
g
a
r
e
e
x
o
t
i
c
.
 

 

i

 

M
o
r
e

 
i

m
p
o
r
t
a
n
t
 
t
h
a
n
 
t
h
e
u
n
u
s
u
a

 

l

m
a
p
 
t
o
 
r
e
v
i
t
a

l
i
s
e
 
t
h
e
i
r
 
d
i
s
c
u
s
s
i
o
n
s
.
 
I

 

n
p
a
r
t
i
c
u
a
r
,
 

l

w
e

 
i

n
s
i
s
t
 
o
n
 
t
h
e
 
r
o
e

l

 
 

A
t
t
r
i
b
u
t
i
o
n
-
N
o
n
c
o
m
m
e
r
c
a
-
S
h
a
r
e
a

i

 

l

l
i

 

 

k
e
3
.
0
L
c
e
n
s
e
.
 

i

p
e
n
c

i
l
 

a
n
d
 
t
h
e
c

 

l
i

p
b
o
a
r
d
 
s
e
e
m

 
f
a
m

i
l
i

 

a
r
 
t
o
u
s
,
 
o
t
h
e
r
s
 
l
i

 

k
e
E
m
o
t
i
o
n
M
a
p
p
n
g

 

i

 

l

o
c
a

l
 

p
e
o
p
e
,
 
i

l

n
t
e
r
e
s
t
 
g
r
o
u
p
s
,
 
d
e
v
e
o
p
e
r
s
 
a
n
d
 
t
h
e
c
o
u
n
c

l

 

i
l
 

w

i
l
l
 

u
s
e

 
 
t
h
i
s
 

 

i

 

 

 

"
e
B
r
e
n
t
f
o
r
d
B
o
p
s
y
m
a
p
h
a
s
 
b
e
e
n
 
r
e
e
a
s
e
d
u
n
d
e
r
 
a
C
r
e
a
t
i
v
e
C
o
m
m
o
n
s
 

 

l

 

 

i

 

n
s
t
r
u
m
e
n
t
s
 
a
n
d
m
e
t
h
o
d
s
 
f
o
r
 
e
x
p
o
r
i
n
g
a
n
d
v
i
s
u
a

 

l

 

 

l
i
s
i
n
g
B
r
e
n
t
f
o
r
d
.
 

l

c
e
a
n

.
 

"

i

 

i

j

 

i
s
 
p
r
o
e
c
t
 
i
s
 
a
n
a
r
t
 
p
e
c
e
w
h
c
h
b
r
i
n
g
s
 
a
p
a
r
t
i
c
u
a
r
 
s
e
t
 
o
f
 

 

 

l

 

r
e
fl
e
c
t
,
 
t
h
e
p
r
o
c
e
s
s
 
o
f
 
r
e
fl
e
c
t
i
n
g
o
p
n
o
n
s
 
a
n
d

 

i

i

 
i

d
e
a
s
 
i
s
 
n
e
v
e
r
 
s
i
m
p
e
o
r
 

l

 

W
H
O

 
I

I

 

S
T
H
S
F
O
R
 
?

 

 

"

i
s
 
m
a
p

 

 

 
i
s
 
f
o
r
 
a
n
y
o
n
e
w
h
o
c
a
r
e
s
 
a
b
o
u
t
 
B
r
e
n
t
f
o
r
d
o
r
 

 

e
n
v
i
r
o
n
m
e
n
t
.
 

U
n

l
i

 

k
e
a
m

 

i
r
r
o
r
 

l

i

 

w
h
c
h
c
e
a
n
y
b
o
u
n
c
e
s
 
l
i

l

 

g
h
t
 
i

 

n
o
r
d
e
r
 
t
o

 
 

i

 

f
r
o
m
d
ff
e
r
e
n
t
 
p
o
n
t
s
 
o
f
 
v
e
w

i

i

i

l

,
 
b
u
t
 
a
w
a
y
s
 
t
r
y
n
g
 
t
o
m
a
k
e
 
s
e
n
s
e
o
f
 
t
h
e
i
r
 
 

 

 

w

i

i

 

 

i
t
h
d
ff
e
r
e
n
c
e
s
 
a
n
d
m
a
k
n
g
o
u
r
 
o
w
n
 
t
r
a
n
s
l
a
t
i
o
n
s
.
 

 

w
h
o
 
r
e
a

l
l

 

y
o
u
g
h
t
 
t
o

O
P
E
N
D
A
T
A

 

 

C
o
p
y
r
i
g
h
t
 
-
C
h
r
i
s
t
i
a
n
N
o
d
,
 
2
0
0
8

l

 

 

i

a
d
ff
e
r
e
n
t
 
a
n
g
e
.

l

t
h
o
s
e
o
f
 

 

 

i

l

m
u
l
t
i
p
e
v
o
c
e
s
 
o
f
t
e
n
d
i
s
a
g
r
e
e
n
g
w

 

i

 

 

 

i
t
h
e
a
c
h
o
t
h
e
r
 
o
r
 
s
p
e
a
k
n
g

i

f
o
r
 
l

o
c
a

l
 

c
h
a
n
g
e
,
 

 

 

w
e
o
u
g
h
t
 
t
o
a
c
c
e
p
t
 
t
h
e
d
ffi
c
u
l
t
 
p
r
o
c
e
s
s
 
o
f
 
d
e
a

 

i

l
i

n
g

 

r
o
u
g
h
y
2
0
0

l

 

 
l

o
c
a

l
 

l

p
e
o
p
e
.
 
Y
o
u
w

 

i
l
l
 

n
o
t
i
c
e
 
t
h
a
t
 
t
h
e
 
t
e
x
t
s
 
o
n
 
t
h
e
m
a
p
a
r
e

 

 

 

g
e
n
e
r
a
t
e
a
p
u
b

 

 

l
i

c
 
s
p
h
e
r
e
.
 

i

 

R
a
t
h
e
r
 
t
h
a
n
a
s
k
n
g
 
f
o
r
 
o
r
 
o
ff
e
r
i
n
g
a
c
t
i
o
n
p
o
n
t
s

 

 

i

i

 

 

  r
o
e
f
 
s
t
u
h
l
e
t
s
s
 
e
o
f
a
 
c
t
h
t
i
e
v
i
d
t
i
e
ff
s
e
 
r
b
e
e
n
c
t
o
 
p
m
a
e
r
t
s
i
 
c
a
p
a
t
o
r
y
a
c
t
i
v
i
t
i
e
s
 
w

e
n
s
 
f
o
r
 
l

 
l

 

i

i

 

o
o
k
n
g
a
t
 
B
r
e
n
t
f
o
r
d
 
f
r
o
m

 

i
t
h

 
l

o
c
a

l
 

l

p
e
o
p
e
.
 
E
a
c
h

 

i

 

 

n
f
o
r
m
a
t
i
o
n
a
n
d
c
o
n
v
e
r
s
a
t
i
o
n
s
 
a
b
o
u
t
 
t
h
e
a
r
e
a
w
h
c
h
w
e
r
e
c
o

 

i

 

 

 

l
l

e
c
t
e
d
b
y

 

 
 
 

 

w

 

i
t
h
e
a
c
h
o
t
h
e
r
 

 

 

w
e
c
r
e
a
t
e
 
s
o
c
a

i

l
 

p
o
s
i
t
i
o
n
s
 
a
n
d
 
r
e
a
t
i
o
n
s
h
p
s
 
t
h
a
t
 

i

l

 

t
h
e
m
a
p

i

 
i
s
 
d
v
d
e
d

i

 
i

n
t
o
 
s
m
a

l
l

e
r
 
g
r
a
p
h
c
a

i

l
 

l

e
e
m
e
n
t
s
 
t
h
a
t
 
v
i
s
u
a

l
i
s
e
 
t
h
e

 

 

a
n
d
 
t
h
e
p
e
o
p
e
w
h
o

l

 

 
l
i

v
e
 
t
h
e
r
e
.
 
I
t
 

w
a
s
 
c
r
e
a
t
e
d
p
u
r
e
y
 
f
r
o
m

 

l

 

 
t
h
e
d
a
t
a
,
 

p
r
o
c
e
s
s
 
o
f
 
d
i
s
a
g
r
e
e
m
e
n
t
 
a
n
d
p
a
r
t
i
c
p
a
t
i
o
n

 

i

 

.
 
E
v
e
n
b
y
p
u
b

 

l
i

l

 

c
y
d
i
s
a
g
r
e
e
n
g

i

 

d
i
s
c
u
s
s
i
o
n
s
 
t
h
a
t
 
e
m
e
r
g
e
d
 
f
r
o
m

 
t
h
a
t
 
s
e
c
t
i
o
n

.
 
I

 

n
a
d
d
i
t
i
o
n
 
t
o
 
t
h
e
 
s
e
c
t
i
o
n
s
,

W
H
A
T

 
I

 

S
T
H
S
 
?

I

I

n
 
s
o
m
e
 
s
e
n
s
e
,
 
t
h
i
s
 
o
b
e
c
t
 
i

j

n
 
f
r
o
n
t
 
o
f
 
y
o
u

 
i
s
 
a
p
u
b

 

l
i

 

c
m

 

i
r
r
o
r
 
o
n
B
r
e
n
t
f
o
r
d

 

j

o
b
e
c
t
s
 
l
i

k
e
 
t
h
i
s
 
m
a
p

 
i

n
 
f
r
o
n
t
 
o
f
 
y
o
u

,
 
i

 

 

n
o
r
d
e
r
 
t
o
c
r
e
a
t
e
a
n
a
c
t
i
v
e

 

 

 

 

E
a
c
h
 
s
e
c
t
i
o
n
c
o
n
t
a
n
s
 
i
t
s
 
o
w
n
m
n

i

 

i

i
 
s
u
m
m
a
r
y
o
f
 
t
h
e

 

 
i
s
s
u
e
s
 
a
n
d

 

 

r
e
p
r
o
d
u
c
e
s
 
t
h
e
a
s
s
u
m
p
t
i
o
n
s
 
o
f
 
t
h
o
s
e
c
r
e
a
t
i
n
g
 
t
h
e
q
u
e
s
t
i
o
n
n
a
i
r
e
s
.

 

 

a

 
l

e
f
t
 
t
o
 
r
i
g
h
t
 
n
a
r
r
a
t
i
v
e
 
f
r
o
m

 

 
t
h
e
p
a
s
t
 
t
o
w
a
r
d
s
 
t
h
e
 
f
u
t
u
r
e
,
 
a
s
 
w
e

l
l
 

a
s
 

W
h
a
t
 

 

w
e
n
e
e
d

 

 
i
s
 
a
c
o
m
m
u
n
a

l
 

p
r
o
c
e
s
s
 
o
f
 
t
r
a
n
s
l
a
t
i
n
g
c
o
m
p

 

l
i

c
a
t
e
d

 
 

 

a
p
r
o
g
r
e
s
s
i
o
n
 
f
r
o
m

 
t
h
e
 
s
t
a
t
i
c
a
n
d
 
s
o

 

l
i

d
 
t
o
w
a
r
d
s
 
t
h
e
fl
u
d
a
n
d
m
a

i

 

 

 

l
l

e
a
b
e
.

l

 

 

 

g
e
t
 
a
 
s
e
n
s
e
o
f
 
t
h
e
w
h
o
e
.

 

l

 

i

v
e
w
o
f
 
t
h
e
b
o
d
y
 
t
o

 

 
l

 

o
o
k
a
t
 
t
h
e

 
i

n
t
e
r
c
o
n
n
e
c
t
i
o
n
s
 
b
e
t
w
e
e
n
p
r
o
b
e
m
s
 
t
o

 

l

i
t
s
 
u
n
q
u
e
a

 

i

i
l

 

i

 

i

m
e
n
t
s
.
 
L
k
e
e
a
s
t
e
r
n
m
e
d
c
n
e
,
 
t
h
i
s
 
p
r
o
e
c
t
 
t
a
k
e
s
 
a
h
o

 

j

i

l
i
s
t
i
c

a
b
o
u
t
 
o
u
r
 
s
o
c
a

i

l
 
s
p
a
c
e
s
.
 

"
e

 
l

a
n
g
u
a
g
e
o
f
 

 

i

 

m
a
n
s
t
r
e
a
m
c
o
n
s
u
l
t
a
t
i
o
n
s
 

l

a
n
g
u
a
g
e
 
f
o
r
 
t
h
i
s
 
m
a
p
.
 

W
e

l
l
 

 

w
e
 
t
h
e
a
r
t
i
s
t
s
,
 
a
r
g
u
e
 
t
h
a
t
 
a
s
 
a
p
u
b

 

l
i

 

c
w
e

 

a
c
t
u
a

l
l

 

 

y
h
a
v
e
v
e
r
y
 
f
e
w
 
s
h
a
r
e
d
 
r
e
f
e
r
e
n
c
e
s
 
o
r
 
l

a
n
g
u
a
g
e
s
 
f
o
r
 
h
o
w

 
t
o
 
t
a
k

l

 
 

o
ff
e
r
s
 
o
n
y
 
t
h
e

l

 
i

m
p
e
r
s
o
n
a

l
 
l

l

i

 

a
n
g
u
a
g
e
o
f
 
o
ffi
c
a
d
o
m
a
n
d
 
t
i
c
k
b
o
x
e
s
 
w
h
c
h

 

i

 

 

 

 

H
O
W
T
O
R
E
A
D
T
H
E
M
A
P

 

 

 

 

"
e
m
a
p
h
a
s
 
b
e
e
n
 
s
t
r
u
c
t
u
r
e
d

 
i

n
t
o
 
f
o
u
r
 
i

l

n
t
e
r
r
e
a
t
e
d
 
s
e
c
t
i
o
n
s
 
t
h
a
t
 
s
u
g
g
e
s
t
 

j

t
h
i
s
 
p
r
o
e
c
t
 
u
s
e
s
 
c
u
l
t
u
r
a

l
 

p
r
o
b
e
s
 
t
o

 
i

n
v
e
s
t
i
g
a
t
e
 
t
h
e

 
l

o
c
a

l
 
s
o
c
a

i

l
 

b
o
d
y
a
n
d

 

 

i

 

l

B
r
e
n
t
f
o
r
d
.
P
e
o
p
e
m
g
h
t
 
q
u
e
s
t
i
o
n
w
h
y
w
e
a
r
e
n
o
t
 
u
s
i
n
g
a
 
'

 

 

 

 

 

n
o
r
m
a
l
'
 

 

p
u
b

l
i

c
 
s
p
h
e
r
e
s
.
 

I

l

 

i

n
s
t
e
a
d
o
f
 
t
a
k
n
g
 
t
i
s
s
u
e
 
s
a
m
p
e
s
 
a
s
 
o
n
e
w
o
u
d
 
f
r
o
m
a
h
u
m
a
n
b
e
n
g
,
 
 

 

l

 

 

 

i

 

t
h
e
e
ff
o
r
t
 
t
o
g
r
a
s
p
 
t
h
e

 

 
l

i

 

o
g
c
b
e
h
n
d

i

 
i
t
,
 

 

w
e
g
e
t
 
a
m
a
z
i
n
g

 
i

n
s
i
g
h
t
s
 
i

n
t
o

 

r
e
p
r
e
s
e
n
t
 
l

o
c
a

l
 

a
n
d

 
i

n
t
r
a
-
o
c
a

l

l
 
i
s
s
u
e
s
 
o
r
 

w
a
y
s
 
t
o

 
i

n
s
t
i
g
a
t
e

 
l

o
c
a

l

B
r
e
n
t
f
o
r
d

 
 

B
i
o
p
s
y

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

A
p
r
i
l
 
/
 
J
u
n
e

 
 

2
0
0
8

 

C
h
r
i
s
t
i
a
n
N
o
d
w

l

 

 

l

 

i

i
t
h
D
a
n
e
a
B
o
r
a
s
c
h

 

i

86

87

hacking our tools

for

thought

dr. tom stafford

Hack: n. a clever solution to an interesting problem . 
Motto of OReillys Hacks Series

Hacking is what happens when you understand a system - you look for 
exploits, short-cuts and unintended uses. You subvert the design intention, 
reconfiguring things for your own purposes. Hacking is what a hacker does 
to understand a system.  What does this do? What will happen if I do this? 
Hey, cool! Now what would happen if I do this? 
            Hacking is a DIY culture, a dissident, irreverent culture. Status is 
about kudos: what can you do ? Come and show us. Share. Show off. 
The hacker of the mainstream press is destructive, but always young, 
cool, capable. An anti-hero, in fact. Lots of hackers see it that way too. 
Destructive ? Well, maybe, but isnt the mainstream always going to see 
disruption of their agenda in that way?
            Your mind is your thoughts and experiences, all the things you 
experience like your memories, hopes and feelings as well as all the 
processes going on below the surface that make conscious thought 
possible. Add to this the idea of hacking and we get mind hacking. 
Mind hacking means looking beneath the user- illusion of consciousness 

and getting at the underlying workings  [ 1 ].
             That sounds great doesnt it? What does it really mean? Mind Hacks 
is a book I wrote with Matt Webb in 2004 for the technical publishers 
OReilly. Matt is into technology and ideas, Im into cognitive neuroscience. 
We drunk one too many cups of coffee and it seemed like a good idea at 
the time [ 2 ] . I think OReilly really had their eyes on something like Mind 
Performance Hacks (actually released 2006, but not written by us). We 
were thinking about liberating all the cool science that has been done 
recently uncovering the workings of the brain and mind. Science started 
out as a kind of open source - ideas published in journals so anyone can 
question them, use them, change them. We wanted to take the tips, the 
tricks, the discoveries of the sciences of the mind and package them in 
little bundles which people could experience, play with and repurpose (like 
programming functions). It was great. I spent six months trying to see how 
many arbitrary words I could remember using ancient Greek memory tricks, 
or see if I could catch myself moving my eyes in a mirror. My flatmates 
came home one day and I was standing on my head in the hall trying to 
work out if the picture Id drawn looked like it was curving in or out of the 
screen. Both Matt and I became hyper-sensitive to the running of our own 
minds, the glitches in what we noticed, remembered, felt. I found out that 
things Id noticed before had been given names by psychologists. That 
feeling when you say the word banana fifty times and you lose the feeling 
for what it means : semantic satiation. I learnt concepts that made me 
notice things Id never noticed before. Like the moment when the projector 
is off before a film comes on in the cinema, when the screen is dark, theres 
an illusion where the screen appears to grow without changing size. Look 
out for it, its there I promise. So we wrote this book about moment-by-
moment experience, about attention, awareness and memory. As well as 
liberating some scientific information into the mainstream, we also learnt 
a few things about our own minds along the way. 
              One thing the book relied on fairly explicitly was the idea of the 
mind as a bit of technology; a mechanism or set of mechanisms with 

88

89

predictable input-output relations. This predictability means that we can 
try and infer operating principles, and then experiment with them. You 
can only take this metaphor so far. It is fairly clear that the mind isnt 
a mechanism in the old, hard, sense of machinery. If anything it is 
a mechanism in the software sense, something fluid and adaptive, dealing 
with the intangibility of information processing. Because mind is infoware, 
it becomes technology in the Arthur C Clarke sense - something that is 
sufficiently sophisticated to be indistinguishable from magic. Andy Clark has 
talked about how the mind is software for dealing with whatever the world 
throws at us [ 3 ].  By this I dont just mean that our brains learn to do smart 
stuff, I mean that our brains learn to take anything we can control and 
make it part of our cognitive ecosystem. We use external objects as mental 
tools naturally and compulsively. Our minds are plastic and extensible, so 
fundamentally embodied that the barrier between world and mind is leaky 
like a sieve. Andy Clark says that we are natural born cyborgs, born to 
become fundamentally integrated with whatever technology is available in 
external world.
            You probably have a feeling for what this means already. When you 
use a well-designed bit of technology it becomes invisible - for example, 
if you drive youll have noticed how the car becomes an extension of your 
thoughts; you forget about gears, pedals and the wheel in your hands and 
instead think of speed, acceleration and movement, just like you forget 
your muscles when you are running. If someone asks if you know the time 
you automatically say that you do, ignoring the fact that it is your watch 
that contains the information, not your memory. But you can access the 
information so easily that it feels like it is part of your mind.I bring up this 
idea of our extensible minds because I want to draw an analogy with 
Bio Mapping. The idea of mind hacking was based on the idea of our 
conscious experience being constructed by various component processes, 
but in our book we never really got to grips with the idea of extending the 
repertoire of components that construct our experience. Let me illustrate 
how important these components of mind can be by a story. Its not a story 

about an extraordinary augmented human consciousness, but about 
an unfortunate individual who lacked the ordinary augmentation of 
memory which we normally take for granted.
              In the book Broken Memories [ 4 ]  Margaret OConner and 
colleagues tell the story of an amnesic patient theyve studied for over 
two decades. The patient, who they refer to by his initials, SS, has a kind of 
brain damage which means that he cant create new memories for things 
that happen to him, nor does he remember events in his personal history 
from before his accident (a viral infection that spread to the temporal lobe 
of his brain). Like other patients with this kind of amnesia, SS is stranded 
in the present. OConner describes how SS has kept the buoyant mood and 
outgoing personality that he had before his injury. Hes intelligent and able 
to carry on a normal conversation - just as long as you dont expect him to 
remember anything beyond the sphere of the immediate conversation. He 
is completely dependent on his family and cannot work, and had been for 
two decades at the time of writing. When OConner and colleagues gave SS 
standard psychiatric tests for depression there was no evidence that he was 
unhappy  [ 5 ]. When he was asked, for example, if he often felt miserable or 
hated himself or thought of suicide, SS consistently ticked the No boxes, 
reflecting his upbeat personality.
             This isnt the end of the story, however. A second batch of tests was 
administered, which tested mood indirectly  [ 6 ]. These tests didnt ask SS 
directly how he felt, but instread were designed to assess his personality 
traits and the themes which dominated his thoughts. These tests seemed to 
show that SS did have depressive feelings, even if he didnt articulate them 
in the first set of tests. OConner interpreted from the second tests that SS 
had low self-esteem, along with accompanying depression and anxiety, 
as well as a preoccupation with ideas of loss and decay.
              So is SS depressed or not? OConner and colleagues asked 
themselves the same question, and in answering they drew on the 
distinction between expressive and experiential aspects of mood. 
SS seems to experience depression to a far higher degree than he expresses 

90

91

it. But this isnt a case of simple deception. What is happening is that his 
memory problems, combined with his upbeat personality, seem to prevent 
him accessing these feelings regularly or consistently. The standard tests 
for depression, which rely on his own recognition of his feelings, suggest 
that he isnt depressed. Yet, the personality test which addresses mood 
indirectly allows SSs depressive feelings to come through. SS does have 
unhappy feelings, which is not surprising for someone in his position, but 
his injury prevents him achieving a stable conscious awareness of this fact.
If SS had an intact memory for lifes episodes it would become a tool for 
self-reflection, a repository for data about himself. He could use it to 
aggregate the fleeting evidence of his negative feelings. Instead, his upbeat 
personality dominates those nagging feelings, sweeping them away every 
time they occur - he is ignorant that each dismissal is not the first, but is in 
fact one of a countless succession of such sweepings-away.
            For those of us lucky enough not to have amnesia, our episodic 
memories are a bit of mental technology which our consciousness can use; 
itll help us remember where the shops are, what happened earlier in 
a film, as well as augmenting our ability to self-reflect and self-understand. 
Amnesic patients show that episodic memories are not a necessary 
component of the mind, they can be removed by injury. If the components 
of the mental operating system are modifiable, what other component have 
been, or could be, added into this kernel? 
            Like memory, language is another tool for thinking. Often it is only 
after I have said something out loud that I realise exactly what I think. 
Language is a tool, but it becomes so integral to ourselves that we think 
through it, with it, rather than having to struggle to construct sentences and 
pick words (this does happen, of course, but it is such an exception that it is 
notable when it does). By putting things into words we can express feelings, 
make ourselves remember things and see what we think about an idea. Just 
as the external world becomes part of the mind, we can make the internal 
world become external and hence use it as a vehicle for self-awareness. 
The point is that the distinction between mind, body and world isnt a firm 

one. Language is part of the world, just as it is part of our minds. So too 
can writing, computers, maps or other people be part of our mind. As with 
language, all our tools are vehicles for self-awareness. Even physical tools 
like a hammer. As soon as you pick it up you ask yourself What can I hit 
with this?, which is encouraging us to ask ourselves What do I want to 
make or break with this?.
              Bio Mapping is a tool for self-awareness, at once more ephemeral 
and more sophisticated than a hammer. By looking at your arousal as you 
traverse physical space you create a medium for reflection on your feelings, 
feelings which can normally pass below the radar of conscious awareness. 
Similarly, on a group level, when we can look at similarities in our emotional 
responses to physical spaces it lets us focus on shared feelings which, 
are normally only fleeting and not recorded, and so pass below the 
collective radar.
              After wed written the book we got a lot of interests from marketers 
(the people whose job it is to sell stuff, by fair means or foul). One story we 
were told was of someone who worked in PR walking round the OReilly 
ETech conference, waving the book and boasting about how they would 
use it to win hearts and minds. Someone asked me at a book reading if I 
was worried about giving all the secrets of the mind away to advertisers. 
I told them that the advertisers already had a perfected non-theoretical 
knowledge of how to manipulate people, and our book wasnt going to help 
them. I think it was true too - if you read the book you find that youre 
getting involved in relatively low-level stuff, like awareness and memory, 
rather than the higher level stuff of desires, fears and aspirations that 
advertisers work on. 
              But still, the reaction to the book was a message on the kind of 
culture we live in. Wed intended Mind Hacks to be for people like us, 
individuals, who liked understanding how stuff worked, and making things 
or improving things. Unfortunately this level of analysis also seemed to 
appeal to people who wanted to take advantage rather than just explore 
and improve.

92

93

            It is here that Bio Mapping has the potential to be more radical than 
mind hacking on its own. If Mind Hacks aimed to show the mechanisms 
behind the construction of moment-by-moment conscious experience, 
then Bio Mapping can be a hack for a different level of consciousness - the 
self-consciousness that evolves over time, the interpersonal and ultimately 
social consciousness. The focus of Mind Hacks reflects a bias that exists 
in the whole of cognitive psychology. This is a bias towards the individual 
rather than the social; towards looking at the limits and resources of our 
mental apparatus rather than the potential; towards focussing on the fixed 
components of mind, rather than the dynamic and developing aspects. This 
bias has brought fantastic benefits, but it is still a limited view of mind. Our 
minds are exciting for their potential, not for their limits; they make sense in 
a social context, not on their own (this is quite literally true - left completely 
on your own for long enough you lose your sanity). Because our minds are 
fundamentally social, a complete understanding of them necessarily needs 
to reference social space. 
            If we get fooled into thinking that individual minds are the sole 
locus of thought (like cognitive science), or that technology should focus 
on individuals without reference to the social then our perception of the 
individual becomes severely handicapped. Were not just natural born 
cyborgs, but natural born social animals.
            Whats this got to do with hacking? Hacking is an idea, as well as 
a social movement, which is about subverting and reclaimin the tools and 
metaphors that were given. Hacking is a DIY culture of action - a very 
individualistic community, but still a community with a vision of shared 
benefits. These are the guys that gave us open source after all. Community 
solutions are more than side-effects of the hacker ethic, they are core.
If the idea of hacking becomes limited to the idea of personal solutions 
to individual problems then it will have failed. Bio Mapping promises to 
open up the field of possibilities for social hacking, for awareness hacking, 
for a rediscovery of conscious collective action - not along the lines of 
the monolithic political movements of the 20th century, but in swarms, 

collectives and communities. The hacker ethic is one with the possibility to 
combine individuality with interconnectedness [ 7 ]. 
              Lets build.

about the author

Dr. Tom Stafford is a lecturer at the University of Sheffield. He likes finding 
things out and writing things down.

94

95

notes

[ 1 ]  User-illusion of consciousness. See Dennet, D.C. (1991) Consciousness   
 Explained. Little, Brown and Co.
 
[ 2 ]   Actually Matt is a ferocious tea drinker, not a coffee-drinker.
 
[ 3 ]  Clark, A. (2004) Natural Born Cyborgs: Minds, Technologies and the 
Future of Human Intelligence. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
 
[ 4 ]  Campbell, R. and Conway, M.A. (ed.) (1995) Broken Memories: Case   
Studies in Memory Impairment. Blackwell, Oxford UK.
 
[ 5 ]  Standard neurpsychological depression measures: BDI = 3, HRSD = 4.

[ 6 ]  The MMPI and the Rorschach test.

[ 7 ]   Warnick B.R. (2004) Technological Metaphors and Moral Education: 
The Hacker Ethic and the Computational Experience. Studies in Philosophy  
and Education, 23, 4, 265-281 .

96

edited by christian nold
www.softhook.com

designed by daniela boraschi 
www.danielaboraschi.com 

This book was funded through a SCIART Research 
& Development Award from the Wellcome Trust 
www.wellcome.ac.uk/arts and supported by SPACE 

the book is available for free download from:
www.emotionalcartography.net

ISBN 978-0-9557623-1-4SB

the essays by dr. stephen boyd davis, sophie hope 
and dr. tom stafford were specially commissioned 
for this book. 

published under a CREATIVE COMMONS  
Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 3.0 LICENSE 
excluding the made to measure essay which is 
copyright raqs media.  

many thanks to: daniela boraschi, prof. john 
gruzelier, heather corcoran, raqs media collective, 
sophie hope, dr. tom stafford, dr. stephen boyd davis, 
rob van kranenburg, marcel van der drift, jim prevett, 
meroe candy, marie-lise sheppard, tony steffert,  
dr. beau lotto, dr. joydeep bhattacharya and prof. 
hugo critchley.

This book is a collection of essays from artists, designers, 
psychogeographers, cultural researchers, futurologists and 
neuroscientists brought together by christian nold to explore 
the political, social and cultural implications of visualising 
peoples intimate biometric data and emotions using technology. 

WWW.EMOTIONALCARTOGRAPHY.NET 

ISBN 978-0-9557623-1-4

