Identity Theft 
And Your Social 
Security Number

Identity Theft And Your 
Social Security Number

Identity theft is one of the fastest 

growing crimes in America. A 

dishonest person who has your Social 
Security number can use it to get other 
personal information about you. Identity 
thieves can use your number and your 
good credit to apply for more credit in 
your name. Then, they use the credit 
cards and do not pay the bills. You may 
not find out that someone is using your 
number until you are turned down for 
credit or you begin to get calls from 
unknown creditors demanding payment 
for items you never bought.

Someone illegally using your Social 

Security number and assuming your 
identity can cause a lot of problems.

Your number is confidential
The Social Security Administration 

protects your Social Security number and 
keeps your records confidential. We do 
not give your number to anyone, except 
when authorized by law. You should be 
careful about sharing your number, even 
when you are asked for it. You should 
ask why your number is needed, how it 
will be used and what will happen if you 
refuse. The answers to these questions 
can help you decide if you want to give 
out your Social Security number.

How might someone steal 
your number?
Identity thieves get your personal 

information by:
  Stealing wallets, purses and your mail 
(bank and credit card statements, pre-
approved credit offers, new checks and 
tax information);

  Stealing personal information you 
provide to an unsecured site on the 
Internet, from business or personnel 
records at work and personal 
information in your home;

  Rummaging through your trash, the 
trash of businesses and public trash 
dumps for personal data;

  Posing by phone or email as someone 

who legitimately needs information 
about you, such as employers or 
landlords; or

  Buying personal information from 

inside sources. For example, 
an identity thief may pay a store 
employee for information about you 
that appears on an application for 
goods, services or credit.

3

Be careful with your Social 
Security card and number
When you start a job, make sure 

your employer has your correct Social 
Security number so your records are 
correct. Provide your Social Security 
number to your financial institution(s) 
for tax reporting purposes. Keep your 
card and any other document that shows 
your Social Security number in a safe 
place. DO NOT routinely carry your 
card or other documents that display 
your number.

What if you think someone 
is using your number?
Sometimes more than one person uses 
the same Social Security number, either 
on purpose or by accident. If you suspect 
someone is using your number for work 
purposes, you should contact us to 
report the problem. We will review your 
earnings with you to ensure our records 
are correct.

You also may review earnings 

posted to your record on your Social 
Security Statement. The Statement 
is available online to workers age 18 
and older. To get your Statement, go to 
www.socialsecurity.gov/myaccount and 
create an account.

4

What if an identity thief is 
creating credit problems for you?
If someone has misused your Social 

Security number or other personal 
information to create credit or other 
problems for you, Social Security cannot 
resolve these problems. But there are 
several things you should do.

You should go to www.idtheft.gov and 

report the identity theft to the Federal 
Trade Commission. Or, you can call 
1-877-IDTHEFT (1-877-438-4338); TTY 
1-866-653-4261. That website is a one-
stop national resource to learn about 
the crime of identity theft. It provides 
detailed information to help you deter, 
detect and defend against identity theft.

You also may want to contact the 

Internal Revenue Service (IRS). An 
identity thief also might use your Social 
Security number to file a tax return to 
receive your refund. If you are eligible for 
a refund, a thief could file a tax return 
before you do and get your refund. Then, 
when you do file, the IRS will think 
you already received your refund. If 
your Social Security number is stolen, 
another individual may use it to get a 
job. That persons employer would report 
income earned to the IRS using your 
Social Security number. This will make 
it appear that you did not report all of 

5

(over)your income on your tax return. If you 
think you may have tax issues because 
someone has stolen your identity, go to 
www.irs.gov/uac/Identity-Protection or 
call 1-800-908-4490.

Also, you should file an online 

complaint with the Internet Crime 
Complaint Center (IC3) at www.ic3.gov.
The IC3 gives victims of cybercrime 
a convenient and easy-to-use reporting 
mechanism that alerts authorities of 
suspected criminal or civil violations. 
IC3 sends every complaint to one or more 
law enforcement or regulatory agencies 
with jurisdiction.
  IC3s mission is to receive, develop and 

refer criminal complaints regarding 
the rapidly expanding arena of 
cybercrime. The IC3 serves the broader 
law enforcement community that 
combats Internet crime. This includes 
federal, state, local and international 
agencies.

  The IC3 reflects a partnership between 
the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the 
National White Collar Crime Center 
and the Bureau of Justice Assistance.

  You also should monitor your 

credit report periodically. You can 
get free credit reports online at 
www.annualcreditreport.com.

6

Should you get a new 
Social Security number?
If you have done all you can to fix the 
problems resulting from misuse of your 
Social Security number and someone still 
is using your number, we may assign you 
a new number.

You cannot get a new Social 

Security number:
  To avoid the consequences of filing for 

bankruptcy;

  If you intend to avoid the law or your 

legal responsibility; or

  If your Social Security card is lost or 
stolen, but there is no evidence that 
someone is using your number.
If you decide to apply for a new 

number, you will need to prove your 
identity, age and U.S. citizenship 
or immigration status. For more 
information, ask for Your Social Security 
Number And Card (Publication Number 
05-10002). You also will need to provide 
evidence you are having ongoing 
problems because of the misuse.

Keep in mind that a new number 

probably will not solve all your problems. 
This is because other governmental 
agencies (such as the IRS and state motor 
vehicle agencies) and private businesses 
(such as banks and credit reporting 
companies) will have records under your 
old number. Along with other personal 
information, credit reporting companies 
use the number to identify your credit 
record. So using a new number will 
not guarantee you a fresh start. This is 

7

especially true if your other personal 
information, such as your name and 
address, remains the same.

If you receive a new Social Security 

number, you should not use the old 
number anymore.

For some victims of identity theft, 
a new number actually creates new 
problems. If the old credit information is 
not associated with your new number, 
the absence of any credit history under 
your new number may make it more 
difficult for you to get credit.

Contacting Social Security
For more information and to find 
copies of our publications, visit our 
website at www.socialsecurity.gov or 
call toll-free, 1-800-772-1213 (for the deaf 
or hard of hearing, call our TTY number, 
1-800-325-0778). We treat all calls 
confidentially. We can answer specific 
questions from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m., Monday 
through Friday. Generally, youll have 
a shorter wait time if you call during 
the week after Tuesday. We can provide 
information by automated phone service 
24 hours a day.

We also want to make sure you 

receive accurate and courteous service. 
That is why we have a second Social 
Security representative monitor some 
telephone calls.

Social Security Administration
SSA Publication No. 05-10064
ICN 463270
Unit of Issue - HD (one hundred)
December 2013 (Oct. 2012 edition may be used)

Printed on recycled paper

