s
t
c
a
F
r
e
t
a
W

 

Water Efficiency Saves 
Energy: Reducing Global 
Warming Pollution Through Water 
Use Strategies

The collection, distribution, and treatment of drinking water and 
wastewater nationwide consume tremendous amounts of energy and release 
approximately 116 billion pounds of carbon dioxide (CO2) per yearas 
much global warming pollution each year as 10 million cars.1 The energy-
water connection is particularly strong in the driest regions of the United 
States, such as the Southwest, where significant amounts of energy are used 
to import water. Solutions exist to cut both water and energy use. Through 
water efficiency measures, we can help to protect dry areas from drought, 
lower consumers utility bills, and reduce global warming pollution.

The Energy  Water Connection
Providing households with safe drinking water 
and wastewater disposal is an energy-intensive 
process. Nationwide, about 4 percent of 
power generation is used for water supply and 
treatment, but in certain parts of the United 
States the number is far higher. California is 
particularly vulnerable: the water sector is the 
largest energy user in the state, estimated to 
account for 19 percent of the total electricity 

consumed. Reducing water consumption saves 
energy because less water needs to be treated and 
pumped to end users. Moreover, when energy 
use is reduced, water is saved because less is 
needed in the operation of power plants. Some 
thermoelectric power plants, for example, use 
136 billion gallons of freshwater a day, which 
translates into 25 gallons of water to produce 
each kilowatt-hour of electricity.2

For more information,  
please contact  
Michelle Mehta  
at (310) 434-2300.

www.nrdc.org/policy
March 2009

 Natural Resources Defense Council

s
t
c
a
F
 
r
e
t
a
W

 

Water Efficiency Saves 
Energy: Reducing Global 
Warming Pollution Through 
Water Use Strategies

  Water conservation and efficiency measures 
reduce the burden on these energy-intensive 
water systems. There are ways to cut down on 
energy useand greenhouse gas emissionsat 
every stage in the water process: 

Source and 
conveyance

Drinking  
Water  
Treatment

Distribution

End use

Wastewater 
Treatment

NRDC Strategies for Saving Energy 
Through Water Efficiency
The following series of policy recommendations 
can help consumers, water suppliers and 
distributors, farmers, and states conserve water 
and in turn save energy. In many cases a single 
investment will help conserve our water supply, 
protect water quality, and lower energy demand, 
which also results in economic savings, greater 
sustainability of our water infrastructure, and a 
reduction in global warming pollution.

Intel's corporate headquarters in Santa Clara, California, incorporates LID techniques.

Source and Conveyance
1. Use Low Impact Development  
(Green Building)

Capturing and reusing stormwater runoff can 
greatly reduce the consumption of imported, 
potable water, as well as the energy usage and 
CO2 emissions associated with importing water. 
When runoff is diverted and captured before it 
flows into surface waters, it can be used onsite 
either to replenish groundwater supplies through 
infiltration or for graywater uses, like landscape 
irrigation and toilet flushing. These techniques 
are known as low-impact development (LID), 
the central objective of which is to maintain 
individual sites pre-development hydrology. LID 
uses common sense and simple technology
strategically placed beds of native plants, rain 
barrels, green roofs, porous surfaces for 
parking lots and roads, and other measuresto 
retain rainfall onsite or to help rainfall soak 
into the ground, rather than polluting the 
nearest receiving water. In effect, LID mimics 
natures own filtration systems. In addition to 
reducing water and energy use, the result is less 
water pollution from contaminated runoff, less 
flooding, replenished water supplies, and often 
more natural-looking, aesthetically pleasing 
cityscapes.

Case Study: LID Can Save Water and 
Energy in Southern California 

LIDs benefits are particularly important in the 
dry climates that characterize much of the 
West, where rainfall is in short supply. Southern 
California, for instance, must import most of its 
water via the State Water Project, Colorado River 
Aqueduct, and Los Angeles Aqueduct. Moving 
such large quantities of water over long distances 
and significant elevations requires a considerable 
amount of energy. Widespread use of LID 
practices would enable Southern California cities 
to import significantly less water, in turn reducing 
energy needs and associated CO2 emissions. As 
one example, if all new residential and commercial 
development and redevelopment in urbanized 
Southern California started using LID practices, 
by 2030 CO2 emissions would be reduced by up to 
292,000 metric tons per year. 

current standards while performing as well or 
better than their less-efficient counterparts. 
All water savings realized through the use of 
WaterSense-labeled products and services also 
have a corresponding reduction in energy 
consumption. The EPA estimates that if just one 
out of every 100 American homes were retrofitted 
with water-efficient fixtures, about 100 million 
kilowatt-hours of electricity per year would be 
savedavoiding 80,000 tons of global warming 
pollution, or the equivalent of over 8 million 
gallons of gasoline consumption.
 
and promote the WaterSense program by: 
n  Offering rebates for the purchase of WaterSense 

Local and federal government can expand 

products, as some cities are already doing. 
n  Offering federal tax credits for purchasing 

WaterSense products, as for the Energy Star 
program. 

n  Requiring WaterSense products in new 

construction and in government buildings. 

 5. Require and Provide Incentives  
for Agricultural Water-Use Efficiency  
and Soil and Manure Management

Agriculture is a major user of groundwater and  
surface water in the United States, accounting for 
about 85 percent of the countrys consumptive 
water use. 

U.S. Consumptive Water Use

You Can Save Water and 
Energy with WaterSense 

Consumers 
can save 
both water 
and energy 
costs by 
switching to 
WaterSense-

labeled fixtures 

and appliances, including 
toilets, showerheads, faucets, 
clothes washers, dishwashers, 
and irrigation equipment. For 
instance, the average household 
could save more than 11,000 
gallons of water, and about $170 
on its water bill, every year by 
making a few simple changes 
such as installing WaterSense-
labeled toilets and faucets in 
the bathroom. If just 1 percent 
of American homes replaced 
an older toilet with a new water 
efficient toilet, the country 
would save more than 38 million 
kilowatt-hours of electricity
enough electricity to supply more 
than 43,000 households for a 
month.4

Domestic-Commercial 8% 

Industrial Mining 4%

Thermoelectric 3%

Irrigation- 
Livestock 85%

2. Recycle and Reuse  
Wastewater 

Because water suitable for reuse is often a 
by-product of existing secondary and tertiary 
wastewater treatment processes, this type of water 
recycling is a low-energy source of water supply. 
This is especially true in areas like Southern 
California, where enormous amounts of energy 
are required to import water. Recycled water 
can be delivered to users, usually at less cost 
than non-recycled water, for anything from 
irrigating golf courses, parks, and crops, to 
mixing concrete, to firefighting. In fact, Orange 
County, California now uses advanced treatment 
technologies to purify wastewater to beyond 
bottled water quality, then allows it to percolate 
into the groundwater basin for later use as 
potable water. This system uses only about half 
the energy that would be required to transport 
that water from Northern California to Southern 
California.

Distribution 
3. Fix Leaking Drinking  
Water Pipes

Water treatment processes use large quantities of 
energy to treat and distribute water to customers. 
Energy use for water treatment is expected to 
increase as more stringent water quality rules 
and improved disinfection technologies, such 
as ultraviolet treatment and ozonation, are put 
in place that reduce the risk of carcinogens 
and other potentially harmful disinfection by-
products. Yet many drinking water systems lose 
as much as 20 percent of treated drinking water 
each year due to leaks in their pipe networks.3 
Improving drinking water infrastructure would 
save water and energy, and reduce the global 
warming pollution that results from wasted 
energy. 

End Use
4. Promote and Expand the  
EPAs WaterSense Program

The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
launched its WaterSense program in 2007 to 
help consumers and businesses identify products 
that meet the programs water-efficiency 
and performance criteria. The program sets 
specifications for the labeling of products that 
are at least 20 percent more efficient than the 

s
t
c
a
F
 
r
e
t
a
W

 

1  EPA, National Water Program Strategy: 
Response to Climate Change (2008), at 24-25, 
at http://www.epa.gov/water/climatechange/
strategy.html. Much of the information in this 
fact sheet has been adapted from this report.

2  U.S. Dept. of Energy, Energy Demands on 
Water Resources (2006), at 18, at http://
www.sandia.gov/energy-water/docs/121-
RptToCongress-EWwEIAcomments-FINAL.pdf.

3  Congressional Budget Office, Future 
Investment in Drinking Water and Wastewater 
Infrastructure (2002), at 8, at http://www.cbo.
gov/ftpdocs/39xx/doc3983/11-18-WaterSystems.
pdf. 

4  EPA, WaterSense program website, at http://
www.epa.gov/watersense/index.htm.

5  Millennium Ecosystem Assessment, 
Ecosystems and Human Well-being: Policy 
Responses (2003), at 302.

6  Consortium for Energy Efficiency, Initiative 
Description: CEE National Municipal Water and 
Wastewater Facility Initiative (2007), at 1, at 
http://www.cee1.org/ind/mot-sys/ww/ww-init-
des.pdf.

7  EPA, Combined Heat and Power Partnership, 
Opportunities for and Benefits of Combined Heat 
and Power at Wastewater Treatment Facilities 
(2007), at iii, at http://www.epa.gov/chp/
documents/wwtf_opportunities.pdf. 

Water Efficiency Saves 
Energy: Reducing Global 
Warming Pollution Through 
Water Use Strategies

  Water use efficiency measures such as 
modest crop shifting, smart irrigation scheduling, 
advanced irrigation management, and efficient 
irrigation technology have the potential of vastly 
improving water use efficiency. Switching from 
flood irrigation to drip irrigation, for instance, 
can increase water use efficiency as much as 40 
percent. Even small management changes can 
bring a 10 to 15 percent improvement in water 
use efficiency. Less water pumped for agricultural 
purposes equals energy savings and global 
warming pollution reduction. 
 
Global warming pollution can also be 
reduced by improved agricultural soil and 
manure management, which produces important 
water quality benefits as well. According to 
recent estimates, agriculture accounts for about 
6 percent of all global warming pollution in 
the United States. Nitrous oxide is the most 
significant greenhouse gas emitted through 
agricultural production. Agricultural soil 
management activities account for 78 percent 
of nitrous oxide emissions, most of which result 
from the application of nitrogen fertilizers to 
cropland, which in turn causes water pollution. 
Currently, U.S. farmers apply about 20 to 30 
percent more nitrogen fertilizer than needed. 
Scientists further estimate that reducing nitrogen 
fertilizer use would reduce downstream water 
pollution by more than 20 to 30 percent.5 Proven 
nutrient conservation practices are available that 
can substantially reduce loss of nitrogen to the 
atmosphere and to surface and groundwater. 

Wastewater and Drinking  
Water Treatment
6. Implement Energy Conservation  

Measures at Drinking Water and Wastewater 
Treatment Facilities
Facilities that treat and distribute drinking 
water and collect and treat wastewater have the 
potential to achieve 15 to 30 percent energy 
savings, or 15.75 to 31.5 billion kilowatt-hours, 
through energy conservation measures alone.6 
Technology is currently available to improve 
energy efficiency of equipment such as motors, 
drives, and fans, by up to 50 percent for some 

individual parts. Given that water and wastewater 
facilities are often the largest and most energy-
intensive loads owned and operated by local 
governments, representing up to 35 percent of 
municipal energy use, water resources agencies 
and energy commissions should work together 
to reflect water-energy connections. For instance, 
the non-profit Consortium for Energy Efficiency 
has launched the National Municipal Water 
and Wastewater Facility Initiative, which brings 
together municipalities, counties, water districts 
or authorities, and townships to promote greater 
energy efficiency in publicly held facilities.

7. Retrofit Wastewater Facilities to Generate 
Energy from Capture and Use of Biogas

Another way to save energy in the water supply 
process is by retrofitting wastewater facilities with 
Combined Heat and Power (CHP) systems. CHP 
systems can recover biogas (a mixture of methane, 
carbon dioxide, water vapor, and other gases) 
from anaerobic digesters to heat buildings or to 
generate electricity. For example, San Franciscos 
East Bay Municipal Utility District captures 
and uses biogas to generate enough electricity 
to cover 90 percent of energy needed at its main 
wastewater facility. It is estimated that if all 544 
large sewage treatment plants in the United States 
operating anaerobic digesters were to install CHP 
systems, about 340 megawatts of clean energy 
could be generated, offsetting 2.3 million metric 
tons of CO2 emissions annuallyequivalent to 
planting about 640,000 acres of forest, or the 
emissions of about 430,000 cars.7 

Water Efficiency Saves Energy
U.S. cities, particularly those in the arid 
Southwest, continue to struggle to find fresh 
water. At the same time, these cities are on the 
front lines for feeling the impacts of global 
warming, such as higher temperatures and 
prolonged droughts. These water use efficiency 
measures can be implemented by consumers and 
agencies alike, saving both water and energy and 
mitigating global warming pollution. It is clearly 
a win-win solution. 

www.nrdc.org/policy

 Natural Resources Defense Council March 2009

Printed on recycled paper

