Energy-Saving Tips

Energy Saving 

Tips

TABLE OF CONTENTS

How Do You Spend Your Energy Dollars?  . . 1

Easy Ways to Save  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . 2

Investing in Energy Savings  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . 6

How Do You Spend 
Your Energy Dollars?

Knowing where your energy dollars go can help you 
plan your usage and reduce your power bill. Heating and 
cooling systems account for about 50 percent of a homes 
typical energy usage.

EarthCents  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . 7

Lighting - 10%

Home Energy Audits  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . 8

Other Helpful Services  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . 8

ENERGY STAR  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  .  . . 9

Government Programs & Tax Credits  .  .  .  . . 9

Other - 21%

Water Heating - 19%

Heating & Cooling - 50%

Heres a snapshot comparison of the typical energy cost 
to run an older common appliance around the home for a 
year versus the typical energy cost of new ENERGY STAR 
qualified appliances.

 
 

 
 
  Appliance 

 
2012 
Standard 

2012 
ENERGY 
STAR 
  *

Clothes Washer 
Dishwasher 
Refrigerator 
Freezer 

$94 
$55 
$57 
$80 

$67 
$42 
$45 
$72 

 

Annual
Savings

 **
up to $27
up to $13
up to $12
up to $8

   *  Source: Applied Proactive Technologies, INC.
 **  Actual savings may vary due to customer usage.
For more information, visit the ENERGY STAR website.

1

Easy Ways to Save

	

	Weather-strip	and	insulate	your	attic	hatch	or	add	a	
thermal hood to cut down on conditioned air loss.

There are many steps you can take to save money and energy 
without impacting the overall quality of your life and comfort 
level.
 
those that are inexpensive and easy to implement to those 
that will require more effort either in time or  
money on your part.

The following tips under each heading are arranged from 

HEATiNG & COOLiNG
	

	Set	your	thermostat	at	78	F	 
in	the	summer	and	68	F	in	the	winter	and	leave	it	alone.	
With each degree decrease on your thermostat in the 
winter and increase in the summer, you can immediately 
realize a 3 percent to 4 percent decrease in energy use.
	Install	and	preset	an	ENERGY	STAR	programmable	
thermostat to automatically reduce energy usage when 
you are away or sleeping. Constantly changing the 
temperature causes your system to work harder.
	Help	your	heating	and	cooling	system	operate	more	
efficiently by keeping air vents clear of obstructions such 
as furniture, curtains and rugs.
	Maintain	heating	and	cooling	unit	efficiency	by	changing	
your standard filters monthly or pleated filters at least 
once every three months.
	Have	your	heating	and	cooling	systems	professionally	
serviced annually to keep them running at top efficiency.
	Clean	dust	from	supply	and	return	air	grilles	 
and heating outlets.
	Make	sure	the	caulk	and	weather- 
stripping around your windows and doors  
are	in	good	shape.	If	the	caulk	is	cracked	or	the	weather-
stripping is damaged or peeling, replace the old material.
	Seal	around	wiring	and	plumbing	penetrations.	Use	caulk	
for small holes and expanding foam for larger areas. This 
will keep unconditioned air from entering the house or 
conditioned air from escaping.
	Make	sure	your	ductwork	is	properly	sealed.	Gaps	in	
joints of the ductwork can cause your heating and cooling 
bills to increase by as much as 30 percent and can allow 
outside air to enter your home.

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

in the winter
	

	

	

	On	sunny	days,	open	curtains	and	shades	to	let	the	sun	
warm your home naturally.
	If	you	have	a	fireplace,	make	sure	the	damper	is	closed	
when the fireplace is not in use. This will keep cold air 
from	coming	down	the	chimney	and	into	your	home.	It	
also will reduce warm air loss from your home.
	Dress	warmly,	even	indoors.	This	will	allow	you	to	set	
your thermostat a few degrees  
lower and still stay comfortable.

in the summer
	

	Keep	curtains	and	shades	closed	 
during the summer, especially on the east and west sides 
of your home.
	Avoid	using	appliances	that	give	off	heat	during	the	
hottest times of the day as they will make your cooling 
system work that much harder. Do your cooking, washing 
and drying clothes in the morning or in the late evening, 
when the demand on your cooling system is less.
	Using	a	ceiling	or	area	fan	in	the	summer	will	make	the	
air feel up to six degrees cooler. However, use fans only 
if you are in the room. Running the fan doesnt actually 
lower the temperature; it just makes you feel cooler.
	If	your	cooling	system	runs	continuously	but	doesnt	
seem	to	be	cooling	adequately,	change	your	filter.	If	that	
doesnt work, have a licensed contractor check to see if 
refrigerant is low or if the coils are dirty.
	Keep	plants	and	brush	at	least	3	feet	away	from	outside	
units so they can operate more efficiently.

WATER HEATiNG
	

			Turn	down	your	water	heater	thermostats.	A	setting	of	
120	F	is	fine	for	most	homes	with	newer	dishwashers.
	Take	quick	showers	instead	of	baths.	This	greatly	reduces	
the amount of hot water used.
		Install	low-flow	showerheads	and	faucet	aerators. 
You probably will not notice the difference in water  
flow,	but	these	fixtures	can	reduce	water	consumption	 
by up to 50 percent.

2

3

	

	Install	a	water-heater	timer.	Setting	a	timer	to	heat	water	
four to five hours a day or less will result in significant 
monthly savings.

APPLiANCES
Refrigerator
	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	

	Refrigerators	and	freezers	can	be	an	area	of	significant	
energy	loss.	Make	sure	they	are	as	full	as	possible	and	
that the seals are in good condition. This will cut down on 
energy escaping when you open the door.
	For	best	operation,	keep	your	refrigerators	temperature	
between	35	and	38	F.
	Keep	food	away	from	the	interior	walls	so	cold	air	can	
circulate faster.
	Keep	your	refrigerator	condenser	coils	clean.	Clean	them	
every six months.
	Avoid	putting	refrigerators	or	freezers	in	unconditioned	
spaces like garages.
	Think	carefully	before	deciding	to	put	your	old	refrigerator	
in	the	garage	or	basement	for	overflow	storage.	Many	
secondary refrigerators are not ENERGY STAR  
qualified and typically use 75 percent  
more energy than newer ENERGY STAR  
models.

Dishwasher
	

	Wait	until	your	dishwasher	is	full	before	 
using it. Automatic dishwashers require the same amount 
of hot water and electricity to wash a partial or full load.
	Turn	off	the	drying	cycle	if	you	do	 
not need to dry dishes immediately.

Washer and Dryer
	

	Wash	clothes	in	warm	or	cold	water	and	 
rinse	them	in	cold	water.	Use	hot	water	only	when	
necessary.
	Wash	a	full	load	at	a	time,	but	do	not	overload.	A	small	
load in a washing machine consumes just as much energy 
as a full load.
	When	using	a	dryer,	wait	until	you	have	a	full	load.	Also,	
separate drying loads into heavy and lightweight items. 
The lightweight items take less time to dry, so the dryer 
doesnt have to be on for as long with these loads.

	

	

	

	Dry	clothes	in	consecutive	loads,	as	the	dryer	will	retain	
heat from the previous load.
	Clean	the	lint	filter	thoroughly	after	each	load.	A	
clogged	filter	restricts	the	flow	of	air	and	reduces	
the performance of the dryer. Also check the vent 
periodically to make certain there are no clogs.
	Dont	overdry	clothes.	Overdrying	causes	shrinkage,	
shortens the life of the fabric, generates static electricity 
and uses more energy.

Cooking
	

	Cooking	small	portions	in	the	 
microwave or toaster oven  
generates less heat than the stove or oven and can 
reduce electrical usage for cooking by as much as  
80 percent.
	Use	the	correct-sized	pot	on	electric	stove	burners.	A	6- 
inch pot on an 8-inch burner wastes over 40 percent of 
the burners heat.

	

Phantom load or standby power refers 
to the electric power consumed by  
electronic equipment and appliances  
while they are switched off or in a standby mode. Phantom 
load can be avoided by unplugging appliances or using a smart 
power strip and using the switch on the smart power strip to 
cut all power to appliances. This can save up to $100 a year.

LiGHTiNG
	

	

	

	

	Use	smaller	lamps	over	work	areas	such	as	desktops	so	
work can be done without lighting the whole room.
	Turn	off	lights	when	you	do	not	need	them	and	use	motion	
sensors where practical.
	Use	ENERGY	STAR	qualified	compact	fluorescent	light	
bulbs (CFLs). They use three-quarters less electricity, 
generate 75 percent less heat and last up to 10 times 
longer than standard incandescent lighting.
	Outdoor	lighting	can	be	on	many	more	hours	than	indoor	
lights.	Install	CFLs	and	new	ENERGY	STAR	qualified	
outdoor fixtures.

CFL Recycling
CFLs contain a small amount of mercury and should be 
disposed of properly, ideally by recycling. 

4

5

Georgia Power has partnered with The Home Depot to 

 
offer	recycling	for	compact	fluorescent	light	bulbs	at	the	
retailers stores in Georgia. Georgia Power sponsors in-store 
bins at all 88 Home Depot locations in the state, which 
creates the states most widespread recycling program for 
CFLs. For more information about the CFL recycling program, 
visit homedepot.com/ecooptions. Find a Home Depot 
location near you or visit lamprecycle.org.  

Broken CFL?
If	a	CFL	should	break	in	your	home,	EPA	provides	cleanup	
guidelines that can be performed by the general public.

investing in Energy Savings
The following energy tips will require a larger monetary 
investment, but, over an extended period of time, will 
generally pay for themselves in energy savings. Call Georgia 
Power  The Energy Expert at 1-800-524-2421 for more 
information and details on possible rebates.
	

	Install	double-paned	replacement	windows,	ENERGY	
STAR qualified Low-E windows or storm windows. They 
will greatly reduce heat loss in the winter and heat gain 
in the summer. They will also help decrease the outside 
noise that enters your home.
	Consider	installing	storm	doors.	Storm	doors	create	a	
pocket of insulated air space between the door and the 
storm door, helping to reduce heat transfer into and out of 
the home.
	Make	sure	your	attic,	walls	and	floors	are	properly	
insulated. We recommend R-30 for the attic, R-19 for 
floors	and	R-13	for	walls	or	local	codes,	whichever	is	
higher.	(Most	homes	built	prior	to	1978	were	not	required	
to have wall insulation.)
	If	your	water	heater	is	electric	and	in	an	unconditioned	
space, insulate the water tank and pipes. This will reduce 
the amount of heat lost from the water stored in the 
tank (consult your warranty before insulating your water 
heater).
	If	your	water	heater	is	more	than	seven	years	old,	
chances are its wasting energy. Todays water heaters 
are much more efficient, saving you energy and money. 
Replace	your	old	water	heater	with	a	Marathon	electric	

	

	

	

	

	

water	heater.	Marathons	have	an	inner	tank	that	wont	
rust or corrode and are backed by a manufacturers 
lifetime warranty.
	If	your	heating	and	cooling	system	is	older,	consider	
installing a more efficient system with a higher SEER 
(Seasonal Energy Efficiency Ratio). Todays heat pumps are 
the most energy efficient way to heat and cool your home 
year-round. ENERGY STAR qualified heat pumps can save 
you up to $300 a year on your homes energy bill when you 
replace your gas furnace and air conditioner with a high-
efficiency heat pump. Heat pump system benefits include 
long-term energy savings, heating and cooling with one 
system, year-round comfort, and easy installation and 
maintenance.

Current EarthCents programs include:

EarthCents aligns under one name the programs and 

EarthCents is Georgia Powers portfolio of energy efficiency 
programs that help our customers save money, use energy 
efficiently and help the environment.
 
resources Georgia Power has available to help residential and 
business customers. From providing energy efficiency tips and 
advice, to conducting energy audits, to offering incentives 
and rebates to help customers make efficiency improvements, 
Georgia	Power	can	help	you	save.	Over	time,	programs	will	be	
enhanced and new programs may be added.
 
Home Energy improvement Program  Rebates are 
available to offset the cost of improving the energy efficiency 
of your home through a Whole-House approach (resulting 
in combined savings of at least 20 percent) or by making 
Individual	Improvements.	Whole-House	rebates	total	up	to	
$2,200	and	Individual	Improvement	rebates	range	from	$50	 
to $400, with an annual total cap of $700.
Lighting and Appliance Program  Georgia Power 
customers may be able to take advantage of special pricing 
incentives on CFLs and may qualify for appliance rebates 
following the purchase of ENERGY STAR qualified appliances.

6

7

	

	Auto Pay: Auto Pay is a free bill payment program where 
you can authorize your bill amount to be automatically 
debited from your checking or savings account. With Auto 
Pay, we will continue to read your meter and calculate 
your bill each month. You will continue to receive your bill 
as you normally do, but instead of Please Pay By being 
displayed on the bill, we will print the date when your 
bank account will be drafted for the amount of your bill.

ENERGY STAR

ENERGY	STAR	is	a	joint	program	of	the	U.S.	Environmental	
Protection	Agency	and	the	U.S.	Department	of	Energy	
designed to educate the public on ways to save money and 
protect the environment through energy-efficient products  
and practices.
 
An easy way for you to save is to look for the ENERGY 
STAR label when buying new appliances. ENERGY STAR 
qualified appliances can use 10 percent to 50 percent less 
energy and water than standard models. For example, an 
ENERGY STAR qualified refrigerator requires about half as 
much energy as models manufactured before 1993.
 
 
Government Programs & Tax Credits
WEATHERizATiON ASSiSTANCE PROGRAM
Weatherization Assistance provides funding for home 
improvements to increase energy efficiency for qualifying  
low-income customers. Visit gefa.com to find out more.

Visit the ENERGY STAR website at energystar.gov. 

New Home Program  Enjoy a home that is more efficient 
than current standard building codes, providing you with annual 
energy savings of up to $400.

Refrigerator Recycling Program  Recycle your old, 
inefficient second refrigerator or freezer through responsible 
recycling with the EarthCents Refrigerator Recycling Program. 
Georgia Power customers can receive $35 and free removal of 
their working old refrigerator or freezer.
Water Heating Program  Take steps to reduce your water 
heating	costs.	Ask	about	low-flow	water	devices,	thermostat	
set points and the installation of free water heater jackets  
and pipe wraps on qualifying equipment.
Commercial Energy Efficiency  Rebates available to 
help commercial customers reduce the cost to install high-
efficiency equipment, resulting in lower energy costs.

Home Energy Audits

Customers can learn ways to save up to 30 percent on their 
annual	energy	bill	through	Georgia	Powers	In-home	or	 
Online	Energy	Audit.
	

 in-home Energy Audit  Georgia Power will perform  
a free in-home audit. To schedule, please call 1-800- 
524-2421 or visit georgiapower.com/auditrequest.
 Online Checkup  Customers can visit  
georgiapower.com/energycheckup to take a free 
online audit.

	

Other Helpful Services

MAkE PAYiNG YOuR BiLL EASY
	

	Paperless Billing: Sign up for Georgia Powers FREE 
Paperless Billing program and relax. Access your account 
24 hours a day, 7 days a week. Enjoy the convenience 
of email notification and eliminate any worry of a late 
payment through our secure online transactions. To get 
started, visit georgiapower.com/paperlessbilling.

8

9

For more energy-saving tips, visit 
georgiapower.com/earthcents.

Customer Service/Power Outage

1.888.660.5890

Energy Audit
1.800.524.2421

1200430                                                                                                    707645A

