You’re already familiar with the miles-pergallon stickers on new automobiles, and the
yellow EnergyGuide labels on home appliances.
Shoppers use this information to figure out
how much that car or appliance is really going
to cost them. This information gives the buyer
a good estimate of what it will cost to operate
that car or use that appliance, over and above
the purchase price. A car or product that is
cheaper to buy can often be more expensive to
operate, so this information can be very
important to assure that you make the best
purchase decision.

Here's how the Florida EnergyGauge
program works.
After the rating, you’ll get an easy-to-read
form like the one on the inside page. The
Rating Guide has a scale that allows you to
compare the specific home you’re looking at
with the most efficient and the least-efficient
homes of the same size with the same number
of bedrooms available in your part of the state
today. And in addition to this overall estimate
of energy use and comparisons, you get a
detailed breakdown on the energy costs of the
home’s air-conditioning, space heating, water
heating, refrigerator, clothes dryer, cooking
costs, lighting, pool pumping and other miscellaneous equipment.
One of the keys to the success of this
program is the uniformity of ratings, made
possible by the use of the EnergyGauge®
software developed by the Florida Solar Energy
Center. It has been specially designed to let
Raters input the key data on the home and
obtain accurate information for comparison
purposes. A unique optimization feature even
lets Raters determine what energy-efficiency

features can be added to the home to maximize
cost-savings and comfort-improvement.

So how can a home energy rating help you
reduce your energy use and save money?
That’s easy. While the design and construction of your home and the efficiency of its
appliances and equipment control the most
significant portion of its energy use, occupant
life-style will still have a big effect on exactly
how much energy gets used. Your comfort
preferences and personal habits - the level at
which you set the thermostat, whether or not
you turn off lights and fans when leaving a
room, how much natural ventilation you use,
and other factors - all will affect your home’s
actual monthly energy use.

The Ratings program in Florida closely
parallels national activities.
The U.S. Department of Energy has been
working to set national standards for Home
Energy Rating Systems, and Florida’s system
surpasses these standards. The Florida Building Energy Rating Guide provides a HERS score
for the home. This national score enables
homes to qualify for national mortgage financing options requiring a HERS score. This score
is computed in accordance with proposed
national guidelines, considering the heating,
cooling, and hot water energy uses. HERS
awards stars to the rating.

Tell your Realtor or builder that you want
to get the home rated before you buy it.
They can give you the names of Raters in
your area. Additional information on the
program is available from the Energy Gauge
Program Office at 321-638-1492, or visit our
website at www.fsec.ucf.edu.

Who does Energy Ratings?
It is important to note that only State Certified Raters are allowed to perform ratings.These
Raters have undergone rigorous training programs and have passed the required challenge
exams. They are also required to undergo continuing education classes and further exams to
keep their certifications current. An on-going
quality control program also watches over their
Ratings and their work. All their Ratings are
submitted to a central Registry that checks them
for accuracy and compiles generic building data.

Thinking About
Buying a Home?

Energy Ratings in Florida
The Florida Building Energy-Efficiency Rating
Act (Florida Statute 553.990) was passed by the
State Legislature in 1993 and amended in 1994.
It established a voluntary statewide energyefficiency rating system for homes. The Rating
System has been adopted by DCA Rule 9B-60.

Get An
EnergyGauge® Rating!
Consider the Benefits:
The Florida Energy Gauge Program
Florida's Building Energy Rating System
1679 Clearlake Road
Cocoa, Florida 32922-5703
321-638-1492
Fax: 321-638-1010
E-Mail: EnGauge@fsec.ucf.edu
Website: www.fsec.ucf.edu
FSEC-EB-1

F1-04

• More Home for Less Money
• Improved Mortgage Options
• Enhanced Indoor Comfort
• Superior Energy-Efficiency
• More Environmental Sustainability
• Tested Quality Construction
• Greater Resale Value

homes might look similar, but one may
be efficient and comfortable and the
other an energy-guzzler with a very
uncomfortable interior.

Congratulations on your decision
to purchase a home.
As you know, there are a lot of factors to
consider before signing on the dotted line. By
now, you’ve probably checked out the location
of the home you like the best. You know how
much the seller wants, how many bedrooms
there are, whether your dining room table will
fit, where you’ll park your car and lots of other
important things.

But wait, there’s still one more important
thing you really ought to do.
You wouldn’t buy a car without asking how
many miles-per-gallon it gets, would you? So
why would you even think of buying a house
without knowing how much the power bills
will be? That’s why now is the perfect time to
get an EnergyGauge® rating on the house.
Since 1994, there has been a voluntary
statewide energy-efficiency rating system for
homes in Florida, and prospective homeowners just like you all around the state are
getting their homes rated before they make
their purchase. There are several very important reasons why:
◆

Energy ratings give homebuyers a marketplace yardstick that measures the benefits
of energy-efficiency improvements. You
get detailed estimates of how much your
energy use will cost.

◆

Energy ratings give you clear and specific
information that lets you compare
similar homes on their energy use. Two

◆

Maybe most important of all, the
national Home Energy Rating System
(HERS) score on the energy rating can
qualify you for a number of special
mortgage programs that offer
lower interest rates, lower closing
costs, and other benefits. More and
more lenders are coming into Florida
with money-saving packages for buyers
of energy-efficient homes.

Before buying your next home, hire a
Certified Energy Rater to do a rating.
Your builder or Realtor can help you find
a Certified Rater in your area. After the
rating, you’ll get an easy-to-understand
Energy Guide that estimates how much it will
cost to pay for energy used in that home, and
will allow you to look at a number of separate
areas of energy use throughout the house.
For many years, buyers have had home
inspectors look over a home before making
their purchase. This is a great way to find
out about potential house problems before
you make your purchase. Smart homebuyers
around the country are now also asking for a
home energy rating to look specifically at
the energy-users in a home and determine
their efficiency. Because energy costs can
often equal house payments, the relatively
small cost of a home energy rating can
easily be offset by many years of lower
energy payments.

