E c o n o m i c

Moving Beyond Environmental
Protection

Frederico Neto
March 2003

United Nations

A f f a i r s

A New Approach to Sustainable
Tourism Development:

S o c i a l

ST/ESA/2003/DP/29
DESA Discussion Paper No. 29

&

DESA Discussion Paper Series
DESA Discussion Papers are preliminary
documents circulated in a limited number of
copies and posted on the DESA website
http://www.un.org/esa/papers.htm to stimulate
discussion and critical comment. This paper
has not been formally edited and the
designation and terminology used do not imply
the expression of any opinion whatsoever on
the part of the United Nations Secretariat.
Citations should refer to a “Discussion Paper
of the United Nations Department of Economic
and Social Affairs.”

Frederico Neto

Acknowledgements

Frederico Neto is an economic affairs officer in
the Economic Affairs and Policy Unit of United
Nations Department of Economic and Social
Affairs. The views expressed in this paper are
those of the author and do not necessarily
represent the views of the United Nations.
Comments should be addressed to the author
at the United Nations, Room DC2-2178,
United Nations, New York, NY 10017 (e-mail:
neto@un.org).

This paper is based on a presentation made
by the author at the Twelfth ACUNS/ASIL
Workshop on International Organization
Studies held in Windhoek, Namibia and
Johannesburg, South Africa from 18 to 30
August 2002. I have benefited from comments
made by various participants in that meeting,
as well as those made by Linda Haley, Ian
Kinniburgh, Anatoly Smyshlyaev and Chikako
Takase on earlier drafts.

Authorized for distribution by Ian Kinniburgh,
Acting Director
Development Policy and Planning Office
Department of Economic and Social Affairs
United Nations

Abstract
Tourism is one of the largest and fastest growing industries in the world. It is an increasingly
important source of income, employment and wealth in many countries. However, its rapid
expansion has also had detrimental environmental (and socio-cultural) impact in many regions.
In this DESA discussion paper, I examine the main economic benefits and environmental
impact of tourism, and review the development of the international sustainable tourism agenda.
While much of international tourism activity takes place within the developed world, this paper
will focus on the (economic) development of the industry in developing countries. I conclude
that new approaches to sustainable tourism development in these countries should not only seek
to minimize local environmental impact, but also give greater priority to community
participation and poverty reduction. I argue, in particular, that more emphasis should be given
to a 'pro-poor tourism' approach at both national and international levels.
Key words:
Tourism, sustainable development, natural resource management, poverty reduction.
JEL classification code:
L83; Q01.

Contents
Page

Introduction: Recent and future trends in world tourism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Economic benefits of tourism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Interaction between tourism and the environment. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Pressure on natural resources. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
Damage to ecosystems . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
Environmental threats to tourism. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
Sustainable tourism development. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
International efforts to promote sustainable tourism development . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
The growing importance of ecotourism . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7
Pro-poor tourism: A poverty reduction strategy? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
Conclusion. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
Notes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
List of figures
1.
2.

Change in international tourism arrivals by region, 2001/2000 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 2
Share of international tourism receipts by region, 2000 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3
List of tables

1.
2.

International tourism arrivals by region, 1990-2000 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 1
Worldwide export earnings of top ten industries, 1999 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3

world recorded significant growth in international
tourism in 2000, during which the number of international arrivals grew at an extraordinary rate of nearly 7% to
reach almost 700 million arrivals.
The September 2001 terrorist attacks in the United
States, however, appear to have had a more serious
impact on the tourist sector than any other major international crisis in recent decades. The attacks had a particularly severe impact on air transport, business travel and
long-haul travel. Worldwide travel reservations were
estimated to have dropped by 15% at the end of October
2001, although not every destination nor every part of the
tourism sector was badly affected (see WTO, 2001c). For
example, while air transport and luxury hotels have suffered from considerable fall in demand, travel within the
same country or region, as well as travel by rail and road,
appear to have weathered the worst effects of the crisis,
or even benefited from it.
Nevertheless, initial forecasts of 3-4% rise in international tourist arrivals for 2001, made before the
September 2001 attacks, were subsequently revised
downwards to around a 1% increase over the 2000 figures (WTO, 2001c). The latest WTO (2002) data show
that there was an actual decline of 0.6% in international
arrivals, to a total of 693 million, in 2001. Given that the
northern hemisphere summer holiday season was coming
to end by the time the attacks took place, this significant
drop confirms that the short-term impacts of the attacks
were devastating to international tourism as a whole. The
last four months of 2001, in fact, recorded a drop of
almost 9% in arrivals worldwide and substantial decreases in all regions of the world (see figure 1).

Introduction: Recent and future trends
in world tourism
Tourism can be considered one of the most remarkable socio-economic phenomena of the twentieth century.
From an activity “enjoyed by only a small group of relatively well-off people” during the first half of the last
century, it gradually became a mass phenomenon during
the post-World War II period, particularly from the 1970s
onwards.1 It now reaches an increasingly larger number
of people throughout the world and can be considered a
vital dimension of global integration.2
Although domestic tourism currently accounts for
approximately 80% of all tourist activity (UN, 1999a),
many countries tend to give priority to international
tourism because, while the former basically involves a
regional redistribution of national income, the latter has
now become the world’s largest source of foreign
exchange receipts. According to the latest figures compiled by the World Tourism Organization (WTO), foreign
exchange earnings from international tourism reached a
peak of US$ 476 billion in 2000, which was larger than
the export value of petroleum products, motor vehicles,
telecommunications equipment or any other single category of product or service (WTO, 2001a).
International tourist arrivals grew at an annual
average rate of 4.3% during the 1990s, despite major
international political and economic crises, such as the
Gulf War and the Asian financial crisis.3 According to the
latest WTO figures, the turn of the millennium recorded
one of the most impressive annual growth rates in international tourism. As table 1 shows, all regions of the

Table 1: International tourist arrivals by region, 1990-2000

Million arrivals
1999
2000

1990

Market share
(percentage)
1999

2000

Growth rate
(percentage)
2000/1999

Region

1990

Africa
Americas
East Asia and Pacific
Europe
Middle East
South Asia

15.0
92.9
54.6
282.7
9.0
3.2

26.5
122.2
97.6
380.2
18.2
5.8

27.2
128.4
109.1
402.7
23.2
6.1

3.3
20.3
11.9
61.8
2.0
0.7

4.1
18.8
15.0
58.5
2.8
0.9

3.9
18.4
15.7
57.8
3.3
0.9

3.4
5.0
12.7
5.8
13.2
5.4

World

457.3

650.4

696.7

100.0

100.0

100.0

6.8

Sources: WTO (2001e) and revised updates released in June 2002 (WTO, 2002).
Note: Totals may differ from the sum of columns because of rounding.

DESA Discussion Paper No. 29

2

Figure I.
CHANGE IN INTERNATIONAL TOURIST ARRIVALS BY REGION, 2001/2000
WORLD

2001/2000
Jan-Aug 2001
Sep-Dec 2001

South Asia

Middle East

Europe

East Asia and Pacific

Americas

Africa

-25.0

-20.0

-15.0

-10.0

-5.0

0.0

Percentage change

It is worth noting, however, that this considerable
fall in international arrivals was caused not only by a
widespread fear of traveling generated by the attacks—
particularly in airplanes and to certain destinations—but
also by a downturn in the world economy. The economic
downturn that began in the United States during the first
half of 2001 had already been affecting the tourism sector before the terrorist attacks were carried out. The
attacks aggravated the economic slowdown already
under way.4 The expected recovery in world tourism in
the near future will thus depend on the evolution of the
world economy, amongst other factors, including the possibility of further terrorist acts or regional conflicts.
Some destinations will in any case experience a prolonged decline in tourism revenues—regardless of any
world economic improvements—for various reasons,
including proximity to areas of regional conflict.
In the medium and long term, however, international tourism is expected to resume its rapid growth, in view
of rising living standards and discretionary incomes,
falling real costs of travel, expansion and improvement
of various transport modes, increasing amounts of free
time and other factors. This helps to explain why WTO
(2001c) has reiterated its long-term forecasts, made
before the September 2001 attacks, of an average annual

5.0

10.0

Source: UN/DESA, based on WTO (2002)
data.

growth rate in international arrivals of over 4% in the
period up to 2020. The number of international arrivals is
thus expected to reach the striking mark of 1 billion by
2010 and 1.6 billion by 2020 (see WTO, 2001d).

Economic benefits of tourism
Tourism comprises an extensive range of economic
activities and can be considered the largest industry in
the world.5 International tourism is one of the fastest
growing sectors of the global economy. During the
1990s, when the globalization of tourism reached
unprecedented proportions, international tourism receipts
had a much higher average annual growth rate (7.3%)
than that of gross world product.6 By 1999, international
tourism receipts accounted for more than 8% of the
worldwide export value of goods and services, overtaking the export value of other leading world industries
such as automotive products, chemicals, and computer
and office equipment (see table 2).
A significant proportion of world tourism expenditure takes place within industrialized countries:
Europe alone accounts for around half of annual international tourism receipts (see figure 2). Tourism, however, is the only major service sector in which develop-

A New Approach to Sustainable Tourism Development

3

Table 2: Worldwide export earningsa of top ten industries, 1999
Export earnings
(US $ billion

Industry
International tourismb
Automotive products
Chemicals
Food
Fuels
Computer and office equipment
Textile and clothing
Telecommunications equipment
Mining products (other than fuels)
Iron and steel products
Total worldwide export of goods and
services (including other industries)

Share
(percentage)

555
549
526
437
401
394
334
289
155
126

8.1
8.0
7.6
6.3
5.8
5.7
4.8
4.2
2.3
1.8

6 890

100.0

Sources: WTO (2001e).
a

b

For economic purposes, international
tourism receipts are considered exports and
international tourism expenditures as
imports.
Total international tourism receipts include
those generated by international fares.

Figure 2.
SHARE OF INTERNATIONAL TOURISM RECEIPTS BY REGION, 2000

Europe (48.6%)

South Asia (1.1%)

East Asia and Pacific (17.3%)

Africa (2.2%)

Americas (28.7%)

Middle East (2.0%)

ing countries have consistently recorded trade surpluses
relative to the rest of the world. Between 1980 and
1996, for instance, their travel account surplus
increased from $4.6 billion to $65.9 billion, due primarily to the impressive growth of inbound tourism to
countries in Africa, the Caribbean, and the Asia and
Pacific regions (UN, 1999a). The 1990s also experi-

Source: WTO (2001a).

enced a significant growth of international tourism
receipts in the 49 least developed countries: total
tourism receipts in these countries more than doubled
from US$ 1 billion in 1992 to over US$ 2.2 billion in
1998. 7 Tourism is now the second largest source of foreign exchange earnings in the least developed countries
(LDCs) as a whole.

4

DESA Discussion Paper No. 29

Tourism has also become the main source of
income for an increasing number of Small Island
Developing States (SIDS). Foreign exchange earnings
can, however, vary significantly among these tourismdriven economies because of ‘leakages’ arising from
imports of equipment for construction and consumer
goods required by tourists, repatriation of profits earned
by foreign investors and amortization of foreign debt
incurred in tourist development.8
Besides export earnings, international tourism also
generates an increasingly significant share of government (national and local) tax revenues throughout the
world. In addition, the development of tourism as a
whole is usually accompanied by considerable investments in infrastructure, such as airports, roads, water and
sewerage facilities, telecommunications and other public
utilities. Such infrastructural improvements not only generate benefits to tourists but can also contribute to
improving the living conditions of local populations.
This increase in social overhead capital can also help
attract other industries to a disadvantaged area and thus
be a stimulus to regional economic development.
The tourism sector is an increasingly important
source of employment—including in tourism-related sectors, such as construction and agriculture—primarily for
unskilled labour, migrants from poor rural areas, people
who prefer to work part-time, and notably women.9
Because the sector is relatively labour-intensive, investments in tourism tend to generate a larger and more rapid
increase in employment than equal investment in other
economic activities.10 Furthermore, given that the sector
provides a considerable amount of jobs for women and
unskilled workers, tourism can significantly contribute to
empowering women and alleviating poverty.
At the same time, available data suggest that most
workers in the tourism sector, notably in hotels and catering, tend to earn less than workers in socially comparable
occupations in both developed and developing countries
(ILO, 2001). In addition, the differential tends to be larger
in less developed countries and regions, particularly those
with high rates of unemployment amongst unskilled labour.
Informal employment relations in small and medium-sized
enterprises, which employ about half of the labour force in
the hotel and catering sub-sectors worldwide, also contribute to a relatively high proportion of child labour and
non-remunerated employment and other unacceptable
forms of social exploitation in many countries.11
The increasing reliance of less diversified
economies on tourism also increases their vulnerability

to seasonal aspects of tourism and to shocks, such as, natural disasters, regional wars and other unexpected events.
The recent crisis generated by fear of international terrorism and regional conflict, for example, caused devastating immediate effects on tourism-dependent economies.12
In addition, sudden changes in consumer tastes and sharp
economic downturns pose significant risks to such
economies, given that demand for mass tourism tends to
be relatively income-elastic and can produce drastic negative responses to economic recession in source markets.
Nonetheless, it is now generally recognized that
tourism can make a vital contribution to employment,
export receipts and national income in most countries
and regions. Furthermore, tourism is often identified as
the most promising driving force for the economic development of less developed countries and regions endowed
with areas of natural beauty—including Small Island
Developing States—because it offers them a valuable
opportunity for economic diversification.

Interaction between tourism and
the environment
While tourism provides considerable economic
benefits for many countries, regions and communities, its
rapid expansion can also be responsible for adverse environmental, as well as socio-cultural, impact.13 Natural
resource depletion and environmental degradation associated with tourism activities pose severe problems to
many tourism-rich regions. The fact that most tourists
chose to maintain their relatively high patterns of consumption (and waste generation) when they reach their
destinations can be a particularly serious problem for
developing countries and regions without the appropriate
means for protecting their natural resources and local
ecosystems from the pressures of mass tourism.
The two main areas of environmental impact of
tourism are: pressure on natural resources and damage to
ecosystems. Furthermore, it is now widely recognized
not only that uncontrolled tourism expansion is likely to
lead to environmental degradation, but also that environmental degradation, in turn, poses a serious threat to
tourism activities.
Pressure on natural resources
In addition to pressure on the availability and prices
of resources consumed by local residents—such as energy,
food and basic raw materials—the main natural resources

5

at risk from tourism development are land, freshwater and
marine resources. Without careful land-use planning, for
instance, rapid tourism development can intensify competition for land resources with other uses and lead to rising
land prices and increased pressure to build on agricultural
land. Moreover, intensive tourism development can
threaten natural landscapes, notably through deforestation, loss of wetlands and soil erosion. Tourism development in coastal areas—including hotel, airport and road
construction—is often a matter for increasing concern
worldwide as it can lead to sand mining, beach erosion
and other forms of land degradation.
Freshwater availability for competing agricultural,
industrial, household and other uses is rapidly becoming
one of the most critical natural resource issues in many
countries and regions. Rapid expansion of the tourism
industry, which tends to be extremely water-intensive,
can exacerbate this problem by placing considerable
pressure on scarce water supply in many destinations.
Water scarcity can pose a serious limitation to future
tourism development in many low-lying coastal areas
and small islands that have limited supplies of surface
water, and whose groundwater may be contaminated by
saltwater intrusion. Over-consumption by many tourist
facilities—notably large hotel resorts and golf courses—
can limit current supplies available to farmers and local
populations in water-scarce regions and thus lead to serious shortages and price rises. In addition, pollution of
available freshwater sources, some of which may be
associated with tourism-related activities, can exacerbate
local shortages.
Rapid expansion of coastal and ocean tourism
activities, such as snorkelling, scuba diving and sport
fishing, can threaten fisheries and other marine
resources. Disturbance to marine aquatic life can also be
caused by the intensive use of thrill craft, such as jet skis,
frequent boat tours and boat anchors. Anchor damage is
now regarded as one of the most serious threats to coral
reefs in the Caribbean Sea, in view of the growing number of both small boats and large cruise ships sailing in
the region (see Michael Hall, 2001). Severe damage to
coral reefs and other marine resources may, in turn, not
only discourage further tourism and threaten the future of
local tourist industries, but also damage local fisheries.
Damage to ecosystems
Besides the consumption of large amounts of natural resources, the tourism industry also generates consid-

A New Approach to Sustainable Tourism Development

erable waste and pollution. Disposal of liquid and solid
waste generated by the tourism industry has become a
particular problem for many developing countries and
regions that lack the capacity to treat these waste materials. Disposal of such untreated waste has, in turn, contributed to reducing the availability of natural resources,
such as freshwater.
Apart from the contamination of freshwater from
pollution by untreated sewage, tourist activities can also
lead to land contamination from solid waste and the contamination of marine waters and coastal areas from pollution generated by hotels and marinas, as well as cruise
ships. It is estimated that cruise ships in the Caribbean
Sea alone produced more than 70,000 tonnes of liquid
and solid waste a year during the mid-1990s (UN,
1999a). The fast growth of the cruise sector in this and
other regions around the world has exacerbated this problem in recent years. In fact, it is sometimes argued that
the rapid expansion of cruise tourism calls for “the
enforcement of an environmental protection ‘level playing field’ across the world’s oceans and between the
world’s maritime tourism destinations” (Johnson, 2002).
In addition, relatively high levels of energy consumption in hotels—including energy for air-conditioning, heating and cooking—as well as fuel used by
tourism-related transportation can also contribute significantly to local air pollution in many host countries and
regions. Local air and noise pollution, as well as urban
congestion linked to intensive tourism development, can
sometimes even discourage tourists from visiting some
destinations.
Uncontrolled tourism activities can also cause
severe disruption of wildlife habitats and increased pressure on endangered species. Disruption of wildlife
behaviour is often caused, for example, by tourist vehicles in Africa’s national parks that approach wild cats
and thus distract them from hunting and breeding; tour
boat operators in the Caribbean Sea that feed sharks to
ensure that they remain in tourist areas; and whalewatching boat crews around the world that pursue whales
and dolphins and even encourage petting, which tends to
alter the animals’ feeding and behaviour (see Mastny,
2001).
Similarly, tourism can lead to the indiscriminate
clearance of native vegetation for the development of
new facilities, increased demand for fuelwood and even
forest fires. Ecologically fragile areas, such as rain
forests, wetlands and mangroves, are also threatened by

6

DESA Discussion Paper No. 29

intensive or irresponsible tourist activity. Moreover, as
will be discussed below, it is increasingly recognized
that, the rapid expansion of nature tourism (or ‘ecotourism’) may also pose a threat to ecologically fragile
areas, including many natural world heritage sites, if not
properly managed and monitored.
The delicate ecosystems of most small islands,
together with their increasing reliance on tourism as a
main tool of socio-economic development, means that
this environmental impact can be particularly damaging
since the success of the tourism sector in these islands
often depends on the quality of their natural environment
(UN, 1999b). In addition, pollution of coastal waters—in
particular by sewage, solid waste, sediments and untreated chemicals—often leads to the deterioration of coastal
ecosystems, notably coral reefs, and thus harms their
value for tourism.
The equally fragile ecosystems of mountain
regions are also threatened by increasing popular tourist
activities such as skiing, snowboarding and trekking.
One of the most serious environmental problems in
mountainous developing countries without appropriate
energy supply is deforestation arising from increasing
consumption of fuelwood by the tourism industry (see,
for example, CDE/SDC, 1999). This often results not
only in the destruction of local habitats and ecosystems,
but also in accelerating processes of erosion and landslides. Other major problems arising from tourist activities in mountain regions include disruption of animal
migration by road and tourist facilities, sewage pollution of rivers, excessive water withdrawals from
streams to supply resorts and the accumulation of solid
waste on trails.
Environmental threats to tourism
In many mountain regions, small islands, coastal
areas and other ecologically fragile places visited by
tourists, there is an increasing concern that the negative
impact of tourism on the natural environment can ultimately hurt the tourism industry itself. In other words,
the negative impact of intensive tourism activities on the
environmental quality of beaches, mountains, rivers,
forests and other ecosystems also compromise the viability of the tourism industry in these places.
There is now plenty of evidence of the ‘life-cycle’
of a tourist destination, that is, the evolution from its
discovery, to development and eventual decline because
of over-exploitation and subsequent deterioration its

key attractions. In many developing and developed
countries alike, tourism destinations are becoming
overdeveloped up to the point where the damage caused
by environmental degradation—and the eventual loss of
revenues arising from a collapse in tourism arrivals—
becomes irreversible.
Examples of such exploitation of ‘non-renewable
tourism resources’ range from a small fishing village in
India’s Kerala state—which saw its tourist sector collapse after two decades of fast growth, because inadequate disposal of solid waste—to several places in the
industrialized world, such as Italy’s Adriatic coast and
Germany’s Black Forest.14 It can also be argued that environmental pollution and urban sprawl tend to undermine
further tourist development in major urban destinations
in developing countries, such as Bangkok, Cairo and
Mexico City.
In addition, tourism in many destinations could be
particularly threatened by external environmental
shocks, notably the potential threat of global warming
and sea-level rise. Significant rises in sea level could
cause serious problems to tourism activities, particularly
in low-lying coastal areas and small islands. Global
warming is also expected to increase climate variability
and to provoke changes in the frequency and intensity of
extreme climate events—such as tropical windstorms and
associated storm surges and coastal flooding—that may
threaten tourism activities at certain destinations (see
UN, 2001b, ch. VII).

Sustainable tourism development
Countries and regions where the economy is driven
by the tourism industry have become increasingly concerned with the environmental, as well as the socio-cultural problems associated with unsustainable tourism. As
a result, there is now increasing agreement on the need to
promote sustainable tourism development to minimize its
environmental impact and to maximize socio-economic
overall benefits at tourist destinations. The concept of
sustainable tourism, as developed by the World Tourism
Organization (WTO) in the context of the United Nations
sustainable development process, refers to tourist activities “leading to management of all resources in such a
way that economic, social and aesthetic needs can be fulfilled while maintaining cultural integrity, essential ecological processes, biological diversity and life support
systems” (see UN, 2001a).

7

International efforts to promote sustainable
tourism development
Although tourism was not specifically addressed in
Agenda 21—the international action plan on sustainable
development agreed on at the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio
de Janeiro (Brazil)15—its growing economic importance,
significant use of natural resources and environmental
impact all contributed to its gradual introduction into the
international sustainable development agenda over the
past ten years. One of the first concrete sectoral action
plans arising from the increasing cooperation between
the tourism industry and inter-governmental agencies
was ‘Agenda 21 for the Travel and Tourism Industry,’ an
action plan for sustainable tourism development
launched by the WTO, in cooperation with two business
associations in 1996 (see WTO, 2001f).
In 1997, the United Nations General Assembly, at
its special session to review the five-year implementation
of Agenda 21, decided that there was a need to consider
the importance of tourism in the context of Agenda 21
and to “develop an action-oriented international programme of work on sustainable tourism” (see UN, 1998).
This request was followed up during the seventh annual
session of the United Nations Commission on
Sustainable Development (CSD), held in New York in
1999, which considered tourism as an economic sector,
held a multi-stakeholder dialogue on the topic and adopted an international work programme on sustainable
tourism development (UN, 1999c). One of the major follow-up activities to the CSD international work programme on sustainable tourism has been the ongoing
development of international guidelines for sustainable
tourism by the Convention on Biological Diversity. The
draft international guidelines stress that “to be sustainable, tourism should be managed within the carrying
capacity and limits of each ecosystem and site” (UNEP,
2002a).
The seventh session of the CSD also invited the
WTO to further develop its proposed global code of
ethics that had been drafted in consultation with the
tourism industry over the previous two years. The
‘Global Code of Ethics for Tourism,’ introduced by the
WTO in late 1999, sets a frame of reference for the
responsible and sustainable development of international
tourism (WTO, 2001f, Appendix I). It includes nine articles outlining the basic rules for governments, tour operators, developers, travel agents, workers, as well as host
communities and the tourists themselves. The tenth arti-

A New Approach to Sustainable Tourism Development

cle includes a proposed mechanism for conciliation,
through the creation of a World Committee on Tourism
Ethics made up of representatives of each region of the
world and representatives of each group of stakeholders
in the tourism sector, Governments, the private sector,
and labour and non-governmental organizations. The
United Nations General Assembly adopted the Global
Code of Ethics for Tourism in 2001.16
The Plan of Implementation adopted at the World
Summit on Sustainable Development (WSSD), held in
Johannesburg (South Africa) from 26 August to 4
September 2002, identified further measures to promote
sustainable tourism development, with a view to increasing “the benefits from tourism resources for the population in host communities while maintaining the cultural
and environmental integrity of the host communities and
enhancing the protection of ecologically sensitive areas
and natural heritages” (UN, 2002b:ch. I.2). As similar
international actions plans show, the WSSD Plan of
Implementation is likely to induce States to take more
progressive steps towards better governance and sustainable development (see Haas, 2002). However, achieving
the sustainable tourism goals contained in the WSSD
Plan of Implementation will require systematic action
and the availability of adequate resources at both national and international levels.
The growing importance of ecotourism
The WSSD Plan of Implementation makes particular reference to activities carried out in conjunction with
the 2002 United Nations International Year of
Ecotourism,17 amongst other international activities, in
the implementation of its sustainable tourism goals. The
International Year of Ecotourism offered an ideal opportunity not only to review ecotourism experiences around
the world, but also to promote worldwide recognition of
the important role of sustainable tourism in the broader
international sustainable development agenda. There is,
however, a crucial distinction between ecotourism and
sustainable tourism: while the former can be broadly
defined as an alternative, nature-based type of tourism,
sustainable tourism calls for adherence to the abovementioned sustainability principles in all types of
tourism activities and by all segments of the tourism
industry.
Ecotourism is still a relatively small segment of the
overall tourism sector. At the same time, it is one of the
fastest growing tourism segments and further rapid

8

DESA Discussion Paper No. 29

growth is expected in the future. There is, however, little
agreement about its exact meaning because of the wide
variety of so-called ecotourism activities provided by
many different suppliers (both international and domestic) and enjoyed by an equally broad range of diverse
tourists. Its main features include (a) all forms of nature
tourism aimed at the appreciation of both the natural
world and the traditional cultures existent in natural
areas, (b) deliberate efforts to minimize the harmful
human impact on the natural and socio-cultural environment and (c) support for the protection of natural and cultural assets and the well-being of host communities.
Consensus on some of these issues was reached
during the World Ecotourism Summit—held in Québec
City (Canada) in May 2002—although many questions
need to be explored further (see UNEP, 2002b). The
Québec declaration stresses that, if carried out responsibly, ecotourism can be a valuable means for promoting
the socio-economic development of host communities
while generating resources for the preservation of natural
and cultural assets. In this way, ecologically fragile areas
can be protected with the financial returns of ecotourism
activities.
Ecotourism has been particularly successful in
attracting private investments for the establishment of
privately owned natural parks and nature reserves in an
increasing number of developing countries, such as Costa
Rica, Ecuador, Malaysia and South Africa. Many such
reserves are well managed, self-financed and environmentally responsible, even when profit remains the main
motivation behind the operation of a private reserve (see,
for example, Langholz et al., 2000). In this way, the
tourism industry can help to protect and even rehabilitate
natural assets, and thus contribute to the preservation of
biological diversity and ecological balance.
However, if not properly planned, managed and
monitored, ecotourism can be distorted for purely commercial purposes and even for promoting ecologicallydamaging activities by large numbers of tourists in natural areas. Given their inadequate physical infrastructure
and limited capacity to absorb mass tourism, the fragile
land and ocean ecosystems of many developing countries
can be literally overwhelmed by large numbers of
tourists. It is increasingly recognized, therefore, that ecotourism activities can also cause adverse ecological
impact, particularly if they are not properly managed or
if they involve tourist numbers beyond the local carrying
capacity (Gössling, 1999).18

Furthermore, even when ecotourism activities are
carried out in a responsible manner, they tend to give
priority to environmental protection, mainly by focusing on providing financial incentives for environmental
conservation by local communities. Similarly, while
broader sustainable tourism strategies contain economic and social objectives, these objectives tend to be
complementary to a central focus on environmental sustainability. Greater priority should thus be given to
socio-economic objectives in general, and to poverty
reduction in particular.
Pro-poor tourism: A poverty reduction strategy?
While responsible ecotourism and other sustainable
tourism strategies may bring significant socio-economic
benefits to host communities, they are not necessarily
aimed at poverty alleviation. Given that the United
Nations Millennium Declaration19 has placed poverty at
the centre of the international development agenda, it can
be argued that sustainable tourism development should
go beyond the promotion of broad socio-economic development and give greater priority to poverty reduction.
This priority shift would also address a somewhat
ignored recommendation of the seventh session of the
Commission on Sustainable Development which, inter
alia, urged Governments “to maximize the potential of
tourism for eradicating poverty by developing appropriate strategies in cooperation with all major groups, and
indigenous and local communities” (see UN, 1999c).
A pro-poor tourism (PPT) approach differs from
ecotourism and other sustainable tourism strategies in
that its overriding goal is to deliver net benefits to the
poor.20 While PPT and ecotourism may have some similar objectives, the key difference is that poverty reduction is the core focus of the PPT approach, rather than a
secondary component of a mainly environmental sustainability strategy. In other words, although environmental
protection remains an important PPT goal, the quality of
the environment in which targeted poor groups live is
only one part of a broader poverty reduction strategy.
There are several reasons why tourism development could be a particularly effective tool of poverty
reduction. First, as discussed earlier, tourism offers considerable employment opportunities for unskilled labour,
rural to urban migrants and lower-income women.
Second, there are considerable linkages with the informal
sector, which could generate positive multiplier effects to
poorer groups that rely on that sector for their liveli-

9

hoods. Third, tourism tends to be heavily based upon the
preservation of natural capital—such as, wildlife and
scenery—and cultural heritage, which are often “assets
that some of the poor have, even if they have no financial
resources” (Ashley et al., 2001:2).
It is increasingly realized that promoting greater
community participation in tourism development not
only provides stronger incentives to conserve natural
capital,21 but can also lead to a more equitable sharing of
benefits and thus greater opportunities for poverty alleviation. But while ecotourism and PPT both aim to increase
community participation in general, PPT also goes
beyond this goal in that it includes specific mechanisms
to enhance the participation of and opportunities for the
poorer segments of society. Three key components of the
PPT approach are:
(a) improved access to the economic benefits of
tourism by expanding employment and business
opportunities for the poor and providing adequate
training to enable them to maximize these opportunities;
(b) measures to deal with the social and environmental impact of tourism development, particularly the above-mentioned forms of social exploitation, as well as excessive pressure on natural
resources, pollution generation and damage to
ecosystems; and
(c) policy reform, by enhancing participation of the
poor in planning, development and management of
tourism activities pertinent to them, removing some
of the barriers for greater participation by the poor,
and encouraging partnerships between government
agencies or the private sector and poor people in
developing new tourism goods and services.
Some of these PPT concepts are beginning to be
implemented in several developing countries, such as
Ecuador, Namibia, Nepal and Uganda. In Namibia, for
example, the implementation of a PPT approach to the
development and management of the country’s community-based tourism segment appears to have made a significant contribution towards poverty reduction.
Several studies have shown that financial returns
from community-based natural resource management and
tourism ventures in Namibia usually exceed their investments and are thus a viable option for generating sustainable economic returns, while promoting environmental
conservation and cultural traditions in rural areas (see,
for example, Barnes et al., 2002). There is now evidence

A New Approach to Sustainable Tourism Development

of a successful introduction of the PPT approach by the
Namibia Community-based Tourism Association
(Nacobta), a non-profit organization that supports poor
local communities—including small entrepreneurs with
inadequate skills or access to financial resources—in
their efforts to develop tourism enterprises in the country
(see Nicanor, 2001).
Nacobta supports its members at both micro and
macro levels, mainly through the provision of grants,
loans, training, capacity building in the areas of institutional development and marketing training, as well as in
negotiations with relevant government agencies and the
mainstream tourist industry. Nacobta is explicitly propoor not only because it represents the poorest segment
of the country’s tourism industry, but also because most
of its members live on communal land areas, where the
majority of the inhabitants have an average per capita
income of less than US$1 a day22 and depend on subsistence agriculture. One of the main objectives of Nacobta
is “to raise the income and employment levels of these
areas through tourism, in order to improve the living
standards of people in communal areas” (Nicanor,
2001:5).
The pro-poor tourism approach of Nacobta is thus
different from conventional tourism because members of
local communities both own and manage the tourism
enterprises, whose economic benefits flow directly into
community funds or as formal sector wages, temporary
remuneration to casual labourers and income to informal
sector traders. There is also evidence that the financial
returns from most community-based tourism enterprises
supported by Nacobta “has changed their communities
from being poor or very poor to being better off”
(Nicanor, 2001:5).

Conclusion
As stressed at the beginning of this paper, tourism
is expected to resume its rapid growth in the near future.
This growth can be harnessed not only for the enjoyment
of tourists themselves but, more importantly, for maximizing economic benefits and thus increasing the living
standards of host communities and countries. At the same
time, unless corrective measures are taken, it is bound to
have negative environmental and socio-cultural impact
on those communities. Ecotourism and other sustainable
tourism strategies have gone a long way towards minimizing this negative impact and ensuring that the eco-

10

DESA Discussion Paper No. 29

nomic benefits of tourism can contribute to environmental protection and the sustainable use of natural
resources.
But while environmental sustainability must remain
a key component of sustainable tourism strategies, another challenge for the international community is to devise
ways and means to place poverty reduction at the centre
of tourism planning, development and management. This
will require, amongst other things, genuine community
participation, greater technical and financial assistance,
human resources development, and institutional capacity
building in many developing countries. Given the potential importance of tourism activities on national and
international efforts to reduce poverty, there is, therefore,
a strong case for promoting a PPT approach, particularly
in developing countries.

Notes

non-remunerated family members of small entrepreneurs
12 See, for example, UN (2002a:Part I).
13 While this socio-cultural dimension must be considered an integral part of

14
15

16
17

18
19
20
21

22

sustainable tourism development strategies, a discussion of that dimension
lies outside the scope of this paper.
See Mastny, 2001.
See UN (1993). Agenda 21, however, addresses tourist-related issues, such
as, sustainable mountain development and the protection of coastal ecosystems.
See GA resolution A/RES/56/212 of 21 December 2001.
The 2002 United Nations International Year of Ecotourism was officially proclaimed by the General Assembly resolution 53/200 of 15 December 1998.
WTO and UNEP took the lead in organizing activities at the international
level.
There is no clear agreement, however, how to define and measure ‘tourist
carrying capacity’ (see, for example, Collins, 1999).
See A/RES/55/2, 18 September 2000.
The analysis here is based mainly on C. Ashley et al. (2001).
Recent empirical analysis of economic incentives for ecotourism in Ecuador
shows, for example, that local income generation depends primarily on the
level of local organization, as well as on the importance of the tourist attraction and the degree of tourism specialization available. See Wunder (2000).
This is the official United Nations threshold for defining people living in
extreme poverty. See, for example, UN (2001c).

1

See UN (2001a). According to the World Tourism Organization (WTO), tourism
is defined as “the activities of persons travelling to and staying in places outside their usual environment for not more than one consecutive year for
leisure, business and other purposes not related to the exercise of an activity remunerated from within the place visited” (see WTO, 2000).
2 See UN (1997:ch. X).
3 Even the Gulf War year of 1991 recorded a small increase of 1.2% in international tourist arrivals. Annual international arrivals include different visits to
the same country by the same international visitor during a single year.
International tourists include both overnight and same-day visitors. See WTO
(2001b).
4 According to the most recent United Nations economic forecasts (UN, 2003),
gross world product (GWP) increased by only 1.7% in 2002, only a marginal
improvement from the previous year—itself the weakest performance in a
decade. This means that 2002 was the second consecutive year of decline in
per capita GWP.
5 The broad definition of tourism includes a complex range of economic activities accounted for in several other sectors by means of a ‘tourism satellite
account’. According to a set of methodological references to a tourism satellite account recently adopted by the United Nations Statistical Commission
(see UN/WTO/OECD/EUROSTAT, 2001), tourism is measured from a demand
side perspective as opposed to the supply side approach used for more
homogenous sectors.
6 International tourism receipts at current prices and excluding international
transport costs (see UN, 2001a and WTO, 2001e).
7 See UNCTAD (2001).
8 See UN (1999b and 1996). The latter estimates that in the mid-1990s such
leakages accounted for well over a third of gross tourism receipts in several
small economies.
9 According to ILO (2002), women account for about 60% of employees in the
hotel and restaurant sector in most countries.
10 ILO (2002) estimates that one job in the direct tourism industry worldwide
induces around one and a half additional indirect jobs in the tourism-related
economy: the ratio varies from 1.2 in North and Latin America, to around 2.0
in the Caribbean and Europe
11 See ILO (2001). The high proportion of unpaid employment in many developed
and developing countries—in many cases almost or more than half of the
total number of employees in this sub-sector—reflects a large number of

References
C. Ashley, D. Roe and H. Goodwin, 2001. Pro-Poor Tourism
Strategies: Making Tourism Work for the Poor, London,
ODI.
J. I. Barnes, J. MacGregor and L. Chris Weaver, 2002.
“Economic Efficiency and Incentives for Change within
Namibia’s Community Wildlife Use Initiatives”, World
Development 30, no. 4, pp. 667-681.
Centre for Development and Environment (CDE) and the Swiss
Agency for Development of Cooperation (SDC), 1999.
Tourism and Sustainable Mountain Development, Berne,
CDE.
A. Collins, 1999. “Tourism development and natural capital”,
Annals of Tourism Research 26, no. 1. pp. 98-109.
S. Gössling, 1999. “Ecotourism: a means to safeguard biodiversity and ecosystem functions”, Ecological Economics 29,
no. 2, pp. 303-320.
P. M. Haas, 2002. “UN Conferences and constructive governance of the environment”, Global Governance 8, no. 1,
pp. 73-91.
International Labour Organization (ILO), 2001. Human
resources development, employment and globalization in
the hotel, catering and tourism sector, Geneva, ILO.
ILO, 2002. Hotels, Catering & Tourism (22 January 2002),
available at http://www.ilo.org/public/english/dialogue/
sector/sectors/tourism.htm.
D. Johnson, 2002. “Environmentally sustainable cruise tourism:
a reality check”, Marine Policy 26, pp. 261-270.
J. A. Langholz, J. P. Lassoie, D. Lee, and D. Chapman, 2000.
Economic considerations of privately owned parks,
Ecological Economics, vol. 33, no. 2, pp. 173-83.
L. Mastny, 2001. Traveling Light: New Paths for International

11

Tourism, Washington, Worldwatch Institute.
C. Michael Hall, 2001. Trends in ocean and coastal tourism: the
end of the last frontier?, Ocean and Coastal
Management, vol. 44, nos. 9-10, pp. 601-18.
N. Nicanor, 2001. Practical strategies for pro-poor tourism:
NACOBTA, the Namibian case study, PPT Working Paper
No. 4, ODI, London.
United Nations (UN), 1993. Earth Summit–Agenda 21: The
United Nations Programme of Action from Rio (Sales
document No. E.93.I.11), New York, UN.
UN, 1996. Sustainable tourism development in small island
developing states, Report of the Secretary-General (document E/CN.17/1996/20/Add.3), New York, UN.
UN, 1997. World Economic and Social Survey 1997 (Sales No.
E.97.II.C.I), New York, UN.
UN, 1998. Earth Summit +5–Programme for the Further
Implementation of Agenda 21, New York, UN.
UN, 1999a. Tourism and sustainable development, Report of
the Secretary-General (Document No. E/CN.17/1999/5),
New York, UN.
UN, 1999b. Sustainable tourism development in small island
developing states, Addendum to the Report of the
Secretary-General (Document No. E/CN.17/1999/6/
Add.11), New York, UN.
UN, 1999c. Report of the seventh session of the United Nations
Commission on Sustainable Development (document
E/1999/29-E/CN.17/1999/20), New York, UN.
UN, 2001a. Sustainable development of tourism, Report of the
Secretary-General (Document No. E/CN.17/2001/
PC/21), New York, UN.
UN, 2001b. World Economic and Social Survey 2001 (Sales No.
E.01.II.A.4), New York, UN.
UN, 2001c. “Road map towards the implementation of the
United Nations Millennium Declaration” (document
A/56/326), New York, UN.
UN, 2002a. World Economic and Social Survey 2002 (Sales No.
E.02.II.C.1), New York, UN.
UN, 2002b. Report of the World Summit on Sustainable
Development (Sales No. E.03.II.A.1), New York, UN.
UN, 2003. World Economic Situation and Prospects 2003
(Sales No. E.03.II.C.2), New York, UN.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development

A New Approach to Sustainable Tourism Development

(UNCTAD), 2001. Note by the Secretariat of the United
Nations Conference on Trade and Development
(Document No. UNCTAD/LDC/Misc.64), Geneva,
UNCTAD.
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), Secretariat
of the Convention on Biological Diversity, (2002a).
Biological Diversity and Tourism: Development of
Guidelines for Sustainable Tourism in Vulnerable
Ecosystems, Montreal, UNEP/CBD.
UNEP, 2002b. “Québec Declaration on Ecotourism”, agreed at
the World Ecotourism Summit and available at
http://www.uneptie.org/pc/tourism/ecotourism/wes.htm.
United Nations (UN), World Tourism Organization (WTO),
Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) and Statistical Office of the
European Commission (EUROSTAT), 2001. Tourism
Satellite Account: Recommended Methodological
Framework (Document No. ST/ESA/STAT/SER.F.80),
New York, UN.
World Tourism Organization (WTO), 2000. Basic References
on Tourism Statistics, Madrid, WTO.
WTO, 2001a. Tourism Highlights 2001, Madrid, WTO.
WTO, 2001b. Compendium of Tourism Statistics–2001 Edition,
Madrid, WTO.
WTO, 2001c. Tourism after 11 September 2001: Analysis,
remedial actions and prospects, Madrid, WTO.
WTO, 2001d. Tourism 2020 Vision—Global Forecasts and
Profiles of Market Segments, vol. 7, Madrid, WTO.
WTO, 2001e. Tourism Market Trends - 2001 Edition, World
Overview & Tourism Topics, Madrid, WTO.
WTO, 2001f. Actions in assisting developing countries to
implement Agenda 21 undertaken by the World Tourism
Organization
since
1992,
(Document
No.
DESA/DSD/PC2/BP3), New York, UN.
WTO, 2002. Tourism proves to be a resilient and stable economic sector (18 June), available at http://www.worldtourism.org/newsroom/Releases/more_releases//june2002/
data.htm.
S. Wunder, 2000. Ecotourism and economic incentives - An
empirical approach, Ecological Economics, vol. 32, no.
3, pp. 465-79.

DESA Discussion Papers
No. 1

Public versus Private Provision of Pensions, By Larry Willmore, December 1998

No. 2

Inefficiencies of Global Capital Markets, By Hugh Stretton, December 1998

No. 3

Greening the National Accounts: Approach and Policy Use, By Peter Bartelmus, January 1999

No. 4

Unpaid Work and Policy-Making Towards a Broader Perspective of Work and Employment
By Joke Swiebel, February 1999

No. 5

Trends in Consumption and Production: Selected Minerals, By Oleg Dzioubinski and Ralph Chipman, March 1999

No. 6

Trends in Consumption and Production: Household Energy Consumption
By Oleg Dzioubinski and Ralph Chipman, April 1999

No. 7

Promoting Sustainable Production and Consumption: Five Policy Studies
By Tarcisio Alvarez-Rivero, Ralph Chipman and Erik Bryld, April 1999

No. 8

Regulation Policies Concerning Natural Monopolies in Developing and Transition Economies
By S. Ran Kim and A. Horn, March 1999

No. 9

Tourism development in the Lao People's Democratic Republic, By Sayo Yamauchi and Donald Lee, June 1999

No.10

Import Elasticities Revisited, By Pingfan Hong, September 1999

No.11

Resources for Social Development: Additional and Innovative Resources, By Anthony Clunies-Ross, March 2000

No.12

Export Processing Zones in Cuba, By Larry Willmo re, May 2000

No.13

Three Pillars of Pensions? A Proposal to End Mandatory Contributions, By Larry Willmore, June 2000

No.14

The Underlying Constraints on Corporate Bond Market Development in Southeast Asia
By Krishnan Sharma, September 2000

No.15

Bank-firm Cross-shareholding in Japan: What is it, why does it matter, is it winding down?
By Mark J. Scher, February 2001

No.16

The Supply of Credit by Multinational Banks in Developing and Transition Economies:
Determinants and Effects, By Christian E. Weller, March 2001

No.17

Global Implications of the United States Trade Deficit Adjustment, By Pingfan Hong, February 2001

No.18

Price Stability in a Monetary Union, By Stefania Piffanelli, September 2001

No.19

The Instrument of Monetary Policy for Germany. A Structural VAR Approach, By Stefania Piffanelli, September 2001

No.20

Preventing Civil Strife: An Important Role for Economic Policy, By Henk-Jan Brinkman, September 2001

No.21

Government Policies toward Information and Communication Technologies: A Historical Perspective
By Larry Wilmore, October 2001

No.22

Postal Savings and the Provision of Financial Services: Policy Issues and Asian Experiences in the
Use of the Postal Infrastructure for Savings Mobilization, By Mark J. Scher, December 2001

No.23

Strengthening Information and Analysis in the Global Financial System: A Concrete Set of Proposals
By Barbara Samuels, II, June 2002

No.24

Multisectoral Global Funds as instruments for financing spending on global priorities
By Jeremy J. Heimans, September 2002

No.25

GATS and its implications for Developing Countries: Key Issues and Concerns, By Rupa Chanda, November 2002

No.26

Informal Money Transfer Systems: Opportunities and Challenges for Development Finance
By Leonides Buencamino and Sergei Gorbunov, November 2002

No.27

Education by the State, By Larry Willmore, November 2002

No.28

Capital Markets Financing for Developing -Country Infrastructure Projects
By Robert Sheppard, January 2003

No.29

A New Approach to Sustainable Tourism Development: Moving Beyond Environmental Protection
By Frederico Neto, March 2003

DESA Discussion Papers are posted on the DESA web site:http://www.un.org/esa/papers.htm

