Ethics and Information Technology (2005) 7:6173
DOI 10.1007/s10676-005-4582-3

O Springer 2005

Where computer security meets national security1

Helen Nissenbaum
Department of Culture and Communication, New York University, NY, USA
E-mail: helen.nissenbaum@nyu.edu

Abstract. This paper identifies two conceptions of security in contemporary concerns over the vulnerability of
computers and networks to hostile attack. One is derived from individual-focused conceptions of computer
security developed in computer science and engineering. The other is informed by the concerns of national
security agencies of government as well as those of corporate intellectual property owners. A comparative
evaluation of these two conceptions utilizes the theoretical construct of securitization, developed by the
Copenhagen School of International Relations.

Key words: cyber-security, computer security, securitization

Introduction

roots

Over the course of the past decade, the mandate of
computer security has grown in complexity and
seriousness as information technologies have satu-
rated society and, simultaneously, the threats have
multiplied in number and sophistication. Although
widely publicized attacks such as denial-of-service,
viruses, worms and unauthorized break-ins create
the impression that the work of computer security
specialists is clear-cut, this paper holds that the
broad purpose of computer security,
is
ambiguous. At least two prominent conceptions of
security vie for the attention and resources of
experts, policy makers, and public opinion. One,
focusing on individual systems and networks, has
its
science and engineering
communities. The other, a more recent entry,
focuses on collective and institutional
systems,

in computer

in fact,

1 This article has been on the drawing boards for longer
than I dare to admit. Along the way, many have helped its
development by generously sharing their wisdom: James
Der Derian, Niva Elkin-Koren, Ed Felten, Batya Fried-
man, Lene Hansen, audiences at CEPE, TPRC, the Yale
Cybercrime and Digital Law Enforcement Conference, and
Watson Institutes Symposium in Dis/Simulations of War
and Peace, and University of Newcastle, Computer Sci-
ence Department. Thanks, also, to Sam Howard-Spink for
excellent editorial assistance.

reflecting the influence of political and national
these two conceptions
security actors. Currently,
exist
inherent differences
spell tensions in future social, political, and tech-
nical decision-making.

side-by-side. But

their

The purpose of this paper is to elaborate the
sources and implications of these tensions so as to
help guide choices. Although a full account would
address outcomes in social, political, and technical
arenas, this paper focuses mainly on the technical,
asking, for this arena, how the two conceptions of
security are likely to play out and what reasons we
might have for favoring one conception over the
other. The decision to focus on implications for
technical choices is not arbitrary but comes from
one of the key motivating interests of this paper,
namely, how values, generally, are embodied in
technical systems and devices (henceforth technol-
ogies), both in their design and regulation. Before
picking up the papers main thread, we take a brief
detour on the subject of values in design of tech-
nologies showing how it has shaped our questions
about security.

Values in technical design

A significant body of work in the humanistic and
social study of technology advances an understanding
of technology not merely as an independent material
form which acts on people and societies but as

62

HELEN NISSENBAUM

political to its very core. That technical systems and
devices can serve as venues for political struggle has
found expression in a range of scholarly works, from
Langdon Winners famous assertion that artifacts
have politics (1986)2 to lesser known claims such as
Bryan Pfaffenbergers that STS (Science and Tech-
nology Studies) be conceived as the political phi-
losophy of our time.3 While a large and excellent
body of scholarship in STS and philosophy of tech-
nology has produced theories and case analyses that
convincingly argue in favor of
this fundamental
claim, recent initiatives, spearheaded in the context of
computer and information technologies, focus on the
practical question of how to bring these ideas to bear
on the design of the information and communications
systems that increasingly shape the opportunities and
daily experiences of people living in technologically
advanced societies. The rationale behind this prag-
matic turn is this: if values shape technical systems,
then responsible creators and regulators should trust
neither serendipity nor possibly illegitimate agency to
produce the best outcomes. Ethical and political
values ought to be added to traditional consider-
ations and constraints guiding the design and regu-
lation of
functionality,
efficiency, elegance,
safety, and, more recently,
usability.

these systems,

such as

Although we are still at the early stages of for-
mulating appropriate methodological principles, this
much is clear: implementing values in the design and
regulation of
information and communications
technologies requires not only technical (engineering
and scientific) adeptness and a firm empirical
grounding in how people perceive and are affected by
them (as may be learned from usability studies, sur-
veys, etc.), but also an adequate grasp of key con-
ceptual definitions as well normative theories in
which these are embedded. It is laudable for well-
meaning designers and developers to seek (Friedman,
Kahn Jr. and Borning (forthcoming), Camp (2003),
Camp and Osorio (2002), Flanagan, Howe and
Nissenbaum (forthcoming), Nissenbaum (2004,

2 L. Winner. Do Artifacts have Politics? The Whale and
the Reactor: A Search for Limits in an Age of High Tech-
nology. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1986.

3 B. Pfaffenberger.

Technological Dramas. Science,

Technology & Human, 17(3): 282312, 1992.

forthcoming); Benkler and Nissenbaum (forthcom-
ing4) for example, to preserve privacy, or provide
accessibility to the disabled, of promote sociality and
cooperation. However, unless such interventions are
guided by sound concepts of privacy, equity, welfare,
and cooperation, respectively, and well-reasoned,
theoretically grounded justifications for choices and
trade-offs, their efforts could easily miss the mark. For
this reason, it is of far more than academic interest
to ponder the meaning of security
in computer
security given that which of the two (or possibly other)
meanings of security guides the choices of designers
and regulators could have a significant effect on out-
comes for the users of computers and networked
information systems. This paper aims to sketch some
of the alternatives that are likely to follow our two
interpretations of security.

Security deserves a place alongside privacy, intel-
lectual property, equity, and other values that have
been vigorously debated in light of developments in
and application of digital electronic information
technologies. So far, security has been treated pri-
marily as a technical problem, despite its being a rich,
complex, and contested concept with variable shad-
ings of specialized and general meanings. Like the
values mentioned above security,
too, has been
stretched and challenged by radical alterations in
information and communications
environments
generated by computing and networks. It is impor-
tant to understand what precisely it is that is being
sought and sometimes achieved in the technologies

4 See at the project Value in Technology Design: De-
mocracy, Autonomy, and Justice, available at:
[http://
www.nyu.edu/projects/valuesindesign/]; B. Friedman, P.H.
Kahn, Jr. and A. Borning, A Value Sensitive Design and
Information Systems, forthcoming. In P. Zhang and D.
Galletta, editors, Human-Computer Interaction in Manage-
ment Information Systems: Foundations. M.E. Sharpe, Inc,
NY; Camp I. Jean, Design for Trust. In Rino Falcone,
editor, Trust, Reputation and Security: Theories and Prac-
tice: Aamas 2002 International Workshop, Bologna, Italy,
July 15, 2002: Selected and Invited Papers (Lecture Notes in
Artificial Intelligence). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2003; L.
Jean Camp & Carlos Osorio, Privacy Enhancing Tech-
nologies for Internet Commerce. In Trust in the Network
Economy. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, 2002; Flanagan, Howe
and Nissenbaum (forthcoming); H. Nissenbaum.
Will
Security Enhance Trust Online, or Supplant It? In M.R.
and S.K. Cook, editors, Trust and Distrust in
Kramer
Organizations: Dilemmas and Approaches Volume VII in the
Russell Sage Foundation Series on Trust. Russell Sage
Foundation, New York, 2004; Benkler Y. and Nissenbaum
H. (forthcoming), Commons Based Peer Production and
Virtue.

WHERE COMPUTER SECURITY MEETS NATIONAL SECURITY

63

and regulations aspiring to produce a state of secu-
rity. If we can unambiguously describe the valued
outcome that is the goal of computer (and network)
security, then, at the very least, we will be better
qualified to judge whether the vast and loosely con-
nected community of scientists and engineers work-
ing in academia, governmental and corporate
research institutions, and in backrooms of enumera-
ble private and public organizations and businesses is
achieving its mission. Finally, an explicit expression
of the goal, or goals, of security efforts will make an
evaluation of these goals possible: are the goals
morally grounded, are they worth pursuing, and, if
so, at what cost?

Two conceptions of computer security

seem dominant. One, here

Taking note of what has been said, over the past few
years, about the mission of computer security, two
conceptions
labeled
technical computer security, has roots in the sci-
entific and technical field of the same name and has
been developed and articulated by the fields leaders
in such venues as professional conferences, scholarly
and research journals, and committee reports of the
National Research Council.5 The other, here labeled
cyber-security, a more recent entry to the public
sphere,
typically articulated by government
authorities, corporate heads, and leaders of other
non-governmental sectors. It links computer security
to traditional notions of national security. At present,
these two conceptions exist side-by-side, each one
angling for the attention of key social actors includ-
ing government agencies,
technical experts and
institutions, corporations, policy experts, pundits, the
general public, and, importantly, the media (popular
as well as specialized.)

is

The two conceptions, while not strictly incompat-
ible on all points, emphasize different issues and, as a
result, pull in different directions. In order to under-
stand why these differences are significant, we need to
flesh them out a little more.

Technical computer security

Within the technical community, the traditional core
mission of computer (and network) security has been
defined by three goals: availability;
integrity; and
confidentiality. In other words, the work of technical
experts in the field of computer security has generally
focused on protecting computer systems and their
users against attacks, and threats of attack, in three
general categories:
 Attacks that render systems, information, and net-
works unavailable to users, including for example,
denial-of-service attacks and malware such as
viruses, worms, etc. that disable systems or parts
of them.

 Attacks that threaten the integrity of information
or of systems and networks by corrupting data,
destroying files or disrupting code, etc.

 Attacks that threaten the confidentiality of infor-
mation and communications, such as interception
of emails, unauthorized access to systems and data,
spyware that enables third parties to learn about
system configuration or web browsing habits.

Although instantiations of these types of attacks have
evolved over time,
the categories have remained
surprisingly robust. This is not to say that the field
has remained static as each new form of even the
same type of attack requires novel defenses. Those
who undertake to provide security understand that
their actions may not lead to total and permanent
invulnerability, but at best a temporary advantage
against wily adversaries who themselves are engaged
in a race in continually evolving tools for penetrating
these defenses. Further, the boundaries of what is
included in technical security continues to expand to
meet new applications. For example, as electronic
commerce has become more common,
security
experts have sought technical means to authenticate
identities and prevent repudiation of financial com-
mitment. Some have argued for extending the mission
of technical security even further to the broader
concept of trustworthiness, which includes features
such as survivability and dependability not only in
the face of deliberate attack but also accidental fail-
ures. (See for example the CSTB report on Trust in
Cyberspace and DIRC project definition.)6 For

5 National Research Council, The Internet Under Crisis
Conditions, (The National Academies Press, Washington,
D.C., 2003); Hennessy L. J, Patterson A. D. and Lin S. H.
(eds.) (2003), Information Technology for Counterterrorism,
(The National Academies Press, Washingtom D.C., 2003);
Baskerville R.
Information Systems Design
Methods: Implications for Information Systems Develop-
ment, 25(4) ACM Computing Surveys, pp. 375414.

(1993),

6 Trust in Cyberspace, Committee on Information
Systems Trustworthiness, National Research Council (1999)
available
[http://www.nap.edu/readingroom/books/
trust/]; see the societys dependability definition by the DIRC
project, available at: [http://www.dirc.org.uk/overview/in-
dex.html].

at:

64

HELEN NISSENBAUM

purposes of the discussion here, we will assume the
narrower conception of computer security focusing
on protection against deliberate attack.

Cyber-security

In the conception that I will call cyber-security, the
issues of greatest danger fall roughly into three
categories:

1. Threats posed by the use of networked computers
as a medium or staging ground for antisocial,
disruptive, or dangerous organizations and
communications. These include, for example, the
websites of various racial and ethnic hate groups,
sites that coordinate the planning and perpetra-
tion of crimes (especially fraud), websites and
other mechanisms that deliver child-pornogra-
phy, and  perhaps of most urgent concern as of
the writing of this paper  use of the Internet for
inducing terrorist actions and for the operational
planning of terrorist attacks (Bendrath 2003).7

2. Threats of attack on critical societal infrastruc-
tures,
including utilities, banking, government
administration, education, healthcare, manufac-
turing and communications media. Here, the
argument is that because critical systems are
increasingly dependent on networked informa-
tion systems, they are vulnerable to network at-
tacks. Potential attackers include rogue U.S.
nationals,
international terrorist organizations,
or hostile nations engaging in cyber-war.

3. Threats to the networked information system
itself ranging from disablement of various kinds
and degrees to  in the worst case  complete
debility.8

The central claim of this article is that two concep-
tions of security seem to drive efforts in computer

7 Bendrath, R.

The American Cyber-Angst and the
Real WorldAny Link? In R. Latham, editor, Bombs and
Bandwidth, pp. 4973. The New Press, New York, 2003.

8 According to the The National Strategy to Secure
Cyberspace, Feb. 2003 (available at: http://www.us-cert.-
gov/reading_room/cyberspace_strategy.pdf)
cyber-attacks
information networks can have serious conse-
on U.S.
quences such as disrupting critical operations, loss of rev-
enue and intellectual property, or loss of life; see also
United State Senate, Committee on the Judiciary, Testi-
mony of Mr. Keith Lourdeau, FBI Deputy Assistant
Director, Cyber Division, February 24, 2004 (available at:
http://judiciary.senate.gov/testimony.cfm?id=1054&wit_id
= 2995).

(and network) security and that their differences are
significant for regulation and design. A difference
that is most immediately obvious is scope: cyber-
security overlaps with technical security but encom-
passes more. Scope, as I argue below, is not all that
separates the two. Other differences will become evi-
dent as we develop the two conceptions through a
series of questions, beginning with the most rudi-
mentary: why security? In other words, why are the
issues raised by the two conceptions matters of
security? Closely connected with this is a second,
basic question: what contributes to the moral force of
computer security, so conceived?

Security and its moral force

A foundational assumption of both conceptions is
that the material concerns they raise are rightly
construed as
security concerns. Although this
apparently self-evident proposition may prove un-
problematic, it is worth taking a moment to draw the
connection explicitly, starting with a general or
ordinary account of security as safety, freedom from
the unwanted effects of anothers actions (Ripstein
1999),9 the condition of being protected from danger,
injury, attack (physical and non-physical), and other
harms, and protection against threats of all kinds.
From here, the question to ask is why the activities
cited by various accounts of computer security war-
rant the label of threat of harm, against which
people deserve to be secured.

With technical computer security, the promise is
protection against attacks by adversaries whose
actions deprive victims of access to or use of sys-
tems and networks (availability); damaging, spoil-
ing, or altering their systems or data (integrity); and
revealing or diverting information to inappropriate
recipients (confidentiality). These are security con-
cerns to the extent we agree that the attacks in
question, in the context of computing, information
flow, digital electronic communication, etc., consti-
tute harm. This is key and not as obvious as it
might at first appear. It is important because the
quest for computer security has moral force only to
the extent that it promotes the common value of
freedom from harm. In other words, the issue is
not merely why these are classifiable as security
concerns but why people deserve, or have a right,
to be thus secured.

9 R. Arthur. Prohibition and Preemption, In 5 Legal

Theory, pp. 235263, Cambridge University Press, 1999.

WHERE COMPUTER SECURITY MEETS NATIONAL SECURITY

65

Antithetical to this picture is a more cynical view of
the goals of technical computer security as a quest for
increasingly effective ways to protect individuals and
institutions against actions that threaten the fulfill-
ment of desires and subjective preferences, irrespective
of their moral standing. Ross Anderson (2003), a
computer scientist who also comments on policy
implications of the technology, presents such a turn in
computer security  driven more by what customers
want than by a mission to provide protection against
objectively (or inter-subjectively) construed harm.
Illustrative cases are moves by corporate entities to
secure their assets and market standing including, for
example, Microsoft, creating so-called trusted com-
puting which would restrict individuals in the way
they use their computers, particularly in relation to
proprietary information. Anderson cites Hewlett-
Packard as another example, applying cryptographic
techniques to prevent consumers from installing third-
party printer cartridges in HP printers. Cases like
these portray computer security as an amoral practice
and security engineers as guns for hire working to
promote vested interests (securing parochial benefits)
rather than as agents of public good.10

If technical computer security were directed only to
the task of securing the private interests of stake-
holders who could afford such protection, it could
not sustain the compelling claim on public attention,
approbation, and financial
investment that it cur-
rently holds. Our point of departure, therefore, is that
the focus is broader in two ways. First, the implicit
beneficiaries of computer security are everyone who
uses, owns, or possibly even is affected by computers
and networks, including ordinary persons as well as
individual institutional agents of any size. Second,
still to be shown, is that the promised benefits are
generally valued by the relevant surrounding com-
munities. By implication, computer security is a
value, and the activities of technical security experts
are of moral import, if the stated end toward which
they are directed result in protection from (conditions
generally thought to be) harms.

it

More specifically,

is not surprising that a
society that values the institution of private prop-
erty and understands computer systems and infor-
mation as possible forms of property would value
integrity given that assaults on system integrity can
easily be construed as a form of property damage.
Further, since confidentiality is typically a valued

aspect of privacy, intrusions into systems or com-
munications are readily conceived as instances of
harm. The case of system and data availability is
slightly more complex as one could argue for its
protection on grounds of traditional property rights
(both use and enjoyment) and the owners enti-
tlement to alienate the property in question from
others. But denying a user availability also consti-
tutes a violation of autonomy as it interferes with
an increasingly important means of identity for-
mation as well as pursuit of self-determined ends.
Because system availability,
integrity, and confi-
dentiality are also instrumental to achieving other
ends, such as safe commercial transactions, pro-
ductivity, robust communication, and more, threats
to them may be harmful
in many ways beyond
those listed above.

When the two foundational questions are asked of
cyber-security, namely, why are the issues it raises
matters of security and what are the sources of its
moral weight, the answers are different. I argue that,
here, the meaning of security is drawn not from
ordinary usage but from usage developed in the spe-
cialized arena of national security. The difference,
therefore, is not merely one of scope but of meaning,
and what follows from this difference is of practical
significance. The argument is inspired by insights and a
vocabulary developed within the Copenhagen School
of thought in the area of international security studies.

Securitization: The Copenhagen School11

In the field of international security studies, traditional
approaches frequently called realist have been
challenged by those taking more general and discur-
sive ones. As depicted by these challengers, realist
theories adopt an overly narrow view of national
security, focusing on protection of physical borders
and strategic assets against military attacks by foreign
states. The broader view includes not only terrorist
attacks occurring within national borders but threats
other than military ones. Also resisting the realists
treatment of threats as objectively conceived and
characterized, some of the challengers opt for so-called
constructivist or discursive accounts of national and
international security. One such approach, offered by

10 R. Anderson. Cryptography and Competition Pol-
icyIssues with Issues with Trusted Computing. In Pro-
ceedings Workshop on Economics and Information Sector,
pp. 111, 2003.

11 For a description of this approach to security studies, I
have used B. Buzan, O. Wyer, J.D. Wilde and O. Waever,
Security: A New Framework for Analysis, Lynne Rienner
Publishers, Inc., Boulder, 1997; O. Waever, Concepts of
Security, Ph.D. dissertation. Institute of Political Science,
University of Copenhagen, 1995.

66

HELEN NISSENBAUM

the Copenhagen School, whose key proponents are
Barry Buzan and Ole Waever, provides a useful
framework for articulating differences between con-
ceptions of security in Cyber-security and technical
computer security. Any further discussion of differences
between realist and discursive approaches to security
studies, however, lie beyond the scope of this paper.

In proposing a constructivist framework, Buzan
and Waever are less concerned with providing an
objective characterization of threats, vulnerabilities,
and modes of defense, and more with providing a
systematic account of the ways specific conditions,
states-of-affairs, or events are posed by significant
social actors as threats to security and come to be
widely accepted as such. They call this rendering of a
security threat securitization, which becomes the
fundamental explanatory construct of their frame-
work. Before using the notion of securitization to
highlight differences between the two conceptions of
security in computer security, a few more features of
the framework need to be specified.

The concept of securitization generalizes certain
elements of traditional approaches to national security
in which the typical landscape includes a threat of
military attack, the nation-state under threat, and the
specific steps leaders take to ensure the states contin-
ued security (through such means as defensive action,
shoring up vulnerabilities, and so forth.) The Copen-
hagen School moves from this landscape to one in
which the threat need not be military and the referent
object need not be the state. Further, its assertions are
not about actual threats, referent objects, and defen-
sive maneuvers, but about the successful portrayal of
threats as security threats and what this means.
Accordingly, the questions that concern Buzan, Wa-
ever, and their colleagues are about the typical threats,
agents, and referent objects that characterize condi-
tions in which securitization of a threat is attempted
and also in which securitization of that threat succeeds.
We briefly summarize some of their answers.

From the traditional conception of security in
national security, this account moves away from the
paradigmatic military threat to a more general notion.
What it retains as a key feature of threats capable of
being securitized is that they be presented not merely
as harmful but as dire, imminent and existential. A
threat must be presented to an audience and accepted
by that audience as fatal to a referent objects very
existence. These are life-and-death threats, existential
threats to a group, a valued entity, a way of life, or
ideology. In the case of the state, a securitized harm is
one that threatens national sovereignty and political
autonomy, of subjugation by a foreign will. Presenting
something as a threat to a society, culture, or religion,
involves claiming it as a critical challenge to social,

religious, or cultural identity, to an historical way of
life, to hallowed traditions.

A similar extension occurs in what can count as
the referent object  not only the state but other
entities as well. The field is not entirely open. Buzan
and Waever argue that only general collectives or
collective values count as such. Only entities that an
audience believes have to survive are likely to rouse
the necessary degree of salience and concern. The
nation-state, at least in the present era, is an obvious
contender but so are such valued entities as envi-
ronment, religion, culture, economy, and so on.
Obviously the range of threats will vary in relation to
entities, thus pollution may be a dire threat for the
environment, depression a dire threat to an economy,
assimilation for a religion and so on. Referent objects
highly unlikely to be securitized include specific
individuals, or what Buzan and Waever call mid-
level,
institutions, or
clubs, even if threats in question are existential.
Exception might occur if a clear link can be drawn
between the survival of the mid-level entity and the
greater collective.12 The threat of Japanese auto-
makers, for example, to the profitability of the Ford
automobile company, or even to its continued exis-
tence, is unlikely to be securitized unless proponents
are able to launch a convincing argument that Fords
demise will lead to a crash in the entire economy.

limited collectives like firms,

In general, to securitize an activity or state-of-
imminent,
to a significant

affairs is to present
extensive, and existential
collective.

it as an urgent,

threat

A third important aspect of the framework is
agency. One half of the story is who has the capacity
or power to securitize, to be a securitizing actor.
These typically will include high-ranking government
officials  elected or appointed, members of cabinet,
high-ranking military personnel, the president (or
prime minister.) It is possible, however, that others in
a society might have achieved sufficient salience and
persuasive capacity to construct the conception of
threat necessary for securitization. One could imagine
that trusted media sources, high ranking jurists, and
possibly corporate personalities might accumulate
this degree of salience. It is also possible that highly
visible lobbyists, pressure groups, and the public
media might have the capacity indirectly to move
government officials
given
threats. The other half of the story is whether secu-
ritizing moves are accepted. Here, we must settle for

toward securitizing

12 B. Buzan, O. Wyer, J.D. Wilde and O. Waever,
Security: A New Framework for Analysis, p. 32. Lynne
Rienner Publishers, Inc., Boulder, 1997.

WHERE COMPUTER SECURITY MEETS NATIONAL SECURITY

67

something like a preponderance of views in the larger
social or national context. Most importantly, how-
ever, in order for securitization of a threat to have
succeeded we need both securitizing moves by rele-
vant actors as well as acceptance by the surrounding
communities.

Application to cyber-security

Examining in greater detail ways in which the three
categories of threats to cyber-security have been
presented by prominent voices in government, the
private sector, and media, we can detect clear moves
to securitize. These moves invest cyber-security with
the specialized meanings of securitization, in contrast
with what I above called the general or ordinary
meaning. In these moves, the dangers in question are
posed as imminent, urgent, and dire for the United
States and the rest of the free world.

The first

threat category stems from the far-
reaching power of the new medium to serve as a
highly effective tool for one-to-one and many-to-
many interactive communication, as well as one-to-
many broadcast communication. Even prior to the
attacks of 11th September, 2001, the media played up
government worries over the dangerous potential of
the net. In February 2001, for example, USA Today
published a widely cited article
claiming that
government officials feared Al Queda was using ste-
ganography, a cryptographic method for concealing
secret information within another message or digital
image, to convey instructions for terrorist attacks and
for posting blueprints of targets on websites, such as
sports
and pornographic bulletin
boards.13 Ralf Bendrath cites Leslie G. Wiser, Jr.s
testimony before the House of Representatives in
August 2001, asserting that terrorist groups are using
the Internet to formulate plans, raise funds, spread
propaganda, and to communicate securely.14

rooms

chat

In the period following the attacks, these themes
crop up regularly in the public media, as, for exam-
ple, in this news report:

13 J. Kelley, Terror Groups Hide Behind Web Encryp-
tion, USA Today (February 6, 2001) discussed in
McCullagh D. (2001), bin Laden: Steganography Mas-
ter? Wired News (February 7, 2001), available at: [http://
www.wired.com/news/print/0,1294,41658,00.html].

14 R. Bendrath, The American Cyber-Angst and the
Real World  Any Link? In Bombs and Bandwidth (2003)
Robert Latham (ed.) (New York: The New Press), pp. 49
73.

Today bin Laden is believed to school his sol-
diers in high-tech tools of communication. E-
mail, online dead drops, satellite phones, cell
phones, encryption and digital camouflage called
steganography ... are all tools of Al Qaeda, bin
Ladens terrorist network. Those high-tech tools
enable members of Al Qaeda to communicate
with terrorist cells (or groups) hidden around the
world.15

Another article reports about Al Qaeda communi-
cation strategy as described by one of its members,
captured by the U.S.:

The Qaeda communications system that Mr. Khan
used and helped operate relied on websites and e-
mail addresses in Turkey, Nigeria and the north-
western tribal areas of Pakistan, according to the
information provided by a Pakistani intelligence
official.
The official said Mr. Khan had told investigators
that couriers carried handwritten messages or
computer disks from senior Qaeda leaders hid-
ing in isolated border areas to hard-line reli-
gious schools in Pakistans Northwest Frontier
Province.
Other couriers then ferried them to Mr. Khan on
the other side of the country in the eastern city of
Lahore, and the computer expert then posted the
messages in code on Web sites or relayed them
electronically, the Pakistani official said.
Mr. Khan had told investigators that most of Al
Qaedas communications were now done through
the Internet, the official said.16

The second and third threat categories, presented as
catastrophic cyber-attacks and debilitating assaults
on critical infrastructure have been aired in dramatic
terms. In the following lengthy quotation from a
January 7, 2000, White House press briefing, moves
to securitize are evident as Chief of Staff John
Podesta, Secretary of Commerce Bill Daley, James
Madison University President Linwood Rose, and
National Coordinator for Security, Infrastructure
Protection and Counter-Terrorism Dick Clarke,
answer questions about computer and network
security.

15 Gaudin, S. The Terrorist Network, NetworkWorld-
[http://

Fusion
www.nwfusion.com/research/2001/1126featside4.html].

2001). Available

(November

26,

at:

16 D. Jehl and D. Rohde, Captured Qaeda Figure Led
Way To Information Behind Warning, The New York
Times, 2004.

68

HELEN NISSENBAUM

the

JOHN PODESTA: And just as in the 1950s when
we were building an economy based on a new
transportation system, a new interstate highway
system and we put guardrails on that transporta-
tion system, were here today to talk about how we
can better protect the information technology and
infrastructure of
information technology
economy  not only for the government, but for the
private sector, as well....
... Its not just computers; its the electric power
grid, its the other things that we learned so much
about during our run-up to Y2K. The banking,
financial industry  increasingly every single sector of
the economy is tied in, linked through e-commerce,
through the use of computer technology, to this kind
of critical infrastructure that has developed over the
course of the 1970s, 1980s and 1990s.

SECRETARY DALEY:  ... no question, we have
a new economy and we have an economy that is
much more dependent, as we enter this next
century, on information technologies. So our
defending of this economy is most important to us...
One of the consequences of leading this e-world is
that we, as I mentioned, are more dependent on
information technologies
in our country, and
therefore were more subject to new and different
kinds of threats.
Q: Whats the biggest threat that youre trying to
guard against? Is it hackers and vandalism? Is it
criminals? Or is it domestic or foreign terrorism?
MR. CLARKE:
I think its all of the above.
Theres a spectrum, from the teenage hacker who
sort of joy rides through cyberspace, up through
industrial espionage, up through fraud and theft.
And up at the far end of the spectrum, to another
country using information warfare against our
infrastructure.
SECRETARY DALEY: This is the first time in
American history that we in the federal govern-
ment, alone, cannot protect our infrastructure. We
cant hire an army or a police force thats large
enough to protect all of Americas cell phones or
pagers or computer networks  not when 95 percent
of these infrastructures are owned and operated by
the private sector.

Picking up on themes of critical dependencies on
information networks, endorsement for moves to
securitize comes not only from government authori-
ties or other representatives of public interests but
from corporate owners of intellectual property. They
have tried, with some success, to hitch their star to the
security wagon by claiming not only that rampant
unauthorized copying and distribution of proprietary

works poses an existential threat to their business but
by presenting their possible demise as a dire threat to
the U.S. economy. They have singled out as the
dangerous activity from which we ought to be
protected: out-of-control peer-to-peer
(p2p) file
sharing.17

The Net itself has been posed as a potential bat-
tlefield for comprehensive attack on the state.18
According to this picture, warfare waged online
through computer viruses, worms, and other malware
could serve an enemys strategic ends by disrupting
access or flow of forces to a sensitive region.19 A
similar notion is embodied in remarks made by Sec-
retary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, at a June 6,
2001, meeting of
the NATO Council, where he
referred to the dangers of attacks from cyberspace.
This rather murky reference, nevertheless, conveys a
sense of cyberspace as potentially an embattled
frontier.20 Imparting a sense of the magnitude and
seriousness of cyber-threats, Curt Weldon, chairman
of the National Security Committees subcommittee
on military research and development
invokes a
powerful national memory: Its not a matter of if
America has an electronic Pearl Harbor, its a matter
of when.21

For those who warn of cyberspace as a staging
ground for aggressive attack on the nation, another
reason not to underestimate the dangers inherent in
the networked information infrastructure is asym-
metry. The Net enables a magnitude of damage

17 For example, the testimony of Jack Valenti, President
and CEO Motion Picture Association of America, before
the SubCommittee on Courts, the Internet, and Intellectual
Property Committee on the Judiciary U.S. House of Rep-
resentatives, International Copyright Piracy: Links to Or-
ganized Crime and Terrorism (March 13, 2003) available
at: [http://www.house.gov/judiciary/valenti031303.htm].

18 An official rendering of threats and vulnerabilities in
the context of national security concerns can be seen in The
National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace, February 2003, a
report by President George W. Bushs Critical Infrastruc-
ture Protection Board (headed by Richard A. Clarke),
especially the chapter, Cyberspace Threats and Vulnera-
bilities: A Case for Action.

19 R. Bendrath. The American Cyber-Angst and the
Real WorldAny Link? In R. Latham, editor, Bombs and
Bandwidth, p.56. New York, The New Press, 2003, quoting
Admiral Thomas R. Wilsons comments during a hearing
of Senate Select Committee on Intelligence, February 2001.
20 R. Bendrath. The American Cyber-Angst and the
Real WorldAny Link? In R. Latham, editor, Bombs and
Bandwidth, p. 57. The New Press, New York, 2003.

21 K. Mitnick.
(London), 1999.

Hacker in Shackles, The Guardian

WHERE COMPUTER SECURITY MEETS NATIONAL SECURITY

69

from malevolent

hugely disproportional
to the size and relative
strength  measured in conventional terms  of an
attacker. Experience has shown that even a single,
not especially skilled attacker can cause considerable
inconvenience, if not outright damage. This means
that the U.S. must guard against the usual array of
world powers, as well as all adversaries with sufficient
technical know-how. In official statements about
cyber-security adversaries of many types are men-
tioned,
teenagers, common or
organized criminals and terrorists, to hostile nations.
According to Bendrath, successive U.S. administra-
tions under Bill Clinton and George W. Bush have
cycled through opinions over the source of greatest
concern, whether organized criminals, terrorists, or
hostile states. For a country like the U.S., which is in
a position to draw confidence from its size and
strength, the notion of a small but disproportion-
ately destructive asymmetric threat, challenges
national security orthodoxy and deepens collective
worry.

Contrasts

computer

The point of the discussion so far has been to educe
contrasts in the conceptions of security informing
security and cyber-security,
technical
respectively. Above, I claimed that
the contrast
went beyond that of scope. One is to be found in
the degree of severity and nature of the threats. The
former acknowledges a broader variation in both
degree of harm and the type of harm,
including
damage to property, incursions on autonomy, pri-
vacy, and productivity. The latter,
in securitizing
threats, assumes the threats to be dire, and possibly
existential. A second contrast is in the prototypical
referent object. The former seeks security primarily
for individual nodes (people, agents,
institutions)
the latter focuses on collective security (state or
nation). A third contrast can be found in the
sources of moral force, that is in the justifications
each offers for actions taken in the name of secu-
rity.

The practical importance of securitization

Asked another way, the question about moral force
is about why we should care that two conceptions of
security inform computer security  why the differ-
ence matters. The answer, beyond mere enlighten-
ment, lies in the defensive activities that each of the

conceptions warrants. More will be said below
about
the range of responses to threats recom-
mended by proponents of technical computer secu-
rity  similar in nature to reactions one would
expect to unethical, including criminal, actions. By
contrast,
security, which
informs those who move to securitize online threats,
calls for extraordinary responses; security discourse
not only heightens the salience and priority of des-
ignated threats but bestows legitimacy on a partic-
ular range of reactions.22 As observed by James Der
Derian:

the logic of national

recently,

No other concept in international relations packs
the metaphysical punch, nor commands the dis-
ciplinary power of security. In its name peoples
have alienated their fears, rights and powers to
gods, emperors, and most
sovereign
states, all to protect themselves from the vicissi-
tudes of nature  as well as from other gods,
emperors, and sovereign states.
In its name
weapons of mass destruction have been developed
which transfigured national interest into a secu-
rity dilemma based on a suicide pact. And, less
often noted in IR, in its name billions have been
made and millions killed while scientific knowl-
edge has been furthered and intellectual dissent
muted.23

Similarly Buzan, Waever and de Wilde write, What
is essential (to securitization) is the designation of an
existential threat requiring emergency action or spe-
cial measures and the acceptance of that designation
by a significant audience.24 These special mea-
sures
typically involve bending rules of normal
governance, and as matters of national security they
are lifted  presumably temporarily  outside, or
beyond the bounds of political procedure.25 In the
face of securitized threats and times of national crises,
even liberal democracies accept breaks from busi-

22 H. Lene. The Little Mermaids Silent Security Di-
lemma and the Absence of Gender in the Copenhagen
School, Millennium, 29(2): 285306, 2000.

23 Derian. D.J. The Value of Security: Hobbes, Marx,
Nietzsche, and Baudrillard. In D. Campbell and M. Dillon
(eds.), The Political Subject of Violence. Manchester Uni-
versity Press, Manchester, 1993.

24 B. Buzan, O. Wyer, J.D. Wilde and O. Waever.
Security: A New Framework for Analysis, p. 27. Lynne
Rienner Publishers, Inc., Boulder, 1997.

25 B. Buzan, O. Wyer, J.D. Wilde and O. Waever.
Security: A New Framework for Analysis, especially pp. 23
25. Lynne Rienner Publishers, Inc., Boulder, 1997.

70

HELEN NISSENBAUM

powers

less-restricted

ness-as-usual
including: (1) reduced restraints on
government powers, frequently manifested in the
curtailment of civil liberties. In the USA PATRIOT
Act, for example, some have seen a worrying move to
extend wide-ranging,
of
national security agencies to the domestic realm as
necessary for the fight against terrorism; (2) breaks
from normal democratic procedure, including gov-
ernment secrecy normally not tolerated by citizens
(this, too, has seen in the period following the Sep-
tember 11 attacks.)26 Other breaks occur when, in the
name of security, officials circumvent normal princi-
ples of justice, such as routine use of racial profiling,
officially forbidden in domestic law enforcement;27
(3) steep incremental funding for security agencies
and infrastructures. Although questioned in some
quarters, most public leaders and citizens seem to
accept national defense as having a high (perhaps the
highest) priority claim on collective resources, even
channeling resources away from other valued public
goals.28

Implications for computer security

I began the paper by claiming that distinct concep-
tions of computer security could steer practical
efforts along diverging paths, spelling tension in
future political and technical decision-making. How
this tension will resolve is not clear, though our
survey has illustrated support for both conceptions
in the voices of political leaders, technical experts,
industry lobbyists, heads of security agencies, and

26 For more on the subject of government secrecy, see
Rotenberg M. Privacy and Secrecy after September 11.
In Bombs and Bandwidth (Latham R. ed.) (The New Press,
2003), pp. 132142.

27 The point is derived from Will Kymlika, Justice and
Security in the Accommodation of Minority Nationalism,
Comparing East and West. Draft paper presented at
Princeton University, 2001, especially pp. 1621.

28 For a critical discussion of this practice, see Goodin
(1982), Political Theory and Public Policy, Chicago: The
University of Chicago Press, Chapter 11, The Priority of
Defense.

the media.29 Moves to securitize are clearly evident
but not endorsed by a critical enough mass to out-
weigh competing conceptions.30 In the concluding
sections of the paper, the goal is not to settle the
question which of technical computer security or
cyber-security (and securitization) prevails, or will
prevail in conceptualizing online threat (a great deal
more empirical study would be needed) but briefly
to outline the distinct futures we face if one or other
does.

To map out the possibilities, consider a hypo-
thetical neighborhood that has experienced a sharp
rise in break-ins and household burglaries. Gathered
to discuss security strategies, worried residents are
split between two alternatives. In strategy A, public
funds will fit each household with state-of-the-art
locks, motion-detection systems, and burglar alarms
linked directly to the local police station. Residents
would also subscribe to a neighborhood watch pro-
gram. In strategy B, public law enforcement agencies
will be brought in to install floodlights in all public
spaces, as well as centrally managed networked sur-
veillance cameras fitted with facial recognition sys-
tems. Checkpoints
staffed with private security

29 A similar connection but with motion in the other
direction is pointed out by Birnhak and Elkin-Koren in an
important paper on the ways security concerns have
allowed the state to re-enter governance of the Net by
collaborating with private actors (Birnhack D. M. and El-
kin-Koren N. (2003)),
The Invisible Handshake: The
Reemergence of the State in the Digital Envitonment, 8
Virginia J. of L. & Tech, 6. Attorney General John Ashcroft
stressed the possible dangers to the society as a result of
intellectual property infringement:
Intellectual property
theft is a clear danger to our economy and the health,
safety, and security of the American people. Attorney
General John Ashcroft, Announces Recommendations of
The Justice Departments Intellectual Property Task Force,
October 12, 2004. available at:
[http://www.usdoj.gov/
criminal/cybercrime/AshcroftIPTF.htm].
possible
relation between security and intellectual property theft was
recognized in the task force report itself: ... those who
benefit most from intellectual property theft are criminals,
and alarmingly, criminal organizations with possible ties to
terrorism. See U.S. Department of Justice, Report of the
Department of Justices Task Force on intellectual property,
October 2004, p. 7. available at: [http://www.usdoj.gov/
criminal/cybercrime/IPTaskForceReport.pdf].

The

30 Evidence of disunity comes, for example, from the
Federal District Court in Manhattan ruling in Doe v.
Ashcroft, 334 F. Supp 2d, 471 (2004), striking down, on
constitutional grounds, a section of the USA PATRIOT
Act that would have allowed government security agencies
to subpoena personal information from Internet Service
Providers without having to obtain a court order.

WHERE COMPUTER SECURITY MEETS NATIONAL SECURITY

71

officers as well as, occasionally, police will be posted
at key intersections.31 While common sense tells us
that A and B will both reduce the incidence of crime
in the neighborhood, their designs for doing so are
quite distinct.32

focused on strengthening protections

Applying this case to the context of computers and
information networks, we find strategy A closer to the
heart of technical computer security; it seeks to protect
individuals by fortifying individual (or institutional)
nodes on the network. It is less concerned with iden-
tifying and stopping attackers before they act and
more
for
potential targets of such attacks as may occur. This
approach is similar to recommendations from a
February 2003 report of the Bush administration, The
National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace, which seeks to
reduce weaknesses in protocols and applications that
open end-users to destructive attacks such as viruses
and worms, destructive mini-applications, and denial
of service. Similarly, in a statement to a Subcommittee
of the U.S. Senate, Amit Yoran, Director of the
National Cyber Security Division of the Department
of Homeland Security, recommends a threat-inde-
pendent approach focused on reducing vulnerabili-
ties rather than on identifying and undermining
specific threats.33 His argument, which is compatible
with recommendations of The National Strategy to
Secure Cyberspace, is that limited resources would be
more effectively applied to shoring up vulnerabilities
and known system weaknesses.34 How to reduce vul-
nerability is a technical question which leads us back to
precepts of technical computer security.

Strategy B, with its checkpoints and surveillance,
differs from A in at least two respects: one, in casting all
passers-by within a net of suspicion, the other, in
vesting greater control in the hands of centralized
authorities. These moves are compatible with securi-
tization because, by anticipating dire and imminent
attack, it makes sense to seek to stop it before it occurs.

31 Obviously, these are paradigmatic and designed to
illustrate alternatives at two ends of a spectrum which offers
many variations in between.

32 Discussions with Ed Felten greatly influenced the

conception of this example.

33 Statement by Amit Yoran, Director National Cyber
Security Division Department of Homeland Security, be-
fore the U.S. Senate Committee on the Judiciary Subcom-
mittee on Terrorism, Technology, and Homeland Security,
February 24, 2004.

34 The National Strategy to Secure Cyberspace, Bush
Administration, final draft released February 14, 2003
(Available at: http://www.whitehouse.gov/pcipb/, Novem-
ber 24, 2004).

This is best done by knowing who everyone is and what
they are doing. Technical barricades that prevent
access by all but authorized entities are the online
equivalents of checkpoints. Although authorization
could be tied to qualifying but non-identifying features,
such as reputation and account status, the trend seems
to be toward full identification, for example, in the
energetic embrace of biometric identification, flight
passenger profiling systems, and even road toll systems
in the U.S. such as EZ Pass. Floodlit, biometric-
enhanced video surveillance find parallels online in
mechanisms that monitor and filter information flows
such DCS1000 (previously Carnivore),
intrusion
detection systems monitoring unusual activity, and
regulation to extend the CALEA (Communications
Assistance for Law Enforcement Act) requirement of
ability to tap phone lines to voice-over IP. The USA
PATRIOT Act gives law enforcement and security
personnel greater powers to scrutinize online postings
and communications.35 Also predicted by the model of
securitization are the persistent calls for large increases
in funding for computer security, security research,
and cyber-crime units.36

In the case of the neighborhood, as in the case of
computers and networks, the choice is difficult partly
because it is contingent not only on facts of the
matter, which are not all that well understood, but
also on preferences and values, which are contested.
A neighborhood resident, enthusiastic about the vir-
tues of both A and B, might suggest doing both
(surely theres no such thing as too much security).
The problem with this solution is that even if it were
affordable, it overlooks inherent incompatibilities in
underlying values. In the online context, the incom-
patibilities between the parallels to strategies A and B
are not only so in the dimension of values but also
materially. Technical computer security demands
protection for individuals from a variety of harms
including breaches of confidentiality and anonymity
and a chilling of speech, action, and association.
individual
Strategies of

type B involve scrutiny,

35 E. Lipton and E. Lightblau, Online and Even Near
Home, a New Front Is Opening in the Global Terror
Battle, The New York Times, September 23, 2004, A12.

36 See for example the CIA and National Science
Foundation joint project Approaches to Combat Terror-
ism: Opportunities for Basic Research, aimed at finding
ways to monitor on-line chat rooms. For more information
about this project and additional ones visit EPIC website at:
http://www.epic.org/privacy/wiretap/nsf_release.html. See
also the EFF Analysis of the Cyber Security Enhancement
Act, available at: http://www.eff.org/Privacy/Surveillance/
?f=20020802_eff_csea_analysis.html.

72

HELEN NISSENBAUM

transparency,

accountability,
identifiability
which often are antithetical to the variety of indi-
vidual liberties and self-determined choices protected
in the alternative.

and

The considerations laid out above follow well-
trodden paths in the theory and practice of politics,
which in liberal democracies have resulted in familiar
compromises such as rule-bound procedures for
criminal investigation, prosecution, punishment, and
governance generally. These
extend well
beyond the scope of this paper; our business here is
merely to point out that design specifications for
computer security may embody commitments to one
understanding  technical computer security focused
on the ordinary security of individuals  or another
 cyber-security responding to threats that have been
securitized.

issues

If the securitization of online threats succeeds, the
former might seem too little, too late. But the
extraordinary responses that securitization allows pose
dangers of a different kind. By removing from indi-
viduals the cover of anonymity and confidentiality,
and investing governmental and other authorities
with greater power and discretion over their online
activities, we expose their vulnerability to tyranny of
corrupt officials or simply excessive control of over-
reaching authorities. Strategies of type B work in the
face of dire and urgent threats, among other things, by
suppressing harmful attacks, but they open a popula-
tion to the risk that suppression extends beyond its
target in ways mentioned above. Moves to securitize
should therefore be carefully scrutinized.

Is securitization warranted?

In developing their framework, Buzan and Waever
are preoccupied primarily with the construction of
securitization and not with the question a realist
might ask: when is securitization legitimate, or war-
ranted? They do not altogether ignore this question,
recommending as a general rule that a society
(nation, state, etc.) set a high threshold for accepting
securitizing moves on the grounds that removing
important issues from the realm of public delibera-
tion, and allowing leaders to work outside the con-
straints of
cherished political principles, has
potentially high costs.37 I would like to give their
recommendation greater specificity, perhaps pushing
beyond the boundaries that a constructivist might set.

37 B. Buzan, O. Wyer, J.D. Wilde and O. Waever.
Security: A New Framework for Analysis, discussion on pp.
2930. Lynne Rienner Publishers, Inc., Boulder, 1997.

To answer the question of the warrant of securitiza-
tion, guided by the precepts of the framework and a
skeptical stance, we must set about discovering how
dire, how imminent, how total the presumed threats
are. We should question the appropriateness of the
proposed measures and their proportionality to the
threats.

In the context of computer and online security the
question of how dire and imminent the threats are
calls for data and analysis that is not readily available
to the broader public. One reason for the difficulty is
that although many of the top technical security
experts (computer scientists and engineers) pursue
research into technical vulnerabilities, that is the
possibilities for attack and damage, they do not seem
to have a holistic of picture of their probabilities, the
general incidence, of that actual damage. This calls for
more than technical analytic understanding. Sporadic
stories of attacks in publicly available sources and
even the direct experience by ordinary users are
insufficient for drawing wise conclusions. Certainly,
they do not constitute sufficient basis for choosing
between the models constructed by technical security
and cyber-security, respectively. Those who follow
these issues also learn that much is withheld or simply
not known, and estimates of damage strategically
either wildly exaggerated or understated.

In looking for supporting evidence for one of the
two competing conceptions, a problem beyond the
scarcity of relevant data and analysis is how to
interpret (or read the meaning of) attacks that we do
hear about. A virus attack on the Internet that cor-
rupts thousands of computer systems,
interpreted
within the technical security model, is presented as a
criminal attack against thousands of individuals and
is the business of domestic law enforcement, con-
strained by relevant protocols of investigation, arrest,
and so forth. This same attack, within the cyber-
security model, may be construed as an attack against
the nation, and count as evidence for securitization.
The importance of meaning attributed to an event
was evident in the minutes and hours following the
attacks on the World Trade Center  conceived not as
crimes against the many individuals killed and injured
but as a transgression against the U.S.  not by
particular individuals, but by the terror organizations
and nations constituting the axis of evil. Corporate
owners of intellectual property have been particularly
adept at reading broad meanings into unauthorized
uses and distribution of copyrighted materials, lob-
bying with relative success to pose these activities as
deeply threatening not only to them but the U.S.
economy. Their efforts have paid off in predictable
ways (according to the Copenhagen School), namely
measures
scholars argue are

that many legal

WHERE COMPUTER SECURITY MEETS NATIONAL SECURITY

73

extraordinary, including quite general attacks on P2P
file-sharing, which they pose as a threat to law and
order.38 These lobbies have also successfully achieved
incremental appropriations of government funds for
law enforcement
to stem unauthorized
exchanges, such as a $32 million increase in spending
in 2001 for FBI cyber-crime units and equipment.39
Further, there has been significant ramping up of
punishment regimes.

efforts

Conclusion

This paper has argued that the way we conceptualize
values can influence the shape of technical design and
related public policy. In the research, design, devel-
opment, and regulation of computer security, it is
clear that strong commitments to the underlying value
of security motivates much of its attraction and public
support. But what I have tried to show is that at least
two quite distinct and incompatible conceptions of
security vie for public and expert support, and that
which of the two ultimately dominates will make a
difference for computerized, networked individuals
and societies. How these differences play out through
law, policy, and budget appropriations is important
but this paper has sought particularly to indicate the
potential of the two conceptions for shaping technical
design. The reason for this focus is not that the realm
of system design and development is more important,
but because it is all too often neglected as a site for
resolving political and ethical conflict. Further, once
standards are adopted and constraints and affor-
dances built, technical systems are less tractable than
other forms of policy resolution.40

In laying out some of differences between the two
conceptions of security, I have tried to show what is at

38 Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998 (DMCA),
Pub. L. No. 105304, 112 Stat. 2860, Codified as 17 U.S.C.
12011205; for commentary review see: Litman J. (1994),
The Exclusive Right to Read, 13 Cardozo Arts & Ent. L.
J., 29; Samuelson P. (1999), Intellectual Property And The
Digital Economy: Why The Anti-Circumvention Regula-
tions Need To Be Revised, 14 Berkeley Tech. L. J. 519;
also,
see the legislation: S. 2560, The International
Inducement of Copyright Infringement Act of 2004 (The
INDUCE Act)., presently on hold.

39 House Gives Final Approval to FY 2002 Commerce,
Justice, State and Judiciary Spending Bill, CJIS Group
News (November 14, 2001) available at: [http://www.cjis-
group.com/aboutCJIS/newsBudget111401.cfm]

40 L. Winner. Do Artifacts Have Politics? The Whale and
the Reactor: A Search for Limits in an Age of High Tech-
nology. University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1986.

stake in the selection of one over the other. If those
who subscribe to a conception of security as cyber-
security are right, particularly if the magnitude of
threat is as great as those on the extremes claim, then
an extraordinary response (strategy B in the hypo-
thetical neighborhood) is warranted despite its chill-
ing effects. In the context of airports, we seem to have
accepted such conditions: virtually ubiquitous infor-
mational and visual surveillance with highly con-
trolled patterns of movement.41 Presumably, nuclear
power plants and high-security prisons limit freedom
of action in similar ways, and justifiably so.

I am inclined to resist a move to frame computers
and networked information and communications
systems in these ways, as so dangerous that they
warrant extraordinary treatment of this kind. This
inclination has less to do with efficacy than purpose.
As long as we value our networked information
infrastructure for its contribution to public commu-
nication, community, political organization, associa-
tion, production and distribution of information and
artistic creation, its security is best pursued under the
conception I called technical computer security.
Just as the residents of our hypothetical neighbor-
hood might agree that improvements in safety would
be greater with strategy B, they may nevertheless
choose A because they prefer the type of neighbor-
hood that would follow as a result. Similarly, secu-
ritization might makes the Net safer but at the
expense of its core purpose as a realm of public
exchange. It makes no sense to make security the
paramount value when this essential purpose is
undermined. Aquinas recognizes this point when he
advises, Hence a captain does not intend as a last
end, the preservation of the ship entrusted to him,
since a ship is ordained to something else as its end,
viz. to navigation;42 or in Goodins paraphrase,
...if the highest aim of the captain were to preserve
his ship, he would keep it in port forever.43

41 See for example the attempt to create passenger pro-
filing as part of the Secure Flight passenger prescreening
program. The Transportation Security Administration has
ordered airlines to turn over a months worth of passenger
data, which will allow the creation of passenger profiling.
For more information about this step and the attempt to
prevent such profiling in the name of privacy right, visit the
Electronic Privacy Information Center (EPIC) website,
available at:
[http://www.epic.org/privacy/airtravel/profil-
ing.html].

42 Aquinas, Summa Theologica, Part I of II, Question 2,

Article 5.

43 Robert, G. Political Theory and Public Policy, p. 233.

The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1982.

