Examining	  the	  Recent	  Pause	  in	  Global	  Warming	  

	  Global	  surface	  temperatures	  have	  warmed	  more	  slowly	  over	  the	  past	  decade	  than	  
previously	  expected.	  The	  media	  has	  seized	  this	  warming	  pause	  in	  recent	  weeks,	  and	  
the	  UKs	  Met	  Office	  released	  a	  three-part	  series	  of	  white	  papers	  looking	  at	  the	  causes	  
and	  implications.	  While	  there	  is	  still	  no	  definitive	  cause	  identified,	  some	  researchers	  
point	  to	  a	  combination	  of	  more	  heat	  going	  into	  the	  deep	  oceans	  and	  downturns	  in	  
multi-decadal	  cycles	  in	  global	  temperature	  as	  the	  primary	  drivers	  of	  the	  pause.	  
Others	  argue	  that	  a	  plethora	  of	  recent	  small	  volcanoes,	  changes	  in	  stratospheric	  
water	  vapor,	  and	  a	  downturn	  in	  solar	  energy	  reaching	  the	  earth	  may	  also	  be	  
contributing	  to	  the	  plateau.	  While	  few	  expect	  the	  pause	  to	  persist	  much	  longer,	  it	  
has	  raised	  some	  questions	  about	  the	  growing	  divergence	  between	  observed	  
temperatures	  and	  those	  predicted	  by	  climate	  models.	  
	  To	  understand	  the	  pause	  in	  warming	  requires	  understanding	  the	  different	  ways	  we	  
can	  measure	  global	  temperature.	  These	  include	  measurements	  taken	  from	  land-
based	  temperature	  stations	  (mostly	  using	  mercury	  thermometers),	  ocean	  buoys,	  
ships,	  satellites,	  and	  weather	  balloons.	  
	  The	  most	  common	  estimate	  of	  global	  temperatures	  comes	  from	  a	  combination	  of	  
land	  temperature	  stations	  with	  sea	  surface	  temperature	  data	  from	  ships	  and	  buoys.	  
There	  are	  three	  main	  global	  land/ocean	  surface	  temperature	  series,	  produced	  by	  
NOAAs	  National	  Climate	  Data	  Center	  (NCDC),	  NASAs	  Goddard	  Institute	  for	  Space	  
Studies	  (GISTemp),	  and	  the	  UKs	  Hadley	  Center	  (HadCRUT).	  
	  

Land/Ocean	  Temperatures	  

	  
As	  shown	  in	  the	  figure	  above,	  all	  three	  series	  agree	  quite	  well	  on	  global	  
temperatures.	  The	  dashed	  grey	  line	  shows	  the	  trend	  in	  temperatures	  since	  2001,	  
while	  the	  dashed	  black	  line	  shows	  the	  long-term	  trend	  since	  1970.	  While	  the	  rise	  in	  
global	  temperatures	  has	  slowed	  in	  recent	  years,	  it	  is	  not	  obviously	  divergent	  from	  
the	  underlying	  long-term	  trend.	  On	  the	  other	  hand,	  periods	  with	  similar	  
temperature	  stagnation	  were	  often	  associated	  with	  a	  major	  volcano	  (e.g.	  Pinatubo	  in	  
1992	  or	  El	  Chichon	  in	  1982),	  though	  the	  attribution	  is	  not	  clear-cut.	  
	  Land	  and	  ocean	  temperatures	  have	  diverged	  notably	  in	  recent	  years.	  Ocean	  
temperatures	  generally	  rise	  more	  slowly	  than	  land	  temperatures,	  due	  to	  the	  large	  
thermal	  inertia	  of	  the	  oceans.	  Since	  2001,	  land	  temperatures	  have	  continued	  to	  rise,	  
albeit	  slightly	  more	  slowly	  than	  in	  prior	  years.	  

Land	  Temperatures	  Only	  

	  
	  Here	  again	  the	  dashed	  grey	  line	  shows	  the	  trend	  since	  2001,	  while	  the	  dashed	  black	  
line	  shows	  the	  trend	  over	  the	  whole	  period.	  The	  major	  land	  series	  used	  are	  
CRUTEM4	  (the	  land	  component	  of	  HadCRUT4),	  NCDC,	  GISTemp,	  and	  Berkeley	  Earth.	  
	  The	  majority	  of	  the	  decline	  in	  global	  surface	  temperatures	  in	  recent	  years	  has	  been	  
concentrated	  in	  the	  oceans.	  The	  figure	  below	  shows	  two	  of	  the	  major	  sea	  surface	  
temperature	  records:	  HadSST3	  from	  the	  Hadley	  Center	  and	  NCDCs	  ERSST	  series.	  

Ocean	  Surface	  Temperatures	  Only	  

Lower	  Tropospheric	  Temperatures	  

	  
	  Ocean	  temperatures	  have	  cooled	  slightly	  in	  recent	  years,	  after	  a	  large	  jump	  upwards	  
in	  2000/2001.	  
	  Global	  temperatures	  can	  also	  be	  estimated	  based	  on	  data	  from	  satellites	  in	  orbit.	  
These	  use	  instruments	  to	  measure	  radiance	  from	  the	  earth	  to	  determine	  
temperature,	  and	  tend	  to	  have	  quite	  good	  spatial	  coverage	  of	  the	  earth	  (excluding	  
some	  high-latitude	  regions).	  While	  there	  is	  still	  some	  uncertainty	  regarding	  how	  to	  
best	  correct	  for	  issues	  like	  orbital	  drift	  and	  transitions	  to	  different	  satellites,	  
satellite-based	  records	  now	  fairly	  closely	  mirror	  surface-based	  records,	  albeit	  with	  
slightly	  lower	  trends.	  The	  discrepancy	  between	  satellite	  and	  surface	  trends	  is	  an	  
outstanding	  issue	  that	  still	  needs	  to	  be	  resolved.	  

	  

Deep	  Ocean	  Temperatures	  

	  Satellite	  records	  show	  some	  stagnation	  of	  temperatures	  in	  recent	  years,	  somewhere	  
between	  the	  land	  and	  ocean	  surface	  records.	  	  
	  In	  recent	  years,	  a	  global	  network	  of	  automated	  buoys	  have	  given	  us	  a	  much	  better	  
picture	  of	  what	  is	  going	  on	  below	  the	  surface	  in	  the	  ocean.	  These	  buoys	  
automatically	  dive	  deep	  down	  into	  the	  ocean	  every	  day,	  taking	  temperature	  
measurements	  as	  they	  slowly	  rise	  and	  transmitting	  them	  back	  to	  a	  central	  database	  
via	  satellite.	  The	  figure	  below,	  via	  Argo,	  shows	  the	  location	  of	  buoys	  currently	  active	  
in	  the	  worlds	  oceans.	  
	  

	  
	  While	  measurements	  of	  deep	  ocean	  temperatures	  existed	  further	  back	  in	  the	  past,	  
they	  were	  taken	  in	  much	  more	  limited	  locations	  as	  Argo	  buoys	  were	  not	  widely	  
deployed	  until	  after	  1999.	  However,	  scientists	  have	  still	  been	  able	  to	  use	  more	  
limited	  data	  to	  reconstruct	  temperatures	  down	  to	  2000	  meters	  much	  further	  back	  in	  
time,	  as	  shown	  in	  the	  figure	  below.	  

	  

	  Total	  ocean	  heat	  content	  has	  increased	  by	  around	  200	  zettajoules	  since	  1970,	  and	  
about	  255	  zettajoules	  since	  1955.	  This	  has	  caused	  the	  oceans	  (0-2000	  meters)	  to	  
warm	  about	  0.09	  C	  over	  this	  period.	  As	  the	  UKs	  Met	  Office	  points	  out,	  if	  the	  same	  
amount	  of	  energy	  went	  into	  the	  lower	  atmosphere	  it	  would	  have	  caused	  about	  36	  C	  
warming!	  The	  oceans	  are	  by	  far	  the	  largest	  heat	  sink	  for	  the	  earth	  and	  absorb	  the	  
vast	  majority	  of	  extra	  heat	  trapped	  in	  the	  system	  by	  increasing	  concentrations	  of	  
greenhouse	  gases.	  
	  It	  is	  interesting	  to	  note	  that	  overall	  deep	  ocean	  heating	  (0-2000	  meters)	  shows	  no	  
sign	  of	  a	  slow	  down	  in	  recent	  years,	  though	  shallower	  layers	  (0-300	  meters	  and	  0-
700	  meters)	  do.	  The	  fact	  that	  the	  slowdown	  in	  surface	  warming	  has	  been	  
concentrated	  in	  the	  ocean	  surface	  temperatures	  (and	  not	  in	  land	  temperatures)	  has	  
led	  a	  number	  of	  scientists	  to	  posit	  that	  the	  pause	  in	  ocean	  surface	  warming	  may	  be	  
driven	  in	  part	  by	  increased	  heat	  uptake	  in	  the	  deep	  ocean.	  Some	  research	  has	  

Multi-Decadal	  Cycles	  

suggested	  that	  El	  Nino-related	  changes	  in	  trade	  winds	  are	  a	  possible	  mechanism	  
driving	  changes	  in	  deep	  ocean	  heat	  uptake	  through	  greater	  boundary	  layer	  mixing.	  
	  
	  There	  are	  a	  number	  of	  inter-decadal	  and	  multi-decadal	  cyclical	  patterns	  observable	  
in	  the	  climate	  system,	  particularly	  in	  ocean	  surface	  temperatures.	  These	  include	  the	  
Atlantic	  Multidecadal	  Oscillation	  (AMO)	  and	  the	  Pacific	  Decadal	  Oscillation	  (PDO),	  
which	  operate	  over	  a	  period	  of	  a	  few	  decades,	  and	  El	  Nino	  Southern	  Oscillation	  
(ENSO),	  which	  has	  a	  period	  of	  three	  to	  seven	  years.	  While	  ENSO	  tends	  to	  average	  out	  
over	  periods	  of	  more	  than	  a	  decade,	  the	  AMO	  and	  PDO	  can	  both	  potentially	  impact	  
the	  climate	  over	  longer	  periods	  of	  time.	  	  

	  

	  

The	  AMO	  is	  generally	  calculated	  by	  subtracting	  out	  the	  linear	  trend	  from	  1880	  to	  
present	  in	  North	  Atlantic	  sea	  surface	  temperatures.	  This	  approach	  isnt	  perfect,	  and	  
may	  overestimate	  the	  magnitude	  of	  natural	  variability	  in	  recent	  years,	  but	  there	  is	  a	  
clear	  cycle	  present	  in	  the	  North	  Atlantic	  that	  can	  contribute	  to	  variations	  in	  global	  
temperatures.	  The	  Met	  Office,	  for	  example,	  cites	  a	  paper	  arguing	  that	  variations	  in	  
the	  AMO	  can	  change	  global	  temperatures	  by	  around	  0.1	  C.	  A	  paper	  by	  Muller	  et	  al	  
recently	  published	  in	  the	  Journal	  of	  Geophysical	  Research	  (JGR)	  argues	  that	  the	  AMO	  
could	  be	  responsible	  for	  some	  of	  the	  2-15	  year	  variability	  observed	  in	  global	  land	  
temperatures.	  
	  While	  the	  AMO	  has	  not	  changed	  much	  in	  the	  past	  10	  years,	  the	  strong	  increase	  in	  
North	  Atlantic	  temperatures	  between	  1970	  and	  2000	  may	  have	  contributed	  to	  the	  
rapid	  rise	  in	  global	  temperatures	  over	  that	  period,	  and	  the	  leveling	  out	  of	  the	  AMO	  
may	  help	  make	  the	  observed	  pause	  in	  warming	  more	  likely.	  

	  

	  

The	  Pacific	  Decadal	  Oscillation	  (PDO)	  is	  calculated	  rather	  differently	  from	  the	  AMO.	  
The	  PDO	  is	  calculated	  by	  examining	  the	  difference	  in	  temperatures	  of	  the	  northern	  
Pacific	  from	  global	  ocean	  temperatures	  as	  a	  whole,	  to	  isolate	  changes	  specific	  to	  that	  
region.	  This	  approach	  more	  effectively	  removes	  any	  anthropogenic	  signals	  affecting	  
the	  whole	  world	  than	  the	  simple	  linear	  detrending	  used	  in	  calculating	  the	  AMO.	  
	  The	  PDO	  has	  transitioned	  to	  a	  cold	  phase	  around	  the	  year	  2000.	  While	  there	  still	  is	  
quite	  a	  bit	  of	  uncertainty	  surrounding	  the	  effects	  the	  PDO	  on	  the	  earths	  climate,	  the	  
Met	  Office	  argues	  that	  decadal	  variability	  in	  the	  Pacific	  Ocean	  may	  have	  played	  a	  
substantial	  role	  in	  the	  recent	  pause	  in	  global	  surface	  temperature	  rise,	  arguing	  that	  
Global	  Climate	  Models	  (GCMs)	  that	  show	  decadal-scale	  pauses	  in	  surface	  
temperature	  warming	  tend	  to	  exhibit	  sea	  surface	  temperature	  patterns	  similar	  to	  
those	  of	  the	  PDO	  in	  a	  cold	  phase.	  This	  is	  still	  highly	  uncertain,	  however,	  and	  much	  
more	  work	  is	  required	  to	  better	  understand	  the	  role	  that	  multi-decadal	  variability	  in	  
ocean	  temperatures	  plays	  in	  determining	  the	  Earths	  surface	  temperatures.	  
	  
	  The	  sun	  has	  a	  well-known	  (roughly)	  11-year	  cycle	  in	  solar	  output	  that	  can	  have	  an	  
influence	  on	  global	  temperatures,	  though	  most	  solar	  scientists	  consider	  it	  to	  be	  
relatively	  minor.	  Estimates	  of	  the	  difference	  in	  temperatures	  between	  the	  peak	  
(high	  point)	  and	  trough	  (low	  point)	  of	  the	  solar	  cycle	  range	  between	  about	  0.05	  C	  to	  
0.1	  C,	  holding	  everything	  else	  equal.	  If	  solar	  cycles	  hold	  steady,	  this	  wont	  really	  
impact	  trends	  over	  periods	  of	  11	  years,	  as	  the	  peaks	  and	  troughs	  will	  cancel	  out.	  
However,	  the	  most	  recent	  solar	  cycle	  has	  been	  notable	  for	  the	  extended	  trough	  and	  
low	  peak	  (at	  least	  so	  far).	  The	  figure	  below	  shows	  the	  PMOD	  compilation	  of	  solar	  
irradiance	  measurements	  from	  a	  number	  of	  different	  satellites.	  	  
	  

Incoming	  Solar	  Radiation	  

	  

	  The	  most	  recent	  trough	  in	  solar	  activity	  could	  play	  a	  role	  in	  depressing	  short-term	  
trends,	  and	  the	  overall	  decline	  in	  total	  solar	  irradiance	  (TSI)	  in	  recent	  years	  relative	  
to	  past	  solar	  cycles	  may	  be	  a	  small	  contributing	  factor	  in	  the	  decadal-scale	  pause.	  As	  
the	  MET	  Office	  explains,	  There	  is	  no	  doubt	  that	  the	  declining	  phase	  of	  the	  11-year	  
cycle	  of	  total	  solar	  irradiance	  has	  contributed	  to	  a	  reduction	  in	  incoming	  energy	  
over	  the	  first	  decade	  of	  the	  21st	  century,	  but	  still	  not	  enough	  to	  explain	  the	  pause	  in	  
global	  surface	  temperature	  rise.	  On	  the	  other	  hand,	  climate	  models	  using	  up-to-
date	  solar	  forcings	  dont	  show	  noticeably	  lower	  temperatures	  in	  the	  past	  decade,	  
and	  that	  data	  runs	  counter	  to	  the	  idea	  that	  longer-term	  changes	  in	  the	  solar	  cycle	  
are	  playing	  a	  major	  role	  in	  the	  pause.	  Similarly,	  the	  recent	  IPCC	  report	  significantly	  
downgrades	  the	  magnitude	  of	  solar	  forcings	  and	  results	  presented	  in	  Rhode	  et	  al	  
(2013)	  suggest	  that	  changes	  in	  solar	  forcings	  have	  a	  nearly	  negligible	  effect	  on	  
climate.	  

Stratospheric	  Water	  Vapor	  

	  Water	  vapor	  in	  the	  upper	  atmosphere	  plays	  an	  important	  role	  in	  the	  earths	  climate.	  
The	  figure	  below,	  from	  a	  paper	  in	  Science	  by	  Susan	  Soloman	  and	  her	  colleagues	  
shows	  a	  notable	  decline	  in	  stratospheric	  (high	  atmosphere)	  water	  vapor	  after	  the	  
year	  2000.	  They	  argue	  that	  this	  very	  likely	  made	  substantial	  contributions	  to	  the	  
flattening	  of	  the	  global	  warming	  trend	  since	  about	  2000	  and	  that	  temperatures	  
between	  2000-2009	  would	  have	  warmed	  about	  25	  percent	  faster	  if	  stratospheric	  
water	  vapor	  had	  remained	  constant.	  The	  figure	  below	  shows	  various	  different	  
estimates	  of	  stratospheric	  water	  vapor	  content,	  with	  the	  pre-	  and	  post-2001	  periods	  
highlighted.	  
	  

	  

	  Soloman	  et	  al	  argue	  that	  El	  Nino	  has	  been	  one	  of	  the	  drivers	  of	  changes	  in	  
stratospheric	  water	  vapor,	  noting	  that	  The	  drop	  in	  stratospheric	  water	  vapor	  
observed	  after	  2001	  has	  been	  correlated	  to	  sea	  surface	  temperature	  (SST)	  increases	  
in	  the	  vicinity	  of	  the	  tropical	  warm	  pool	  which	  are	  related	  to	  the	  El	  Nino	  Southern	  
Oscillation	  (ENSO).	  	  
	  That	  said,	  the	  models	  that	  Soloman	  et	  al	  use	  still	  show	  significant	  warming	  over	  the	  
past	  decade	  even	  when	  stratospheric	  water	  vapor	  is	  declining	  (they	  give	  a	  rise	  of	  
0.10	  C	  instead	  of	  0.14	  C,	  a	  0.04C	  difference).	  Based	  on	  these	  results,	  declining	  
stratospheric	  water	  vapor	  would	  only	  account	  for	  about	  a	  quarter	  of	  the	  pause	  in	  
warming.	  They	  also	  point	  out	  that	  an	  increase	  in	  stratospheric	  water	  vapor	  during	  
the	  1990s	  may	  have	  led	  to	  about	  30	  percent	  more	  warming	  during	  that	  decade	  than	  
would	  have	  otherwise	  occurred.	  The	  error	  bars	  are	  also	  fairly	  wide	  on	  the	  
measurements	  of	  stratospheric	  water	  vapor,	  which	  makes	  precise	  attribution	  
difficult.	  

Small	  Volcanic	  Eruptions	  

	  Stratospheric	  aerosolssmall	  air-borne	  particles	  in	  the	  upper	  atmosphereplay	  an	  
important	  role	  in	  the	  earths	  climate.	  By	  scattering	  incoming	  solar	  radiation,	  they	  
can	  significantly	  cool	  the	  earth.	  Historically,	  much	  of	  the	  study	  of	  stratospheric	  
aerosols	  has	  focused	  on	  with	  large	  volcanic	  eruptions,	  which	  inject	  large	  amounts	  of	  
sulfur	  dioxide	  into	  the	  stratosphere.	  	  
	  A	  recent	  paper	  by	  Ryan	  Neely	  and	  coauthors	  argues	  that	  multiple	  small	  volcanoes	  
can	  also	  have	  a	  notable	  impact	  on	  stratospheric	  aerosols.	  They	  point	  out	  that	  "recent	  
studies	  using	  ground-based	  lidar	  and	  satellite	  instruments	  document	  an	  increase	  in	  
stratospheric	  aerosol	  of	  410%	  per	  year	  from	  2000	  to	  2010"	  and	  argue	  that	  "as	  
much	  as	  25%	  of	  the	  radiative	  forcing	  driving	  global	  climate	  change	  from	  2000	  to	  
2010	  may	  have	  been	  counterbalanced	  by	  the	  increases	  in	  stratospheric	  aerosol	  
loading	  over	  this	  period."	  They	  examine	  various	  potential	  causes	  of	  aerosol	  
increases	  and	  identify	  a	  number	  of	  small	  volcanoes	  over	  the	  last	  decade	  as	  the	  most	  
plausible	  source.	  
	  The	  MET	  Office	  downplays	  these	  results	  in	  their	  report,	  arguing	  that	  the	  effect	  
would	  only	  be	  around	  -0.02	  C	  to	  -0.03	  C	  during	  the	  2008-2012	  period	  and	  will	  not	  
be	  detectable	  above	  climate	  variability.	  This	  relies	  on	  an	  analysis	  that	  has	  been	  
submitted	  for	  publication	  but	  not	  yet	  published,	  however,	  and	  may	  be	  subject	  to	  
revision	  in	  the	  course	  of	  the	  peer	  review	  process.	  
	  While	  it	  is	  difficult	  to	  distinguish	  the	  recent	  pause	  in	  global	  surface	  temperatures	  
from	  the	  underlying	  long-term	  trend,	  the	  pause	  stands	  out	  much	  more	  vividly	  when	  
compared	  to	  projections	  from	  the	  latest	  set	  of	  GCMs.	  These	  models	  predict	  warming	  
of	  around	  0.2	  C	  per	  decade	  from	  2000	  to	  present	  on	  average.	  	  
	  

Climate	  Models	  and	  Observations	  

	  
The	  figure	  above	  compares	  the	  three	  major	  global	  land/ocean	  temperature	  records	  
to	  105	  unique	  runs	  involving	  42	  different	  GCMs	  used	  in	  the	  upcoming	  IPCC	  report.	  It	  
shows	  the	  two-sigma	  (95th	  percent)	  confidence	  intervals	  as	  dashed	  back	  lines,	  with	  
the	  solid	  black	  line	  representing	  the	  average	  of	  all	  models.	  The	  dark	  gray	  area	  
represents	  the	  shorter	  term	  (less	  than	  30	  year)	  weather	  noise	  in	  the	  models,	  while	  
the	  light	  gray	  area	  represents	  longer-term	  model	  uncertainty	  due	  to	  different	  
physics,	  sensitivity,	  and	  other	  structural	  differences	  in	  the	  models.	  
	  While	  surface	  temperatures	  have	  generally	  remained	  fairly	  close	  to	  the	  multi-model	  
mean	  in	  the	  past,	  the	  recent	  pause	  threatens	  to	  cause	  surface	  temperatures	  to	  fall	  
outside	  the	  confidence	  interval	  of	  models	  in	  the	  next	  few	  years	  if	  temperatures	  do	  
not	  rise.	  	  
	  

	  The	  pause	  also	  stands	  out	  sharply	  if	  one	  looks	  at	  the	  full	  range	  of	  model	  projections,	  
from	  1880	  to	  2100.	  However,	  its	  important	  to	  remember	  that	  all	  models	  are	  not	  
created	  equal.	  Some	  will	  necessarily	  have	  more	  realistic	  parameters,	  better	  physical	  
models,	  higher	  resolutions,	  etc.	  Simply	  averaging	  all	  the	  models	  together	  may	  not	  
provide	  an	  accurate	  picture	  of	  variations	  in	  individual	  model	  performance.	  

	  

	  

	  The	  figure	  above	  shows	  all	  105	  model	  runs,	  and	  reveals	  significant	  differentiation	  
among	  models.	  Generally	  speaking,	  models	  that	  are	  more	  consistent	  with	  recent	  
temperatures	  tend	  to	  have	  slightly	  lower	  climate	  sensitivity	  than	  those	  that	  predict	  
higher	  temperatures	  over	  the	  past	  few	  decades.	  A	  recent	  paper	  in	  Environmental	  
Resource	  Letters	  used	  recent	  observations	  to	  argue	  that	  some	  of	  the	  highest	  
sensitivity	  models	  may	  be	  inconsistent	  with	  the	  observational	  record.	  
	  There	  have	  been	  a	  number	  of	  new	  papers	  that	  use	  recent	  atmospheric,	  ocean,	  and	  
surface	  temperature	  observations	  to	  argue	  that	  climate	  sensitivity	  may	  be	  lower	  
than	  previously	  estimated	  (e.g.	  closer	  to	  2	  C	  than	  4	  C).	  These	  studies	  tend	  to	  be	  
rather	  sensitive	  to	  the	  time	  period	  chosen,	  and	  a	  future	  warm	  decade	  could	  
considerably	  change	  the	  picture.	  As	  with	  many	  things	  in	  science,	  there	  is	  still	  
significant	  uncertainty	  surrounding	  climate	  sensitivity,	  and	  different	  approaches	  
can	  obtain	  fairly	  different	  results.	  However,	  the	  longer	  the	  pause	  continues	  the	  more	  

people	  will	  begin	  to	  question	  whether	  GCMs	  are	  getting	  either	  multi-decadal	  
variability	  or	  climate	  sensitivity	  wrong.	  What	  is	  clear	  is	  that	  there	  is	  still	  much	  we	  
dont	  understand	  about	  the	  many	  different	  factors	  impacting	  the	  Earths	  climate	  
system,	  especially	  over	  periods	  as	  short	  as	  a	  decade.	  	  

