All Exede 5 and Exede 12 Internet Plans and Promotions 
One-time standard installation fee may be charged at the time of sale.  Minimum 24-month 
service term.  Monthly service fees and taxes apply.  Equipment lease fee is $9.99 per month, 
$199.99 if prepaid for 24 months, or $299.99 if prepaid for the life of the equipment.  
Equipment must be returned upon cancellation of service, otherwise an unreturned equipment 
fee will apply.  Non-standard installations may result in additional charges.  Speeds are up to, 
are not guaranteed and will vary.  Service is for residential and non-commercial use only.  Exede 
Classic, Essential 10, Evolution and Liberty plans are subject to data transmission limits 
measured on a monthly basis.  For full details, see the Data Allowance Policy here. Exede 
Freedom plan is subject to Bandwidth Usage Policy at 
http://www.exede.com/documents/master/bandwidth-usage-policy.pdf.  After 12-month 
promotional period, $2.99 per month fee for anti-virus software.  Service is not available in all 
areas and requires a clear view of the southern sky. The performance of some games over the 
internet is very poor and some games may not work at all. Use of the Exede Internet service on 
multiple devices requires a wireless router. Virtual private networks (VPNs) and remote 
computer access may be very slow with Exede.  Some VPNs may not work at all. All offers may 
be changed or withdrawn at any time. Exede is a registered service mark of ViaSat, Inc. 
 
Liberty Plans 
Liberty plan customers who use more Priority Data than their Liberty plan provides will receive 
Liberty Pass for the remainder of their monthly billing period.  Liberty Pass speeds are slower 
than Priority Data speeds and will vary greatly based on the time of day and network traffic in 
your area.  Liberty Pass speeds may be extremely slow when the network is busy, which may 
greatly impair internet usage.  Heavier users of Liberty Pass may experience slower speeds than 
lighter users.  See Data Allowance Policy for details. 
 
Exede Evolution Plans 
Accessing web pages and email will generally not count toward the monthly data allowance of 
Exede Evolution customers.  All other internet usage will count toward the data allowance, 
including any internet activity embedded in web pages or email, streaming video or audio 
media, playing online games, uploading or downloading files on a browser through any third-
party application, third-party applications, data (including web pages or email) transferred 
through a virtual private network (VPN) or other forms of remote access, voice or video 
chatting, and sending or receiving emails with attachments greater than 25 MB. 
 
Boost 25 Plans 
Boost 25 only applies to data used within a customers data allowance or other data threshold.  
Boost 25 does not apply when Liberty Plan customers are using Liberty Pass, when Freedom 
Plan customers have used in excess of 150 GB of monthly data, or when Evolution Plan 
customers are accessing web pages and email after such customers use their monthly data 
allowance.  
 
 
 

Data Usage Examples for Exede Evolution Plan 
Examples of data consumption for individual activities under the Exede Evolution plan are 
estimates only and are based on the following assumptions: (1) the average bit rate for 
streaming standard definition video is 1 Mbps; (2) the average bit rate for streaming music is 
128 kbps; (3) the average song download is 4 MB; and (4) the average photo download is 2 MB.  
Depending on the content accessed, the distributor of the content, your network 
configurations, your computer settings and your browser settings, the amount of internet 
activity you may engage in within the Exede Evolution data allowance will vary.   
 
Freedom Plan 
Freedom Plan customers who use greater than 150 GB of data during their monthly billing 
period will experience reduced speeds until the end of their monthly billing period, and may be 
asked to reduce their monthly usage below 150 GB or transition to another service plan.  If 
customer does neither, ViaSat may terminate customers service.  See Bandwidth Usage Policy 
for details.  
 
Exede EasyCare 
Exede EasyCare is $5.99 per month.  For new Internet customers who purchase EasyCare, the 
monthly charge is waived for the first 90 days of service.   If a customer cancels EasyCare within 
90 days after purchase, the customer may be charged the standard rate that would have been 
applicable for each service call made at the customers service address during that 90-day 
period.  Re-enrollment in EasyCare may be restricted for up to 180 days after cancellation.  
Additional terms and conditions applicable to EasyCare are set forth in the Exede EasyCare Plan 
Addendum to the Customer Agreement available at www.exede.com/legal.  
 
Plan Price Reduction Promotions 
Upon the expiration of a promotional period, the plan price will increase to the standard non-
promotional price.   
 
Free Standard Installation Fee Promotion for Exede Internet 
Free standard installation fee promotion available only to new Exede12 customers in limited 
areas who order service during the promotion period.  One-time standard installation fee of 
$99.99 will be credited via an instant rebate of $99.99, which will be reflected on the 
customers first bill. 
 
Three-Year Price Lock Guarantee for Exede Internet 
The price lock guarantee applies only to the standard monthly internet service fee and the 
monthly equipment lease fee (in each case, before any promotional discounts) and excludes all 
taxes and surcharges.  The price lock guarantee runs for 36 consecutive months from the date 
of account activation, requires that the customers account remain in good standing, and may 
terminate with certain account changes.   
 
 
 

 

2 

Late Night Free Zone 
The Late Night Free Zone provides for unmetered uploads and downloads to customers on a 
Classic Exede plan from midnight to 5:00 a.m. customer local time every day of the week.  If you 
have already used your monthly data allowance, you may still use the Late Night Free Zone at 
regular speeds.  The Late Night Free Zone is not available to customers on the Hibernation plan 
(formerly the Vacation/Seasonal Suspend plan), the Freedom Plan, or the Liberty Plans. 
 
Early Bird Free Zone 
The Early Bird Free Zone provides for unmetered uploads and downloads to customers on the 
Essential 10 plan and the Evolution plans from 3:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. customer local time every 
day of the week.  If you have already used your monthly data allowance, you may still use the 
Early Bird Free Zone at regular speeds.  The Early Bird Free Zone is not available to customers 
on the Hibernation plan (formerly the Vacation/Seasonal Suspend Plan), the Freedom Plan, or 
the Liberty Plans.  
 
DIRECTV Bundle Promotion  
The DIRECTV bundle offer purchased directly through ViaSat or DIRECTV and not through 
ViaSats Dealer channel is available only to customers who have not had DIRECTV service during 
the previous 24 months, who otherwise qualify to receive DIRECTV service and who are new 
Exede Internet customers.  You must agree to separate 24-month service agreements to 
receive both DIRECTV and Exede Internet service. To receive the $10 monthly Exede Internet 
discount for the first 12 months of your service term, you must remain a DIRECTV customer 
during this time period. Prices are for Internet service only.  
 
DIRECTV Service   
Service provided by DIRECTV. 24-MONTH DIRECTV AGREEMENT.  EARLY CANCELLATION WILL 
RESULT IN A FEE OF $20/MONTH FOR EACH REMAINING MONTH.  Must maintain 24 
consecutive months of any DIRECTV programming package ($29.99/month or above) or any 
qualifying international service bundle.  NON-ACTIVATION CHARGE OF $150 PER RECEIVER MAY 
APPLY.  ALL EQUIPMENT IS LEASED AND MUST BE RETURNED TO DIRECTV UPON 
CANCELLATION, OR UNRETURNED EQUIPMENT FEES APPLY.  VISIT directv.com OR CALL 1-800-
DIRECTV FOR DETAILS.  Receipt of DIRECTV programming subject to DIRECTV Customer 
Agreement; copy provided at directv.com/legal and in order confirmation.  DIRECTV and the 
Cyclone Design logo are registered trademarks of DIRECTV, LLC.  
 
Exede Voice Service  
Available only as an add-on service for Exede12 customers (and certain Recovery Act 
customers) in Exede12 service areas, excluding Alaska and Hawaii.  Minimum 6-month service 
term.  Additional charges for calls to destinations outside of the 50 United States, the District of 
Columbia and Canada and for directory assistance calls. Billing for Exede Voice for existing 
Exede Internet customers commences five days after the date Exede Voice is ordered and for 
new Exede Internet customers five days after the date internet service is installed, even if the 
customer does not activate the Exede Voice equipment. Monthly service fee is $29.99 and is 
subject to taxes, E911 fees and other regulatory fees and surcharges.  911 service through 

 

3 

Exede Voices satellite technology may be limited in comparison to 911 service available 
through traditional landline telephone carriers.  Exede Voice may not work well with fax 
machines, security systems and other analog data services and devices.  
 
Exede Internet/Exede Voice Bundle Promotion 
New customers in participating sales channels who order Exede Voice at the same time they 
order Exede Internet will receive a savings of $10 per month on their Exede Internet bill for the 
first 12 full months of services provided they continue to receive both services. Existing Exede 
Internet customers in participating sales channels who add Exede Voice service will receive a 
savings of $10 per month on their Exede Voice service for the first six months of Exede Voice 
service provided they continue to receive both services. 

 

Rev. February 1, 2016 
 

 

 

 

 

4 

