Insights on  
governance, risk  
and compliance 

October 2014

Get ahead of cybercrime
EYs Global Information  
Security Survey 2014

Contents

Welcome 

The cyber threat landscape 

Get ahead of cybercrime   
focus on the three As  

Activate 
Adapt 
Anticipate 

One organization, three stories 

Summary 

Survey methodology 

1

2

6

8
14
20

29 

30

34

Paul van Kessel
EY Global Risk Leader

Ken Allan
EY Global Cybersecurity 
Leader

Welcome

Welcome to Get ahead of cybercrime.
Anticipating cyber attacks is the only way to be ahead of cyber criminals. Thats our 
message to businesses across the globe today, based on how 1,825 organizations 
responded to our 17th Global Information Security Survey (GISS), which this year 
focuses on how well organizations are managing cyber threats and what they need  
to do if they are to get ahead of todays cyber criminals.
Reports in the media regularly illustrate that cyber threats are increasing in their levels 
of persistence, sophistication and organization: the damage caused by a cyber attack 
can severely impact a business. As we discussed in the GISS 2013 report, even if you 
have not experienced an attack yet, you should assume that your organization will have 
been targeted, or that your security has already been breached. 
In our 2014 survey, we discovered that organizations are making progress on building 
the foundations of cybersecurity  and this progress is important  however, most 
respondents report having only a moderate level of maturity in their foundations. 
There is still a lot to do.
The survey also tells us that more organizations are looking beyond the foundations in 
their approach to cybersecurity. These organizations are adapting their cybersecurity 
measures to changes in their business strategy and operations (for example, a merger, 
acquisition, introduction of a new product, entrance to new markets, implementation  
of new software) and to changes in the external business environment. But we know 
that they also need to change their way of thinking to stop being simply reactive to 
future threats.
Based on the above, we have organized this years survey report to follow the 
cybersecurity journey:
 Activate 
This part of the report covers the foundations of cybersecurity. What is the status  
in 2014 and what are the most important elements that need more attention?
 Adapt 
Next we are going to focus on change. What are organizations doing to adapt their 
cybersecurity measures to the changing requirements? Can those organizations  
better defend themselves as cyber threats change and they integrate more  
advanced technologies?
 Anticipate 
The last part of the report will talk about how leading organizations can reach a state  
of readiness  to be confident in their assessment of risks and threats and prepared  
for what is coming. In other words: how to anticipate and get ahead of cybercrime.
By undertaking this journey, organizations will transform themselves from being an 
easy target into something more formidable. Eventually, they will  for the first time  
be truly prepared for attacks. 
We would like to extend a personal note of thanks to all of our survey participants.  
We appreciate the time they took to share their experiences with us. We welcome  
your reactions to this report.
Every organization is at risk of a cyber attack, so let us continue this discussion together. 

Paul van Kessel
EY Global Risk Leader 
paul.van.kessel@nl.ey.com 

Ken Allan
EY Global Cybersecurity Leader 
kallan@uk.ey.com 

Get ahead of cybercrime | EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014 | 1

The cyber threat landscape

The disappearing perimeter
Cyber threats will continue to multiply. The advent of the digital world, and the inherent 
interconnectivity of people, devices and organizations, opens up a whole new playing 
field of vulnerabilities. In our Global Information Security Surveys of 2012 (Fighting to 
close the gap) and 2013 (Under Cyber Attack) we described this trend. 
The short summary below highlights the top five reasons why effective cybersecurity 
is increasingly complex to deliver: they illustrate that the security defenses of 
organizations are under increasing pressure, further eroding the traditional  
perimeter and, in turn, creating more motivation for threat actors. 

1 Change

2 Mobility and 

consumerization

3 Ecosystem

4 Cloud

5 Infrastructure

In this post-economic-crisis world, businesses need 
to move fast. New product launches, mergers, 
acquisitions, market expansion, and introductions 
of new technology are all on the rise: these changes 
invariably have a complicating impact on the 
strength of an organizations cybersecurity.

The adoption of mobile computing resulted in 
blurring organizational boundaries, with IT getting 
closer to the user and further from the organization. 
The use of internet, smartphones and tablets (in 
combination with bring-your-own-device) has made 
organizations data is accessible everywhere.

We live and operate in an ecosystem of digitally 
connected entities, people and data, increasing the 
likelihood of exposure to cybercrime in both the 
work and home environment.

Cloud-based services, and third party data 
management and storage, open up new  
channels of risk that previously did not exist.

Traditionally closed operational technology systems 
are now being given IP addresses so that cyber 
threats are making their way out of the back-office 
systems and into critical infrastructures such as 
power generation and transportation systems,  
and other automation systems.

Global Information Security Survey  
2013, Under Cyber Attack
www.ey.com/giss2013

Global Information Security Survey  
2012, Fighting to close the gap
www.ey.com/giss2012

2 | Get ahead of cybercrime |  EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014

The cyber threat landscape

The growing attacking power of cyber criminals
The attacking power of criminals is increasing at an astonishing speed. Attackers have 
access to significant funding; they are more patient and sophisticated than ever before; 
and they are looking for vulnerabilities in the whole operating environment  including 
people and processes. 

Who or what do you consider the most likely source of an attack?

Breaking 
news!

Combined external attackers now 
significantly more likely as a risk source 
than internal threats. 

Employee

External contractor working on our site

Customer

Supplier

Other business partner

Criminal syndicates

State sponsored attacker

Hacktivists

Lone wolf hacker

57%

35%

10%

12%

14%

53%

27%

46%

41%

In our previous surveys, employees were seen as the most likely source of an attack. In 
this years GISS, employees are still seen as a significant risk. However, for the first time, 
we found that when the different types of external attacker were combined (criminal 
syndicates, state sponsored attackers, hacktivists and lone wolf hackers) these threats 
were considered to be significantly more likely as a risk source. And nearly all our 
respondents have one or more external attackers included in their rating.

The roadblocks facing todays organizations
In the following sections of this report we will look at what organizations are doing to 
address these challenges, but first we need to consider what are the roadblocks that 
need to be removed before an organization can successfully get ahead of cybercrime.

Roadblock 1  Lack of agility
Not only are threats growing, our survey respondents also tell us that there are still 
known vulnerabilities in their cyber defenses. In other words, it is understood that there 
is a clear and present danger, but organizations are not moving fast enough to mitigate 
the known vulnerabilities  37% tell us that they have no real time insight on cyber risks, 
and for a further 27% it is only sometimes available. As a result, organizations are 
lagging behind in establishing foundational cybersecurity. See the Activate section to 
learn more about the areas requiring most attention, according to our survey.

Get ahead of cybercrime | EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014 | 3

The cyber threat landscape

Which threats and vulnerabilities have most increased your risk exposure over the 
last 12 months?

Vulnerabilities   (Vulnerability is defined as exposure to the possibility of being attacked or harmed)

Outdated information security controls  
or architecture

Careless or unaware employees

35%

38%

17%

15%

16%

17%

19%

16%

14%

13%

Cloud computing use

17%

22%

18%

18%

25%

Mobile computing use

16%

25%

22%

20%

17%

Social media use

7%

25%

24%

20%

24%

Unauthorized access (e.g., due to location of data)

14%

20%

23%

24%

19%

Threats   (Threat is defined as the potential for a hostile action from actors in the external environment)

Cyber attacks to disrupt or deface the organization

25%

20%

21%

16%

18%

Cyber attacks to steal financial information (credit 
card numbers, bank information, etc.)

28%

23%

18%

19%

12%

Cyber attacks to steal intellectual property or data

20%

24%

22%

17%

17%

Espionage (e.g., by competitors)

16%

24%

20%

18%

22%

Fraud

19%

23%

22%

21%

15%

Internal attacks (e.g., by disgruntled employees)

11%

20%

23%

18%

28%

Malware (e.g., viruses, worms and Trojan horses)

15%

19%

24%

25%

17%

Natural disasters (storms, flooding, etc.)

15%

14%

16%

21%

34%

Phishing

17%

22%

21%

22%

18%

Spam

13%

18%

19%

20%

30%

Zero-day attacks

16%

20%

19%

20%

25%

Priority:   

 1st    

 2nd    

 3rd    

 4th    

 5th

Roadblock 2  Lack of budget
As we have seen before, the lack of budget is one of the most challenging roadblocks. 
In former years, we have been relatively positive about the difference between the 
available budget for cybersecurity and the amount of budget that was necessary, as we 
have seen a year-on-year increase of cybersecurity budgets. Now, for the first time, we 
see more organizations reporting that their budgets will remain flat.
Although we are experiencing ever greater attention on cybercrime in the boardroom 
and from non-executive directors around the globe, it seems that this interest doesnt 
translate into additional money. Nevertheless, there is still a need for more money and 
resources to face the growing threats effectively.

43%

of respondents say that their 
organizations total information security 
budget will stay approximately the 
same in the coming 12 months and a 
further 5% said that their budget will 
actually decrease.

53%

of organizations say that lack of  
skilled resources is one of the main 
obstacles that challenge their 
information security.

4 | Get ahead of cybercrime |  EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014

The cyber threat landscape

5% 

of organizations have a threat 
intelligence team with dedicated analysts 
and external advisors that evaluate 
information for credibility, relevance  
and exposure against threat actors.

Roadblock 3  Lack of cybersecurity skills 
The most important roadblock is the lack of cybersecurity skills. While the need 
for specialists deepens, every year our survey shows that the lack of specialists is 
a constant and growing issue. Also there is the need to build skills in non-technical 
disciplines to integrate cybersecurity into the core business. 
Sophisticated organizations not only defend themselves against cyber attacks; they use 
analytical intelligence to anticipate what could happen to them and have the confidence 
in their operating environment to know they are prepared (see the Anticipate chapter 
for more information). However, our survey points out that it is very difficult to hire the 
specialists necessary to perform the analysis on threat intelligence data, draw relevant 
and actionable conclusions, and enable decisions and responses to be taken.

The growing threat to operational technology 
The resilience of operational technology systems (OT systems, such as power 
generators, transportation systems, flight control systems and gas distribution 
systems) becomes more and more important and more and more challenging at 
the same time. New technologies, regulatory pressure and changing business 
requirements call for more cybersecurity. However, securing OT is not an easy 
task due to the complexities of the OT environments, legacy systems, different 
vendor architectures, and cultural differences between OT and IT teams.
Due to the relative ease of access via IP-addresses, OT systems are often targets 
for cyber criminals and should be included in an organizations approach to 
improving cyber maturity. Examples of attacks have included: 
  Infection by a worm virus of process control systems that ran a railway network, 
causing the unreliable usage of the railway tracks
  Access to a banks facility management system and manipulation of the 
buildings internal air conditioning system that caused servers to shut down  
due to over-heating
  Malware that destroyed the controls systems of a nuclear power plant, or 
process controls over the upstream installation of an oil and gas company

Looking at what we have discussed 
so far (summarized in this diagram), 
we have seen that there is a rapidly 
expanding threat landscape, the 
power of cyber criminals is growing, 
and organizations are still struggling 
with a number of roadblocks. We 
know that it is not easy to get ahead 
of cybercrime.

Cyber  
threats 
multiplying

L

a

a

c

g

k

 

o

i
l
i
t

y

f
  

D i s a p p e a r i n g  
p e r i m e t e r

Gro

win

o

p

attackin
of cy
er  
crimin
b
er 
als

w

g 
g  

Increase d   e x ternal threa

t

Cybersecurity 

function

Getting ahead

I

n

c

r

e

a

sed interna l

p

 

Lack of  
budget

r essures

Lack of  
skills

Get ahead of cybercrime | EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014 | 5

Get ahead of cybercrime  focus  on the three As

In the following chapters we will 
discuss three different stages of the 
journey to cybersecurity maturity  
Activate, Adapt and Anticipate 
(the three As)  which need to be 
executed in a tight sequence (and 
consistently recurring) to deliver 
state-of-the-art cybersecurity.  
 
We have found that organizations 
responses to cybercrime fall into 
three distinct stages, and the aim 
should be to implement ever more 
advanced cybersecurity measures 
at each stage.

Activate

Organizations need to have a solid foundation of 
cybersecurity. This comprises a comprehensive set of 
information security measures which will provide basic 
(but not good) defense against cyber attacks. At this 
stage, organizations establish their fundamentals   
i.e., they activate their cybersecurity. 

Foundational

Bolt-on cybersecurity

A focus on safeguarding the  
current environment

A static approach

Where am I? 

Check the boxes below and identify how many of the  
characteristics of your organization meet the Activate profile.

Incident 
management

Leadership 
discussions

Metrics

     Never had an incident

    Third party releases information publicly or  
notifies you

     Unsure who would respond
     No single person nominated to disclose  

information publicly
    No incident response plan

     Not a boardroom issue
     Leadership conversations focus on tools and policies
     Business not engaged as security leadership team

    Headcount
    Maturity models

     Budget

   Compliance

6 | Get ahead of cybercrime |  EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014

Get ahead of cybercrime  focus  on the three As

Adapt

Organizations change  whether for survival or for 
growth. Threats also change. Therefore, the foundation 
of information security measures must adapt to keep 
pace and match the changing business requirements 
and dynamics otherwise they will become less and less 
effective over time. At this stage, organizations work to 
keep their cybersecurity up-to-date; i.e., they adapt to 
changing requirements.

Anticipate

Organizations need to develop tactics to detect and 
detract potential cyber attacks. They must know 
exactly what they need to protect (their crown jewels), 
and rehearse appropriate responses to likely attack/
incident scenarios (including accidents): this requires 
a mature cyber threat intelligence capability, a robust 
risk assessment methodology, an experienced incident 
response mechanism, and an informed organization. At 
this stage, organizations are more confident about their 
ability to handle more predictable threats and unexpected 
attacks; i.e., they anticipate cyber attacks.

Dynamic

Built-in cybersecurity

Proactive

Built-beyond cybersecurity

A focus on the changing environment

A focus on the future environment

A dynamic approach

A proactive approach

Check the boxes below and identify how many of the  
characteristics of your organization meet the Adapt profile.

Check the boxes below and identify how many of the  
characteristics of your organization meet the Anticipate profile.

    Organization identifies and reacts to its own incidents
    Incident response plan notifications of participation
    Incident response teams include IT leadership
   Public relations established
    Acceptance a breach will occur, or has  
already occurred

 

      Organization prepares for oncoming breaches based 

on threat scenarios
    Corporate senior leadership is part of response team
    External communication is controlled and fact-based 
defensible positions

     Disaster recovery plans

    Regulatory landscape and impacts
    IT leadership and business leaders discuss reality  
of breach occurrence and impact

    Standing boardroom agenda item

     IT leadership and business leaders discuss how 

security enhances business
    Leadership level cooperation with peers

      Attacks/incidents
 
 

   Revenue impact of breach
   Advanced risk analysis and scoring

     Revenue support/growth/protection from security

    Alignment to business objectives

Get ahead of cybercrime | EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014 | 7

Establish 
foundations

Every organization needs a solid 
foundation of cybersecurity. Putting 
this foundation in place is not 
an easy task and the specifics of 
exactly what is needed will depend 
on industry sector and geography. 
This is not new: in our Global 
Information Security Survey 
report of 2012 (Fighting to close 
the gap) we explored the gap 
between the actual cybersecurity 
measures taken and the necessary 
foundational cybersecurity 
components that should be in place. 
This foundation provides the first 
step in the cybersecurity journey.

8

Activate

Organizations that have activated the foundations for cybersecurity but 
not moved beyond this will typically display the following three shortfalls 
in their capabilities, demonstrating why the journey must continue.
1. Bolt-on cybersecurity 

The organizations cybersecurity has been added on to business 
processes and activities. It has not yet been integrated into the 
business, it is not seen as an added-value activity and is viewed 
as a cost factor which needs to be limited as much as possible. If 
application development is all about security certification approval 
after development or at major gates, the organization is stuck  
here ... with bolt-on security.

2. A focus on safeguarding the current environment 

This foundation level for cybersecurity starts with looking at the 
risks the organization is already aware of based on prior experience; 
the goal is to make sure the measures are in place that will solve 
any weaknesses. If conversations are just around risk assessments, 
controls efficiency and risk mitigation, the organization remains in  
the Activate level. 

3. A static approach 

This level of cybersecurity capability is aimed at enabling the 
business to carry out its known and regular day-to-day functions 
securely. The organization will be rule-based and compliance-driven, 
relying on metric-driven reporting  it can only deal with threats in a 
world without change.

9

All businesses, no matter how advanced 
in their cybersecurity development, must 
achieve mastery of the foundational 
requirements of cybersecurity. However, 
our observation based on this years 
survey is that too many organizations 
do not even have all foundational 
components of cybersecurity in place.
In this report we have focused on five 
critical areas, as this years survey, and 
EYs experience from working with our 
global clients, has shown that this is 
where the biggest issues can arise:
 Executive buy-in
 Resources
 Performance
 Access to data
 Cost vs. value

Component

What are the issues?

Executive  
buy-in

 Leadership on cybersecurity strategy, plan and 
execution comes from lower organizational levels  
or is seen as an IT issue.
 There is not a consistent threat management 
system in place; threats are not regularly discussed 
in the boardroom.

Resources

 Cybersecurity tasks are not adequately resourced 
and/or performed by skilled people.
 Cybersecurity teams do not have visibility and 
knowledge about attacks.

Performance

 Many organizations are spread too thin: they 
maintain too many cyber capabilities and   
as a result  with moderate effectiveness.
 The effectiveness of cybersecurity is not measured. 

Access to data

 Employees are a risk to cybersecurity, and their Identity 
and Access management (IAM) program is weak.
 Excessive manual processing and irregular reviews 
or reports make it too easy for employees to have 
inappropriate access to data.
 Movers, leavers and joiners are a key cyber risk area.

Cost vs. value

 Too many organizations view the costs of 
cybersecurity as considerable.
 Organizations do not appreciate the benefits of the 
measures they already have.
 Organizations significantly underestimate the 
potential cost of a cyber attack.

10 | Get ahead of cybercrime |  EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014

Activate | Adapt | AnticipateSurvey findings

Implications

Nearly 80% of CIOs or IT departments have the Information  
Security function reporting directly to them, compared with  
just 14% reporting directly to the CEO.

 Organizations need to involve senior leadership  
in cybersecurity.
 Lack of executive buy-in opens the doors to mistakes 
and cyber criminals; cybersecurity will miss the 
necessary direction and investments.

Fewer than 20% of 
organizations have real 
time insight on cyber  
risks readily available.

20% have published 
sources of cyber attacks  
on their sector peers 
readily available.

 Cyber threats are overlooked or the response is too late.
 Cyber criminals successful use of phishing is a result of 
a lack of security awareness.

Across almost every cybersecurity process between  
35% and 45% of respondents rated themselves still  
a lot to improve.

 Foundational cybersecurity processes are not working 
properly, leaving a broad range of options for those 
performing an advanced persistent threat (APT).

Nearly two thirds of organizations do not have well-defined  
and automated IAM programs.

 We have seen that employees are seen as a huge 
threat for cybersecurity; while organizations are 
looking for hackers coming in from the outside,  
fraud is already happening from the inside.

63% cite budget constraints 
as the main obstacle to 
making a contribution and 
delivering value.

Nearly 50% will see no 
increase in budget over  
the coming 12 months.

 Organizations must understand they are under daily 
attack, the attackers show no signs of giving up, they 
are getting smarter and more targeted. The next 
breach could be fatal.

Get ahead of cybercrime | EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014 | 11

Activate | Adapt | AnticipateFoundational activities all organizations  
need to activate
Organizations that have not yet reached the foundational level of cybersecurity 
need to act fast. To help them, here are six of the most frequently overlooked yet 
critical actions to be considered urgently:
1.  Security assessment and roadmap
 

 Conduct a cyber threat assessment, current state maturity assessment, 
target state definition, gap analysis and design of implementation roadmap, 
alignment with leading practices such as ISO 27001.

2.  Get Board-level support for a security transformation
 

 Redefine cybersecurity governance, e.g., realigning cybersecurity outside  
of the IT function and ensure that the Board understand processes.

3.  Review and update security policies, procedures and  

supporting standards
 Implement an information security management system (ISMS)

  
4.  Establish a Security Operations Center (SOC)
 
5.  Design and implement cybersecurity controls.
 

 Develop monitoring of known cases and incident response procedures.

 Assess the effectiveness of data loss prevention processes and IAM. Harden 
the security of IT assets, such as servers and firewalls, network components 
and databases.

6.  Test business continuity plans and incident response procedures
 Instigate regular penetration testing of the network perimeter, ingress points 
 
and software applications; and identify exploitable weaknesses.

12 | Get ahead of cybercrime |  EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014

Activate | Adapt | AnticipateThe Security Operations Center

Vital to foundational cybersecurity are the processes and technology that support  
the Information Security function. These are most effective when they are centralized, 
structured and coordinated, which is why a Security Operations Center (SOC) is a 
valuable starting point. While a SOC can be outsourced, it is important to ensure that it 
meets the needs of your business operations  we are seeing a clear shift from a one 
size fits all into a bespoke SOC situation  and that its knowledge of cybersecurity 
threats and issues is up to date and aligned to the business strategy.
It is concerning that over 40% of organizations in our survey do not have a SOC. 
For those that do, the benefits of centralization are either not being met or are not 
communicated or understood by organizations. Over half of respondents were either 
unable to answer the question about how well the SOC met business operations needs, 
or declared that it was unknown, or that the SOC didnt interact with the business. 

How does your SOC ensure they are meeting the needs of business operations?

42% 

of organizations do not have a SOC.

Our SOC is tightly integrated, meeting with the heads of business 
operations regularly to understand business concerns and risks

Our SOC receives quarterly updates from the business so they 
can understand and address their concerns and risks

Our SOC receives annual updates from the business to 
understand and address their concerns and risks

Our SOC does not interact with the business

Unknown

20%

10%

12%

22%

36%

37% 

say that real time insight on  
cyber risk is not available.

There is similar lack of awareness in the area of how the SOC stays up to date with the 
latest threats. Over 50% of respondents either could not answer the question, or did not 
know how long the SOC would take to initiate an investigation on a discovered or alerted 
incident. Before any improvements can be requested or mandated, organizations first 
need to be better informed about what their SOC does.

How long on average does it take for your SOC to initiate an investigation on 
discovered/alerted incidents?

Within 10 minutes

Within 1 hour

Within 4 hours

Within 1 day

Longer than 1 day

Unknown

12%

25%

13%

13%

4%

33%

Overall, the technology infrastructure and endpoints of the SOC need to be improved.  
If more of the benefits of a SOC were being realized, then the general ability of  
an organization to protect itself in even the most basic functions would start to  
deliver benefits.

Get ahead of cybercrime | EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014 | 13

Activate | Adapt | AnticipateTake a dynamic 
approach

Organizations that have 
established the foundation of 
cybersecurity have commenced 
the journey, but to remain 
competitive, a business must 
constantly change and adapt to a 
changing business environment 
and to the evolving threats that 
come along with those changes. 
As a result, the organizations 
cybersecurity requirements will 
need to change as well  changing 
the control infrastructure and 
technology capability/usage to 
support the improved situational 
awareness of known risks. If an 
organization doesnt adapt, its 
cybersecurity foundation will 
quickly be obsolete.

14 

Adapt

The Adapt stage adds the following features to the Activate level:
1. Built-in security

Cybersecurity is considered and involved in everything the 
organization does: whether that is the development of a new 
business process, opening a new plant, an acquisition or the 
introduction of a new product. Changes in the business are 
immediately assessed from a cybersecurity perspective (it is not  
an afterthought) and changing cybersecurity requirements are  
built in to all business processes. As a result, cybersecurity will  
be up-to-date continuously.

2. A focus on the changing environment

A more mature cybersecurity continuously adapts to ongoing 
changes in the business and its environment. For instance: Going 
digital or using cloud services can introduce risks the organization 
was not facing before. Increased situational awareness enables the 
risk assessment to incorporate internal changes, and to be able to 
react to expected changes in the threat landscape.

3. A dynamic approach

The organizations cybersecurity is flexible, agile and under constant 
revision. It continually adapts to better protect the business.

15

Cycle of improvement: the approach to adaptability
Organizations are undergoing constant change. Here are a number of examples: 
 The necessity to integrate new technologies (social media, cloud, digital, big data, 
etc.) into business processes
 The exponential rise of mobile devices (BYOD, etc.), blurring the lines between the 
business and personal world
 The growth in managed services and remote hosting, with greater reliance on 
complex apps (many hosted remotely)
 The integration of process control infrastructure with the back office and the  
outside world
 Rapidly changing regulatory environment and requirements
As a result, organizations have to cope with a never-ending cycle of new threats  
and challenges requiring the adoption of a never-ending cycle of improvement and  
re-evaluation of the changing cybersecurity capabilities. Organizations need to establish 
a system that enables them to manage this cycle in an efficient and effective manner so 
that they benefit from embracing new/different security opportunities which,  
in turn, enable the business and save costs.

The improvement cycle

Take charge
 Visible leadership from the very top
  Senior leader made accountable,  
all business leaders tied in
 Accept tough decisions and set timetable

Spread  
the word
  Integrate and align 
cybersecurity strategy 
with key business and 
strategy
  Establish network across 
the organization to drive 
integration and enable 
business performance
  Build awareness 
and confidence 
that everyone feels 
responsible

Reassess  
and continue
   Measure against defined 
metrics and track 
improvement
  Manage risks and 
dependencies
   Challenge through 
critical thinking and 
assessment
   Seek external advice
   Be willing to change and 
continue driving change

16 | Get ahead of cybercrime |  EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014

Never-ending  

cycle of 

improvement

Implement and innovate
 Deliver enterprise-wide program
  Be bold and creative in transforming thinking and 
operations

Activate | Adapt | Anticipate17% 13%

2013

2014

Instead of an expected increase in the 
number of organizations reporting that 
their Information Security function fully 
meets the needs of their organization, 
our survey found a decrease.

 

68% 63%

2013

2014

Instead of an increase in the number 
of organizations reporting that 
their Information Security function 
partially meets their needs and that 
improvements are under way, there  
has been a decrease of 5%.

Running backwards to grasp reality
In order to get ahead of cybercrime, it is essential to keep your cybersecurity measures 
100% aligned with your business. This challenge has been high on the agenda for 
several years, and improvement has been made year on year. However, for the 
first time in five years, the GISS survey shows us that organizations are effectively 
going backwards. Organizations are continuing to improve their cybersecurity, but 
the changes in the threat landscape (see chapter 1 of this report) are travelling at 
an even faster rate. We predicted this trend two years ago.* This also indicates that 
organizations are becoming more aware of the reality of threats  from the news or 
personal experience.
This year, our GISS found that:
 13% of respondents report that their Information Security function fully meets their 
organizations needs  this is down from 17% in 2013.**
 Last year, 68% of respondents felt that their Information Security function partly 
meets their needs and that improvement is under way. This has fallen to 63% this year.

These results show that organizations need to get more serious about cybersecurity. 
Using the improvement cycle described opposite will help them get back on track.
Our survey also explored why cybersecurity measures are not meeting the needs of so 
many organizations, for example in breach detection:

 What statement best describes the maturity of your breach detection program? 

 We do not have a breach detection program. 

2013

2014

12%

16%

How to make vital improvements 
So what are the areas that need specific and more attention? What low hanging fruit 
would allow organizations to make progress easily? 
Here are four areas of improvement (applicable for most organizations):

1. Improve the Security Operations Center (SOC)
A well functioning SOC is an important asset to get ahead of cybercrime. If there is one 
security function in the organization that should be aware of the latest threats, it is the 
SOC. Broadly, only a third of respondents felt that their SOC was keeping up to date 
with the latest threats  this is an alarming result.
One of the root causes is that  in most cases  SOCs are overly focused on the 
technology. Although the features of the technology are important (what can be 
measured and monitored), the starting point should be the business (what needs  
to be measured and monitored).
Interaction with the business is key: 22% of GISS respondents tell us that there is no 
interaction between the SOC and the business  and a further 36% did not know. How 
can a SOC focus on the right risks (and changing risks) if the business is not connected 
to the SOC on a regular basis?

* See EYs Global Information Security Survey 2012  Fighting to close the gap (www.ey.com/giss2012)
**EYs Global Information Security Survey 2013  Under cyber attack (www.ey.com/giss2013)

Get ahead of cybercrime | EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014 | 17

Activate | Adapt | Anticipate 55%

of organizations do not include 
information security in employee 
performance evaluations.

2. Create a core cybersecurity team
Consolidate cybersecurity approaches and activities around a core team: by establishing 
the cybersecurity knowledge in a core team, organizations will be able to adapt to new 
threats more easily. This core team can be organized centrally or distributed across 
functions/borders depending on the size and the requirements of the organization. 
The core team should also focus on training, skills and awareness, and make the 
practice of information security part of everyday life for every employee  the members 
of the core team should act as ambassadors who practice what they preach.

3. Establish accountability 
Greater accountability and performance measurement are key ways to achieve 
behavior change. If employees understood that their own job security was under threat 
because the security of the organization was under threat, and that cybersecurity was 
a performance metric, this could encourage a permanent change in awareness and 
behavior. Embed the required behaviors into employee contracts  especially for those 
with access to critical information  and include it in their performance evaluations. 
Breaches of information security protocols (even if there were no significant 
consequences) should be taken very seriously.
In addition to informing employees about cyber threats, find ways to make them the 
eyes and ears of the organization and ensure there is a clear escalation process 
everyone can follow in the event of an employee noticing something suspicious. In our 
survey, forensics support and social media are the lowest ranked areas on information 
security priority, yet these techniques and channels can be the first way of spotting that 
the organization is at risk of an attack.

4. Go beyond the borders
With a transformation cycle in place, organizations can start to look beyond their own 
borders, and begin to assess the impact of a cyber attack on their business partners, 
suppliers, vendors  a community that can be described as their business ecosystem 
(see page 19). Their own effective transformation will have revealed leading practices, 
and now these practices can be communicated to the ecosystem so that suppliers and 
vendors could be contractually obliged to conform.

Take action to improve and transform
If your organization is between the Activate and the Adapt levels, here are five 
steps you should be considering urgently:
1. Design and implement a transformation program
Support a step improvement in cybersecurity maturity over and above the basic 
level where security projects are delivered separately in a piecemeal fashion. Get 
external help in designing the program, and providing program management.
2. Decide what to keep in-house and what to outsource
For example, decide whether to keep a core team in your own SOC providing full  
in-house capability, or outsource to a managed security services provider 
(MSSP), or move to a blended model.
3. Define a RACI matrix for cybersecurity
4. Define the organizations ecosystem
Consider the knock-on impact of security breaches on your third parties, and make 
moves to eliminate or lessen potential security gaps in your interaction with them.
5. Introduce cybersecurity awareness training for employees
Perform a maturity assessment, target state definition, and gap analysis. 
Develop and implement a training plan for staff (including contractors).

18 | Get ahead of cybercrime |  EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014

Activate | Adapt | AnticipateLooking beyond borders:  
the business ecosystem

Our research shows that in the battle against cybercrime most companies spend  
the majority of their time and resources building a fence around their internal 
organization  including their data, systems and personnel. This is a starting point,  
but the perimeter is no longer stable, and a fence no longer possible.
Most of todays business is done outside the defensive fence. In order for organizations 
to be able to communicate with their business partners, they must create holes in 
the fence. As a result a cybersecurity system should also include the broader network, 
including: clients, customers, suppliers/vendors, business partners and even their 
alumni  together called the business ecosystem.
For an organization to be able to effectively manage the risks in its ecosystem, it needs 
to clearly define the limits of that ecosystem. It also needs to decide what it is willing 
to manage within those boundaries: is it just the risks faced by groups that are one 
step from the organization itself (e.g., suppliers); or should the organization also try 
to influence the mitigation of risks faced by groups that are two steps from the center 
(e.g., the suppliers of suppliers)? 
Organizations need to ask: 
 What is our security limit; in other words: with how many partners should we work 
with to enhance overall cybersecurity?
 How much can we do to manage the risk in the business ecosystem? 
 Are we prepared to accept a certain level of risk from the business ecosystem?

Your business ecosystem

Uncontrollable  
factors

Variable  
factors

Agreed  
security limit

World events
Government regulations
Economy
Climatic disruption
Unknown customer (online)
Social media
Packaging
Advertising agency
Employee agency
Network connections
Distributor (secondary)
Software developer
Support services
Alumni
Contractors
Known customer (p
Cloud hosting
Manufacturer
Distributor
Key sup

y
sic

al)

h

pli

e

SOC

r

s

 

Get ahead of cybercrime | EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014 | 19

Activate | Adapt | AnticipateBe in a proactive 
state of readiness

There is only so much an organization 
can do to respond to threats that have 
already arisen. But an organization that 
can only react to new threats once they 
have become active may well find out 
that it has acted too late. 
The only way to get ahead in this complex 
and dynamic environment is to grasp 
the challenges head on  embrace 
cybersecurity as a core aspect of the 
business, and as an integral capability to 
survive and thrive. Becoming successful 
and staying successful is a never-ending 
journey, and building and maintaining the 
organizations cybersecurity capability is 
part of this.
The ambition should be to move to a state 
of readiness  to be able to anticipate 
what is likely to happen and to prepare, 
act and respond accordingly. To do this 
means shedding the victim mindset 
of operating in a perpetual state of 
uncertainty (and anxiety) about unknown 
cyber threats, leaving the organization 
open to unpleasant and damaging 
surprises. It means building awareness 
and advanced capabilities, developing 
a compelling strategy and installing 
cybersecurity components throughout 
the business: it means promoting 
confidence in the organizations ability  
to deal with cybercrime.

20

Anticipate

To be at the Anticipate stage, the following characteristics need to  
be added:
1. Built-beyond security
  Be alert, ready to act and respond quickly, in a balanced manner. 

Leadership accepts cyber threats/risks as a core business issue, and 
cybersecurity capabilities are part of a dynamic decision process. 
This enables preventative action and response mechanisms to 
operate smoothly and quickly.

  Know your crown jewels. The organization cannot be ready  
for attacks if it does not know the assets most valuable to the  
business. It must be able to prioritize these assets and  
understand the impact of them being breached, compromised 
or made unavailable in any way; then link this into the threat 
assessment process.

2. A focus on the future environment
  Know your environment, inside and out. Comprehensive, yet 
targeted, situational awareness is critical to understanding the 
wider threat landscape and how it relates to the organization. Cyber 
threat intelligence can bring this knowledge  it incorporates both 
external and internal sources of risk, and covers both the present 
and future, while learning from the past.

  Continually learn and evolve. Nothing is static  not the criminals, 

not the organization or any part of its operating environment  
therefore the cycle of continual improvement remains. Become a 
learning organization: study data (including forensics); maintain 
and explore new collaborative relationships; refresh the strategy 
regularly and evolve cybersecurity capabilities.

3. A proactive approach
  Be confident in your incident response and crisis response 

mechanisms. Organizations that are in a state of anticipation 
regularly rehearse their incident response capabilities. This includes 
war gaming and table top exercises, through to enacting complex 
incident scenarios that really test the organizations capabilities.

21

Get ready to anticipate
An organization in a state of readiness inhabits an entirely different mindset, sees the 
world differently and responds in a way the cyber criminals would not expect. It requires 
behaviors that are thoughtful, considered and collaborative. It learns, prepares and 
rehearses. No organization or government can ever predict or prevent all (or even most) 
attacks; but they can reduce their attractiveness as a target, increase their resilience, 
and limit damage from any given attack.
Learning how to stay ahead is challenging and takes time, but the benefits for the 
organization are considerable. The organization will be able to exploit the opportunities 
offered by the digital world, while minimizing exposure to risks and the cost of dealing 
with them.
To start, an organization and its leadership must know answers to all of these questions 
to be confident. If any of the answers is no, that is where to focus and where changes 
need to be made.

Being attacked is unavoidable, so how prepared are you? Can you answer yes to these five key questions?

5.  Do you have a plan to react to an attack 

and minimize the harm caused?

Valued assets

4.  Would you know if you were being attacked 
and if the assets have been compromised?

3.  Do you understand how these assets could 

be accessed or disrupted?

2.  Do you know how your business plans 

could make these assets more vulnerable?

1.  Do you know what you have that others 

may want?

Intellectual property

People information

Financial information

Business information 
(strategy performance transactions)

The following sections outline what an organization can do to  
get ahead, and enable it to answer yes to everything above  
and move beyond.

22 | Get ahead of cybercrime |  EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014

Activate | Adapt | Anticipate56%

of organizations say that it is  
unlikely or highly unlikely that their 
organization would be able to detect  
a sophisticated attack.

Understand your threat environment and  
establish early detection
It is not enough to just know there are threats. The organization needs to understand 
the nature of those threats and how (and where) these might manifest themselves, 
and assess what the impact would be. Early warning and detection of breaches is key 
to being in a state of readiness. However, the majority of organizations are only able 
to detect fairly simple attacks, meaning they may not know they have already been 
breached by a more sophisticated attack and they will not be able to detect future 
attacks of this nature.
Incorporating or establishing a cyber threat intelligence capability can help get the 
organization ahead of cybercrime. At a tactical level, this capability will sit in the SOC, but 
the reach of this function will extend into the strategic level and the C-suite, if done well.
 What is happening out there that the organization can learn from? 
 How can the organization become target hardened and is this required? 
 How are other organizations dealing with specific threats and attacks? 
 How can the organization help others deal with these threats and attacks?
 Does the organization understand the difference between a targeted attack  
and a random one?
 Which threat actors are relevant? 
All these questions can be answered through cyber threat intelligence, but our survey 
indicates that few organizations have a grasp of what that is and what it can deliver:

Which statement best describes the maturity of your threat intelligence program?

We do not have a threat intelligence program

We have an informal threat intelligence program that 
incorporates information from trusted third parties and 
email distribution lists

We have a formal threat intelligence program that 
includes subscription threat feeds from external 
providers and internal sources, such as a security 
incident and event management tool

We have a threat intelligence team that collects internal 
and external threat and vulnerability feeds to analyze 
for credibility and relevance in our environment

We have an advanced threat intelligence  
function with internal and external feeds, dedicated 
intelligence analysts and external advisors that evaluate 
information for credibility, relevance and exposure 
against threat actors

36%

32%

17%

10%

5%

Get ahead of cybercrime | EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014 | 23

Activate | Adapt | Anticipate36%

of respondents do not have a 
threat intelligence program.

23% 

of respondents state that their 
information security strategy outlines 
the future state of information security 
three to five years out.

Intelligence is about much more than just collecting information. The intelligence cycle 
comprises a sequence of activities: 

1. Determine intelligence requirements 
What does the organization need to be aware of? Where are the gaps in knowledge? 

2. Collect information
Various open source feeds are available for external information, and there are many 
data feeds from internal systems.

3. Analyze and assess gathered information to produce an intelligence report
This can be sourced externally, or conducted internally. An understanding of the core 
business is crucial for any assessment to be meaningful.

4. Distribute and communicate the report

5. Take appropriate action
For cyber threat intelligence to be effective, this cycle will need to be performed quickly. 
Some activities can be automated, and techniques, tools and services are available 
for this. Other elements cannot be automated, and will require human involvement 
and intervention. There are a variety of cyber threat intelligence services available, 
and these will need to be evaluated specifically for the organizations requirements, 
appetite and maturity. However, the flaw of many of these services is that they flood the 
organization with information that is not meaningful or actionable, and often end up 
being ignored.
Cyber threat intelligence can also prove to be very useful in creating more value in risk 
management by pointing out potential flaws in the current network and ecosystem, 
which should result in process changes that would allow the organization to be 
more agile: decisions would be made faster; data would be protected; gaps would be 
uncovered, prioritized and mitigated. A solid threat intelligence program can also be 
further unlocked with a good metrics program and analytics, often tied into a companys 
Big Data program.

Take a view of the past, present and future
The organizations ambition needs to encompass efforts to look into the future, as 
well as learning from the past and being prepared for the now. Organizations should 
be kept informed of new/different trends in attack types and in the methods, tools 
and techniques to deal with them. Its vital to be kept informed about emerging 
technologies, and to keep exploring the opportunities for the business to exploit these, 
while keeping a firm eye on the new risks and weaknesses they may introduce. Our 
2014 survey, however, shows that most organizations are still preoccupied with their 
current state and are not looking to the future:

24 | Get ahead of cybercrime |  EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014

Activate | Adapt | AnticipateCompared to the previous year, does your organization plan to spend more, less or 
relatively the same amount over the coming year for the following activities?

Business continuity/disaster recovery resilience

41% 

Cloud computing

Data leakage/data loss prevention

39%

41%

Forensics support

11%

Fraud support

14%

Identity and access management

39%

Incident response capabilities

33%

Information security transformation  
(fundamental redesign)

25%

Insider risk/threats

19%

53%

54%

53%

80%

78%

53%

60%

64%

74%

Intellectual property

12%

78%

IT securing and operational technology integration

30%

63%

Mobile technologies

46%

47%

Offshoring/outsourcing security activities,  
including third-party supplier risk

21%

Privacy measures

19%

68%

73%

Privileged access management

29%

63%

Securing emerging technologies (e.g., cloud computing, 
virtualization, mobile computing)

43%

50%

Security architecture redesign

24%

66%

Security awareness and training

Security incident and event management (SIEM) and 
Security operations center (SOC)

Security operations (e.g., antivirus,  
patching, encryption)

Security testing (e.g., attack and penetration)

37%

34%

29%

33%

54%

58%

64%

59%

Social media

11%

Third party risk management

18%

78%

74%

Threat and vulnerability management  
(e.g., security analytics, threat intelligence)

34%

59%

Key:  

 Spend more    

 Spend the same    

 Spend less

6%

7%

6%

9%

8%

8%

7%

11%

7%

10%

7%

7%

11%

8%

8%

7%

10%

9%

8%

7%

8%

11%

8%

7%

Get ahead of cybercrime | EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014 | 25

Activate | Adapt | AnticipateGet involved and collaborate
Collaboration is necessary at the Anticipate level. All organizations (and indeed 
individuals) are facing these challenges and, as capability matures, organizations are 
learning that collaboration bears fruit, especially if done in a targeted fashion. The 
sharing of information across a business ecosystem in a larger group (whether ad-
hoc, semi-formal, or a moderated formal environment), is the secret ingredient for 
organizations that have the most success at understanding, scoping and mitigating 
intrusions in their networks.

I

n
s

i

d
e
r

 

t

h

r

e

a

t

I

n
d
u
s

t

r

y

 

O
p
p
o

r

t

u

n

A
s
y
m
m

e

t

C
y
b

e

r

 

c

r

i

m

i

H
a

c

k

t

i

v

i

s

t

c

o

m

p

e

t

i

t

o

r

 

i

r

s

i

c

t

n

a

l

 

t

h

r

e

a

t

s

Climate

n ts

World e v e
Global/local e c o n

m ics

o

t
s

ktivi
Hac

s
t
a
e
r
h

l
a
n

Cyber crimi
metric t
Asym

t
a
e
r
h
t
 
r
e
sid
In

t
s
i
n
u
t
r
o
p
p
O

r
o
t
i
t
e
p
m
o
y c
str
u
d
In

Collaboration

Company 

one

Company 

two

This central collaborative component is also true of cyber threat intelligence. 
Information and intelligence sharing platforms exist in many forms (industry specific, 
cross-industry, government-run, linked to the national CERT, or standalone entities with 
government involvement, etc.); and governments and major organizations have started 
to take a leading role in establishing the policy and practice frameworks that support 
the development of resilient cyber ecosystems, e.g., US-CERTs Cyber Resilience Review 
(CRR) and the World Economic Forums Partnering for Cyber Resilience (PCR) initiative. 
These forums will push time critical information to the organization, and also provide 
access to strategic insights on threat actors and future scenarios, mitigation techniques, 
industry context and government actions.
Collaboration also provides the organization with greater awareness of its partners 
and supply chain, and the ability to influence and learn from the whole ecosystem. 
Larger organizations need to understand that their security capabilities are often far 
more mature than those of some of their suppliers, so knowledge-sharing around 
cybersecurity, or coordinating cybersecurity activities with suppliers can be much  
more effective than going it alone. A shared solution tightens the protective layers in 
and around your ecosystem. However, it would require an organization to develop a 
trust model, based around authentication, assurance agreements, etc. Any incident 
response exercises should include third parties and other players in your  
wider ecosystem.

26 | Get ahead of cybercrime |  EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014

Activate | Adapt | AnticipateHow do you ensure that your external partners, vendors or contractors are 
protecting your organizations information?

Assessments performed by your organization's 
information security, IT risk, procurement or  
internal audit function (e.g., questionnaires, site  
visits, security testing)

All third parties are risk-rated and appropriate  
diligence is applied

Accurate inventory of all third-party providers, network 
connections and data transfers is maintained and 
regularly updated

Independent external assessments of partners, vendors 
or contractors (e.g., SSAE 16, ISAE-3402)

Self assessments or other certifications performed by 
partners, vendors or contractors

Only critical or high-risk third parties are assessed

Fourth parties (also known as sub-service organizations) 
are identified and assessments performed  
(e.g., questionnaires issued, reliance placed on  
your vendor's assessment processes)

No reviews or assessments performed

56%

27%

27%

27%

34%

24%

8%

13%

Cyber economics
Organizations are using these four questions to assess the impact of a cyber attack in  
real-world terms, to understand the impact on the bottom line and the organizations 
brand and reputation.
 How would the share price be affected? 
 Would customers be impacted? 
 Will this translate into reduced revenues? 
 What will the costs be of having to repair damage to all internal systems and/or 
replace hardware because the organization was not prepared for an attack?

Cyber economic techniques are being developed to help organizations convert this into 
tangible figures. 

Conduct cyber incident exercises 
Is the organization confident that everyone knows what to do if an attack takes place?  
If not, then the damage from the attack will be far greater than expected. 
Poor handling of cyber incidents have led to harsh impacts on many companies. Once 
a breach is detected, then having thorough knowledge of your critical assets and 
associated ramifications will allow the organization to set in motion the appropriate 
handling mechanisms. Stakeholders, customers, employees, PR, regulators  all these 
parties play a part in determining how well your organization weathers an attack. 

 6%

of organizations claim to have a 
robust incident response program 
that includes third parties and law 
enforcement and is integrated with 
their broader threat and vulnerability 
management function.

Get ahead of cybercrime | EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014 | 27

Activate | Adapt | Anticipate58%

of organizations do not have a 
role or department focused on 
emerging technologies and their 
impact on information security.

Being in a state of readiness requires that the organization will have already  
rehearsed many different attack scenarios. At least once a year, the organization  
should rehearse its crisis response mechanisms through complex cyber attack 
scenarios. Different services are available to help the organization safely, but 
realistically, exercise in this fashion. It will be difficult, but the lessons learned will  
prove invaluable. Regulators in some areas are now requiring that cyber scenarios  
be undertaken and the results reported.
EY client-serving teams are working at board-level with many leading companies who 
are undertaking cybersecurity simulations and war gaming to encourage the C-suite to 
think more broadly and seriously about future threats and opportunities, and helping 
them to move in the right direction to Anticipate.

Take action  and get ahead
If your organization is ready to move into the Anticipate level, here are five vital 
actions we suggest you should take:
1. Design and implement a cyber threat intelligence strategy
The Information Security function should work with the Board to help them 
understand how to use threat intelligence to support strategic business decisions 
and leverage the value of cybersecurity.
2. Define and encompass the organizations extended  
cybersecurity ecosystem
Work with others in the organizations extended ecosystem to define RACI and 
trust models and enact cooperation, sharing capabilities where advantageous.
3. Take a cyber economic approach
Understand which are the organizations most vital cyber assets and their value 
to the cyber criminals, then re-evaluate plans to invest in security.
4. Use forensic data analytics and cyber threat intelligence
Take advantage of the latest technical tools to analyze where the likely threats 
are coming from and when, increasing your ability to combat them.
5. Ensure everyone understands whats happening
Strong governance, user controls and regular communications will update 
employees and keep then acting as the eyes and ears of the entire organization.

28 | Get ahead of cybercrime |  EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014

Activate | Adapt | AnticipateOne organization, three stories

Below is a familiar story, told in three different ways. While this is a fictitious example, the reactions, impacts and events are based on our 
actual experiences with clients and the events that unfolded during this time. Companies in the different Activate, Adapt or Anticipate 
phases will identify, react, respond and recover from these incidents in very different ways. We will evaluate the impacts on them: 
1. Financially  |  2. Operationally  |  3. Personally
Our case study involves three versions (Activate, Adapt, Anticipate) of a large telecoms operator (>US$12b in revenue) with 
significant retail operations (>400 retail and customer service centers) and direct interaction with their customers, both in person and 
online. They will suffer a breach of customer data and we will watch their very different experiences reacting to very similar events.

Activate
The scenario:  This company suffered  
a significant breach of customer data.  
The announcement was first released 
by an external source publicly and 
ultimately confirmed by the company. 
The company very quickly responded, 
confirming the breach had occurred 
and informing the public they had 
identified the problem, it had been 
resolved and the impact was minimal. 
 However, a week later the same 
external source stated that the damage 
was significantly worse than confirmed 
by the company, and millions of credit 
card details had been stolen. The 
company acknowledged this was true. 
The source made more discoveries, 
and this back and forth continued 
in the media for several weeks until 
eventually it was discovered that the 
number of records lost was over 10 
times the original number quoted 
and that there was evidence that the 
breach was still active and not resolved.
Financial:  The story played out in the 
media over a period of two months, 
right before their busiest time of the 
year. They lost many customers, but 
the ultimate cost was double-digit 
percentage loss in both share price 
and revenue. The company has still not 
seen a return to pre-breach numbers 
(over a year later). Eventually the 
total cost of the breach is expected to 
exceed 5% of annual revenue.
Operational:  The company spent 
many months of effort focused on this 
problem and rather than fixing it, their 
efforts were focused on responding 
and managing the media crisis that 
occurred. They had to identify and 
provide credit monitoring services, work 
with banks and customers to settle their 
concerns and ultimately attempt to 
restore customer confidence.
Personal:  This led to the termination 
or resignation of many executives and 
leaders throughout the organization, 
including both the CEO and CIO.

Adapt
The scenario:  This company suffered 
a significant breach of customer data. 
The announcement was first released 
by an external source publicly and 
ultimately confirmed by the company, 
but the company did not comment for 
almost a week. They provided a very 
measured response, confirming the 
breach, identifying that they knew 
where it had occurred, felt confident 
they had addressed the problem and 
were waiting to confirm the extent of 
the problem until the investigation 
was complete. Two weeks later they 
came out publicly and confirmed the 
total loss, confident they had identified 
the source of the breach, and had put 
in place mitigating controls and were 
working on the permanent resolution. 
Since then there have been no 
contradicting reports.
Financial:  This incident generated 
three primary news stories, but was 
in and out of the media fairly quickly. 
While the breach was significant, the 
company did not experience a high 
churn in customers. They did provide 
credit monitoring, and introduced 
special offers to bring customers  
back to the stores, at some cost.  
Within three months, they had  
returned to pre-breach revenue,  
share price and operations.
Operational:  This story had left the 
media spotlight within a month. The 
company put more time and effort into 
fixing this problem than responding to 
media pressure. They had to work with 
banks, brands and customers and their 
efforts focused on accretive services 
and support for the business.
Personal:  Throughout this challenging 
time the company showed solid 
leadership in the event of a crisis, and 
sustained the confidence of customers, 
shareholders and the board.

Anticipate
The scenario:  This company suffered a 
significant breach of customer data. In the 
months prior to the attack, the company 
had worked with peer organizations, law 
enforcement and their internal threat 
intelligence teams to collect relevant 
attacker activity information and identify 
the risks to the company. They also 
learned about other breaches in their 
sector. As a result, they were able to 
develop additional segregation and 
protective controls, and create scenarios 
for attack and response exercises. 
Ultimately, they were not able to stop the 
attack taking place, but no payment details 
or sensitive personal information was lost 
as it had already been stored separately 
and protected with different controls. 
Due to additional monitoring, the breach 
was discovered internally first. Shortly 
after the incident, the company released 
a public statement about what had 
happened and how it had been addressed.
Financial:  While the cost of recovery from 
the breach was significant, the impact 
on share price, customer churn and 
media exposure was minimal to none. 
The cost was confined to investigative 
and remediation activity. The company 
was able to control the media attention 
with enough confidence that they did not 
need to offer credit monitoring service, 
which is the usual response to a customer 
data breach. This alone will save at least 
US$350m in potential cost of response 
and, arguably, it strengthened their 
customers and regulatory confidence.
Operational:  There was virtually no 
media coverage beyond the statement 
released by the company itself; they 
could therefore focus their efforts on 
returning to business as usual. The cost of 
investigation and remediation became an 
additional operational cost, so the breach 
investigation did not negatively impact 
their BAU processes and weaken their 
defences  a frequent error that creates 
an aftershock affect, which can cause 
subsequent breaches.
Personal:  No terminations or resignations 
were tabled, and there is evidence of 
renewed confidence in the executives.

Get ahead of cybercrime | EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014 | 29

Activate | Adapt | Anticipate30

Summary

Where organizations are now
Cyber risks are growing and are changing rapidly. Every day, cyber criminals are 
working on new techniques for getting through the security of organizations, including 
yours. They are doing this so that they can cause damage, access sensitive data and 
steal intellectual property. Every day, their attacks become more sophisticated and 
harder to defeat.
Because of this ongoing development, we cannot tell exactly what kind of threats will 
emerge next year, in five years time, or in 10 years time. We can only say that these 
threats will be even more dangerous than those of today. We can also be certain that  
as old sources of cyber threat fade, new sources will emerge to take their place.
Despite this uncertainty  in fact, because of it  you need to be clear about the type  
of cybersecurity you need.

What organizations need to do
To get cybersecurity right, the first step is to get the foundations right. Given how much 
attention recent cyber attacks have received, no one can claim they do not know the 
dangers; so there can be few excuses for organizations that are still not putting basic 
cybersecurity systems and processes in place.
Once the foundation has been mastered, the next stage is to make your cybersecurity 
more dynamic and better aligned and integrated into key business processes. Without 
taking this crucial step, organizations remain vulnerable  particularly when they, their 
environment and the cyber threats they face are all changing. 
And then comes the real opportunity: the chance to get ahead of cybercrime. By 
focusing your cybersecurity on the unknowns  the future and your businesss broader 
ecosystem  you can start building capabilities before they are needed and begin to 
prepare for threats before they arise.

What it is

Cybersecurity system building blocks

Status

Anticipate is about looking into the unknown.  
Based on cyber threat intelligence, potential hacks  
are identified; measures are taken before any  
damage is done.

Adapt is about change. The cybersecurity system 
is changing when the environment is changing. It is 
focused on protecting the business of tomorrow.

Activate sets the stage. It is a complex set of 
cybersecurity measures focused on protecting  
the business as it is today.

Anticipate

Adapt

Activate

Anticipate is an emerging level. More and more 
organizations are using cyber threat intelligence to 
get ahead of cybercrime. It is an innovative addition 
to the below.

Adapt is not broadly implemented yet. It is not 
common practice to assess the cybersecurity 
implications every time an organization makes 
changes in the business.

Activate is part of the cybersecurity system of every 
organization. Not all necessary measures are taken 
yet; there is still a lot to do.

Where wed like organizations to be
Organizations must look ahead and look beyond the business  new threats are being 
created today and you need to get ahead of the game. Although this years survey 
does not suggest that they will get there soon, we would like proactive, intelligent 
cybersecurity to become the norm for every organization. 
We dont want the focus to be on business-destroying attacks or public relations 
disasters: we want the focus to be on enhancing the organization because businesses 
have mastered the foundation; they are introducing innovative new approaches and 
they are using powerful new tools making them stronger and safer than ever. We would 
like businesses to take the initiative and make cybercrime far less profitable and a far 
less effective use of time and resources than it is today. In other words, take away the 
power of the hacker and get ahead of cybercrime.

Get ahead of cybercrime | EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014 | 31

How EY can help
At EY, we have an integrated perspective on all aspects of organizational risk, and 
cybersecurity is a key area of focus where EY is an acknowledged leader in the current 
landscape of mobile technology, social media and cloud computing. 
Our cybersecurity professionals address the challenge of managing the information 
and cybersecurity risk to business operations. We draw on in-depth industry-leading 
technical and IT-related risk management knowledge from our global organization to 
deliver IT controls services focused on the design, implementation and rationalization  
of controls that potentially reduce the risks in our clients applications, infrastructure 
and data.
Cybersecurity is regularly discussed in the board room; we know the business impact 
and technical details and how to present these to C-level executives, resulting in deeper 
risk insights and more in-depth executive-level discussions. We aim to be a trusted 
advisor to our clients as they face the challenge of protecting and securing their assets; 
for example, we help our clients with:
 Aligning their information security strategy with business needs
 Containing and investigating complex cyber breaches, and remediating detect and 
respond approaches 
 Optimizing their information security spending and making their Cyber Program 
Management (CPM) more cost-effective and sustainable
 Improving SOC capabilities
 Helping monitor, maintain and enforce compliance with access management policies, 
as well as addressing legal and regulatory compliance related issues
 Assessing adequacy of resources and skills for implementing technology  
and processes

Our cybersecurity services include key aspects of the Activate, Adapt and Anticipate 
phases mentioned in this report to help you get ahead of cybercrime.

32 | Get ahead of cybercrime |  EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014

Want to learn more?
Insights on governance, risk and compliance is an ongoing series of thought leadership reports focused on IT and other business 
risks and the many related challenges and opportunities. These timely and topical publications are designed to help you understand 
the issues and provide you with valuable insights about our perspective. Please visit our Insights on governance, risk and compliance 
series at www.ey.com/GRCinsights.

Cyber Threat Intelligence   
how to get ahead of cybercrime  
www.ey.com/CTI

Achieving resilience in the  
cyber ecosystem  
www.ey.com/cyberecosystem

Cyber Program Management: 
identifying ways to get ahead  
of cybercrime 
www.ey.com/CPM

Security Operations Centers  
helping you get ahead of cybercrime 
www.ey.com/SOC

Privacy trends 2014: privacy 
protection in the age of technology  
www.ey.com/privacy2014

Maximizing the value of a 
data protection program
www.ey.com/dataprotect

Building trust in the cloud
www.ey.com/cloudtrust

Identity and access management: 
beyond compliance
www.ey.com/IAM

Big data: changing the way 
businesses operate
www.ey.com/bigdatachange

Get ahead of cybercrime | EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014 | 33

Survey methodology

EYs Global Information Security Survey was conducted between June 2014 and  
August 2014. More than 1,800 respondents across all major industries and in 60 
countries participated.
For our survey, we invited CIOs, CISOs, CFOs, CEOs and other information security 
executives to take part. We distributed a questionnaire to designated EY professionals 
in each country practice, along with instructions for consistent administration of the 
survey process.
The majority of the survey responses were collected during face-to-face interviews. 
When this was not possible, the questionnaire was conducted online.
If you wish to participate in future EY Global Information Security Surveys, please 
contact your EY representative or local office, or visit www.ey.com/giss and complete  
a simple request form.

Respondents by area  
(1,825 respondents)

Respondents by total annual  
company revenue

Key: 

 EMEIA 

 Americas 

 Asia-Pacific  

 Japan  

39% 

26%

22%

13% 

Key: 

 US$10US$50 billion 

 US$1US$10 billion 

 US$100 millionUS$1 billion  

 US$10US$100 million  

 Less than US$10 million 

 Government, nonprofit 

 Not applicable 

167

441

479

314 

209

119

215

34 | Get ahead of cybercrime |  EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014

Respondents by industry sector

Respondents by number of employees 

Profile of participants

Aerospace and defense

Asset management

Automotive

Banking and  
capital markets

Cleantech

Consumer products

Diversified industrial 
products and chemicals

Government and  
public sector

Health care and 
Provider care

Insurance

Life sciences

Media and 
entertainment

Mining and metals

Oil and gas

Power and utilities

Private equity

Professional  
firms and services

Real estate

Retail and wholesale

Technology

Telecommunications

Transportation

Less than 1,000

1,000 to 5,000

5,000 to 15,000

15,000 to 50,000

50,000 plus

Respondents by roles/titles

Chief Information 
Officer

Chief Information 
Security Officer

Chief Security Officer

Chief Technology Officer

Information  
Security Executive

Information  
Technology Executive

Internal Audit  
Director/manager

Network/System 
Administrator

Other C-suite, Executive, 
Vice President

Other

664

557

283

194

127

208

283

54

41

233

346

72

38

60

490

63

60

62

308

2

132

146

119

70

138

40

44

43

55

68

1

68

56

100

117

62

71

1,825

respondents

60countries worldwide

25industry sectors

Get ahead of cybercrime | EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014 | 35

Contact us
We have an integrated perspective on all aspects of organizational risk. We are the 
market leaders in internal audit and financial risk and controls, and we continue to 
expand our capabilities in other areas of risk, including governance, risk and  
compliance, as well as enterprise risk management. 
We innovate in areas such as risk consulting, risk analytics and risk technologies to stay 
ahead of our competition. We draw on in-depth industry-leading technical and IT-related 
risk management knowledge to deliver IT controls services focused on the design, 
implementation and rationalization of controls that potentially reduce the risks in our 
clients applications, infrastructure and data. Information security is a key area of focus 
where EY is an acknowledged leader in the current landscape of mobile technology, 
social media and cloud computing.
Our Risk leaders are:

Global Risk Leader

Paul van Kessel

Area Risk Leaders
Americas

Amy Brachio

EMEIA

+31 88 40 71271

paul.van.kessel@nl.ey.com

+1 612 371 8537

amy.brachio@ey.com

Jonathan Blackmore

+971 4 312 9921

jonathan.blackmore@ae.ey.com

Asia-Pacific

Iain Burnet

Japan

+61 8 9429 2486

iain.burnet@au.ey.com

Yoshihiro Azuma 

+81 3 3503 1100

azuma-yshhr@shinnihon.or.jp

Our Cybersecurity leaders are:

Global Cybersecurity Leader

Ken Allan

+44 20 795 15769

kallan@uk.ey.com

Area Cybersecurity Leaders
Americas

Bob Sydow

EMEIA

Ken Allan

Asia-Pacific

Paul ORourke

Japan

+1 513 612 1591

bob.sydow@ey.com

+44 20 795 15769

kallan@uk.ey.com

+65 6309 8890

 paul.orourke@sg.ey.com 

Shinichiro Nagao

+81 3 3503 1100

nagao-shnchr@shinnihon.or.jp

36 | Get ahead of cybercrime |  EYs Global Information Security Survey 2014

EY | Assurance | Tax | Transactions | Advisory

About EY
EY is a global leader in assurance, tax, transaction 
and advisory services. The insights and quality 
services we deliver help build trust and confidence 
in the capital markets and in economies the world 
over. We develop outstanding leaders who team to 
deliver on our promises to all of our stakeholders. 
In so doing, we play a critical role in building a 
better working world for our people, for our  
clients and for our communities.
EY refers to the global organization, and may  
refer to one or more, of the member firms of  
Ernst & Young Global Limited, each of which is a 
separate legal entity. Ernst & Young Global Limited, 
a UK company limited by guarantee, does not 
provide services to clients. For more information 
about our organization, please visit ey.com.

About EYs Advisory Services 
Improving business performance while managing 
risk is an increasingly complex business challenge. 
Whether your focus is on broad business 
transformation or, more specifically, on achieving 
growth or optimizing or protecting your business, 
having the right advisors on your side can 
make all the difference. Our 30,000 advisory 
professionals form one of the broadest global 
advisory networks of any professional organization, 
delivering seasoned multidisciplinary teams 
that work with our clients to deliver a powerful 
and exceptional client service. We use proven, 
integrated methodologies to help you solve your 
most challenging business problems, deliver a 
strong performance in complex market conditions 
and build sustainable stakeholder confidence for 
the longer term. We understand that you need 
services that are adapted to your industry issues, 
so we bring our broad sector experience and deep 
subject matter knowledge to bear in a proactive 
and objective way. Above all, we are committed to 
measuring the gains and identifying where your 
strategy and change initiatives are delivering the 
value your business needs. 
 2014 EYGM Limited.  
All Rights Reserved.
EYG no. AU2698
1408-1308388 EC  
ED None.  

This material has been prepared for general informational purposes only and 
is not intended to be relied upon as accounting, tax, or other professional 
advice. Please refer to your advisors for specific advice.
ey.com/giss

