H. R. 245848

(1)  maximize  the  degree  to  which  unclassified  geographic
information  from  various  sources  can  be  made  electronically
compatible and accessible; and

(2)  promote  the  development  of  interoperable  geographic

information systems technologies that shall

(A)  allow  widespread,  low-cost  use  and  sharing  of
geographic data by Federal agencies, State, local, and tribal
governments, and the public; and

the  enhancement  of  services  using

(B)  enable 
geographic data.

(f)  AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.There  are  authorized
to  be  appropriated  such  sums  as  are  necessary  to  carry  out  this
section, for each of the fiscal years 2003 through 2007.

TITLE IIIINFORMATION SECURITY

SEC. 301. INFORMATION SECURITY.

(a)  SHORT TITLE.This  title  may  be  cited  as  the  Federal

Information Security Management Act of 2002.

(b) INFORMATION SECURITY.

(1)  IN GENERAL.Chapter  35  of  title  44,  United  States
Code,  is  amended  by  adding  at  the  end  the  following  new
subchapter:

SUBCHAPTER IIIINFORMATION SECURITY

 3541. Purposes

The purposes of this subchapter are to

(1)  provide  a  comprehensive  framework  for  ensuring  the
effectiveness  of  information  security  controls  over  information
resources that support Federal operations and assets;

computing 

(2)  recognize  the  highly  networked  nature  of  the  current
Federal 
effective
governmentwide  management  and  oversight  of  the  related
information security risks, including coordination of information
security  efforts  throughout  the  civilian,  national  security,  and
law enforcement communities;

environment  and  provide 

(3) provide for development and maintenance of minimum
controls  required  to  protect  Federal  information  and  informa-
tion systems;

(4) provide a mechanism for improved oversight of Federal

agency information security programs;

(5)  acknowledge  that  commercially  developed  information
security products offer advanced, dynamic, robust, and effective
information  security  solutions,  reflecting  market  solutions  for
the  protection  of  critical  information  infrastructures  important
to  the  national  defense  and  economic  security  of  the  nation
that  are  designed,  built,  and  operated  by  the  private  sector;
and

(6)  recognize  that  the  selection  of  specific  technical  hard-
ware  and  software  information  security  solutions  should  be
left to individual agencies from among commercially developed
products.

 3542. Definitions

H. R. 245849

(a)  IN GENERAL.Except  as  provided  under  subsection  (b),
the  definitions  under  section  3502  shall  apply  to  this  subchapter.

(b) ADDITIONAL DEFINITIONS.As used in this subchapter:

(1)  The  term  information  security  means  protecting
information and information systems from unauthorized access,
use, disclosure, disruption, modification, or destruction in order
to provide

(A) integrity, which means guarding against improper
includes

information  modification  or  destruction,  and 
ensuring information nonrepudiation and authenticity;

(B)  confidentiality,  which  means  preserving  author-
ized restrictions on access and disclosure, including means
for protecting personal privacy and proprietary information;
and

(C)  availability,  which  means  ensuring  timely  and

reliable access to and use of information.
(2)(A)  The  term  national  security  system  means  any
information system (including any telecommunications system)
used or operated by an agency or by a contractor of an agency,
or other organization on behalf of an agency

(i) the function, operation, or use of which

(I) involves intelligence activities;
(II) 

involves  cryptologic  activities  related  to

national security;

forces;

(III)  involves  command  and  control  of  military

(IV)  involves  equipment  that  is  an  integral  part

of a weapon or weapons system; or

(V)  subject  to  subparagraph  (B),  is  critical  to  the
direct  fulfillment  of  military  or  intelligence  missions;
or
(ii) is protected at all times by procedures established
for information that have been specifically authorized under
criteria  established  by  an  Executive  order  or  an  Act  of
Congress  to  be  kept  classified  in  the  interest  of  national
defense or foreign policy.
(B) Subparagraph (A)(i)(V) does not include a system that
is  to  be  used  for  routine  administrative  and  business  applica-
tions  (including  payroll,  finance,  logistics,  and  personnel
management applications).

(3)  The  term  information  technology  has  the  meaning

given that term in section 11101 of title 40.

 3543. Authority and functions of the Director

(a)  IN GENERAL.The  Director  shall  oversee  agency  informa-

tion security policies and practices, including

(1)  developing  and  overseeing  the  implementation  of  poli-
cies, principles, standards, and guidelines on information secu-
rity, including through ensuring timely agency adoption of and
compliance  with  standards  promulgated  under  section  11331
of title 40;

(2)  requiring  agencies,  consistent  with  the  standards
promulgated  under  such  section  11331  and  the  requirements
of this subchapter, to identify and provide information security
protections  commensurate  with  the  risk  and  magnitude  of  the

H. R. 245850

harm  resulting  from  the  unauthorized  access,  use,  disclosure,
disruption, modification, or destruction of

(A) information collected or maintained by or on behalf

of an agency; or

(B) information systems used or operated by an agency
or  by  a  contractor  of  an  agency  or  other  organization  on
behalf of an agency;
(3)  coordinating  the  development  of  standards  and  guide-
lines  under  section  20  of  the  National  Institute  of  Standards
and Technology Act (15 U.S.C. 278g3) with agencies and offices
operating  or  exercising  control  of  national  security  systems
(including the National Security Agency) to assure, to the max-
imum  extent  feasible,  that  such  standards  and  guidelines  are
complementary  with  standards  and  guidelines  developed  for
national security systems;

(4)  overseeing  agency  compliance  with  the  requirements
of  this  subchapter,  including  through  any  authorized  action
under  section  11303  of  title  40,  to  enforce  accountability  for
compliance with such requirements;

(5)  reviewing  at  least  annually,  and  approving  or  dis-
approving,  agency  information  security  programs  required
under section 3544(b);

(6)  coordinating  information  security  policies  and  proce-
dures  with  related  information  resources  management  policies
and procedures;

(7)  overseeing  the  operation  of  the  Federal  information

security incident center required under section 3546; and

(8)  reporting  to  Congress  no  later  than  March  1  of  each
year  on  agency  compliance  with  the  requirements  of  this  sub-
chapter, including

(A) a summary of the findings of evaluations required

by section 3545;

(B)  an  assessment  of  the  development,  promulgation,
and adoption of, and compliance with, standards developed
under  section  20  of  the  National  Institute  of  Standards
and  Technology  Act  (15  U.S.C.  278g-3)  and  promulgated
under section 11331 of title 40;

(C) significant deficiencies in agency information secu-

rity practices;

ciencies; and

(D)  planned  remedial  action  to  address  such  defi-

(E)  a  summary  of,  and  the  views  of  the  Director  on,
the report prepared by the National Institute of Standards
and  Technology  under  section  20(d)(10)  of  the  National
Institute of Standards and Technology Act (15 U.S.C. 278g
3).

(b)  NATIONAL SECURITY SYSTEMS.Except  for  the  authorities
described in paragraphs (4) and (8) of subsection (a), the authorities
of the Director under this section shall not apply to national security
systems.

(c)  DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE AND CENTRAL INTELLIGENCE
AGENCY SYSTEMS.(1)  The  authorities  of  the  Director  described
in  paragraphs  (1)  and  (2)  of  subsection  (a)  shall  be  delegated  to
the  Secretary  of  Defense  in  the  case  of  systems  described  in  para-
graph  (2)  and  to  the  Director  of  Central  Intelligence  in  the  case
of systems described in paragraph (3).

H. R. 245851

(2)  The  systems  described  in  this  paragraph  are  systems  that
are  operated  by  the  Department  of  Defense,  a  contractor  of  the
Department  of  Defense,  or  another  entity  on  behalf  of  the  Depart-
ment  of  Defense  that  processes  any  information  the  unauthorized
access,  use,  disclosure,  disruption,  modification,  or  destruction  of
which  would  have  a  debilitating  impact  on  the  mission  of  the
Department of Defense.

(3)  The  systems  described  in  this  paragraph  are  systems  that
are  operated  by  the  Central  Intelligence  Agency,  a  contractor  of
the  Central  Intelligence  Agency,  or  another  entity  on  behalf  of
the  Central  Intelligence  Agency  that  processes  any  information
the  unauthorized  access,  use,  disclosure,  disruption,  modification,
or  destruction  of  which  would  have  a  debilitating  impact  on  the
mission of the Central Intelligence Agency.

 3544. Federal agency responsibilities

(a) IN GENERAL.The head of each agency shall

(1) be responsible for

(A)  providing 

security  protections
commensurate  with  the  risk  and  magnitude  of  the  harm
resulting from unauthorized access, use, disclosure, disrup-
tion, modification, or destruction of

information 

(i)  information  collected  or  maintained  by  or  on

behalf of the agency; and

(ii)  information  systems  used  or  operated  by  an
agency  or  by  a  contractor  of  an  agency  or  other
organization on behalf of an agency;
(B)  complying  with  the  requirements  of  this  sub-
chapter  and  related  policies,  procedures,  standards,  and
guidelines, including

(i)  information  security  standards  promulgated

under section 11331 of title 40; and

(ii) information security standards and guidelines
for national security systems issued in accordance with
law and as directed by the President; and
(C)  ensuring  that  information  security  management
processes  are  integrated  with  agency  strategic  and  oper-
ational planning processes;
(2) ensure that senior agency officials provide information
security for the information and information systems that sup-
port  the  operations  and  assets  under  their  control,  including
through

(A)  assessing  the  risk  and  magnitude  of  the  harm
that could result from the unauthorized access, use, disclo-
sure,  disruption,  modification,  or  destruction  of  such
information or information systems;

(B)  determining  the  levels  of  information  security
appropriate  to  protect  such  information  and  information
systems  in  accordance  with  standards  promulgated  under
section 11331 of title 40, for information security classifica-
tions and related requirements;

(C) implementing policies and procedures to cost-effec-

tively reduce risks to an acceptable level; and

(D)  periodically  testing  and  evaluating  information
security  controls  and  techniques  to  ensure  that  they  are
effectively implemented;

H. R. 245852

(3) delegate to the agency Chief Information Officer estab-
lished  under  section  3506  (or  comparable  official  in  an  agency
not covered by such section) the authority to ensure compliance
with  the  requirements  imposed  on  the  agency  under  this  sub-
chapter, including

(A)  designating  a  senior  agency  information  security

officer who shall

(i)  carry  out  the  Chief  Information  Officers

responsibilities under this section;

(ii)  possess  professional  qualifications,  including
training  and  experience,  required  to  administer  the
functions described under this section;

(iii) have information security duties as that offi-

cials primary duty; and

(iv) head an office with the mission and resources
to  assist  in  ensuring  agency  compliance  with  this  sec-
tion;
(B)  developing  and  maintaining  an  agencywide
information  security  program  as  required  by  subsection
(b);

(C)  developing  and  maintaining  information  security
policies,  procedures,  and  control  techniques  to  address  all
applicable requirements, including those issued under sec-
tion 3543 of this title, and section 11331 of title 40;

(D) training and overseeing personnel with significant
responsibilities  for  information  security  with  respect  to
such responsibilities; and

(E)  assisting  senior  agency  officials  concerning  their

responsibilities under paragraph (2);
(4) ensure that the agency has trained personnel sufficient
to  assist  the  agency  in  complying  with  the  requirements  of
this  subchapter  and  related  policies,  procedures,  standards,
and guidelines; and

(5)  ensure  that  the  agency  Chief  Information  Officer,  in
coordination with other senior agency officials, reports annually
to the agency head on the effectiveness of the agency informa-
tion  security  program,  including  progress  of  remedial  actions.
(b)  AGENCY PROGRAM.Each  agency  shall  develop,  document,
and  implement  an  agencywide  information  security  program,
approved  by  the  Director  under  section  3543(a)(5),  to  provide
information  security  for  the  information  and  information  systems
that  support  the  operations  and  assets  of  the  agency,  including
those  provided  or  managed  by  another  agency,  contractor,  or  other
source, that includes

(1)  periodic  assessments  of  the  risk  and  magnitude  of
the  harm  that  could  result  from  the  unauthorized  access,  use,
disclosure,  disruption,  modification,  or  destruction  of  informa-
tion  and  information  systems  that  support  the  operations  and
assets of the agency;

(2) policies and procedures that

(A)  are  based  on  the  risk  assessments  required  by

paragraph (1);

to an acceptable level;

(B)  cost-effectively  reduce  information  security  risks

(C)  ensure  that  information  security  is  addressed
throughout the life cycle of each agency information system;
and

H. R. 245853

(D) ensure compliance with

(i) the requirements of this subchapter;
(ii)  policies  and  procedures  as  may  be  prescribed
by  the  Director,  and  information  security  standards
promulgated under section 11331 of title 40;

(iii)  minimally  acceptable  system  configuration

requirements, as determined by the agency; and

(iv)  any  other  applicable  requirements,  including
standards and guidelines for national security systems
issued  in  accordance  with  law  and  as  directed  by  the
President;

(3)  subordinate  plans  for  providing  adequate  information
security  for  networks,  facilities,  and  systems  or  groups  of
information systems, as appropriate;

(4)  security  awareness  training  to  inform  personnel,
including  contractors  and  other  users  of  information  systems
that  support  the  operations  and  assets  of  the  agency,  of
(A)  information  security  risks  associated  with  their

activities; and

(B)  their  responsibilities  in  complying  with  agency
policies  and  procedures  designed  to  reduce  these  risks;
(5)  periodic  testing  and  evaluation  of  the  effectiveness
of  information  security  policies,  procedures,  and  practices,  to
be  performed  with  a  frequency  depending  on  risk,  but  no  less
than annually, of which such testing

(A)  shall  include  testing  of  management,  operational,
and  technical  controls  of  every  information  system  identi-
fied  in  the  inventory  required  under  section  3505(c);  and
(B) may include testing relied on in a evaluation under

section 3545;
(6)  a  process  for  planning,  implementing,  evaluating,  and
documenting  remedial  action  to  address  any  deficiencies  in
the  information  security  policies,  procedures,  and  practices  of
the agency;

(7)  procedures  for  detecting,  reporting,  and  responding
to  security  incidents,  consistent  with  standards  and  guidelines
issued pursuant to section 3546(b), including

(A)  mitigating  risks  associated  with  such  incidents

before substantial damage is done;

(B) notifying and consulting with the Federal informa-
tion  security  incident  center  referred  to  in  section  3546;
and

(C)  notifying  and  consulting  with,  as  appropriate
(i) law enforcement agencies and relevant Offices

of Inspector General;

(ii)  an  office  designated  by  the  President  for  any

incident involving a national security system; and

(iii) any other agency or office, in accordance with

law or as directed by the President; and

(8) plans and procedures to ensure continuity of operations
for information systems that support the operations and assets
of the agency.
(c) AGENCY REPORTING.Each agency shall

(1)  report  annually  to  the  Director,  the  Committees  on
Government  Reform  and  Science  of  the  House  of  Representa-
tives, the Committees on Governmental Affairs and Commerce,
Science,  and  Transportation  of  the  Senate,  the  appropriate

H. R. 245854

authorization  and  appropriations  committees  of  Congress,  and
the  Comptroller  General  on  the  adequacy  and  effectiveness
of  information  security  policies,  procedures,  and  practices,  and
compliance with the requirements of this subchapter, including
compliance with each requirement of subsection (b);

(2)  address  the  adequacy  and  effectiveness  of  information
security policies, procedures, and practices in plans and reports
relating to

(A) annual agency budgets;
(B)  information  resources  management  under  sub-

chapter 1 of this chapter;

title III of title 40;

(C)  information  technology  management  under  sub-

(D)  program  performance  under  sections  1105  and
1115 through 1119 of title 31, and sections 2801 and 2805
of title 39;

(E)  financial  management  under  chapter  9  of  title
31, and the Chief Financial Officers Act of 1990 (31 U.S.C.
501 note; Public Law 101576) (and the amendments made
by that Act);

(F)  financial  management  systems  under  the  Federal
Financial  Management  Improvement  Act  (31  U.S.C.  3512
note); and

(G)  internal  accounting  and  administrative  controls
under  section  3512  of  title  31,  (known  as  the  Federal
Managers Financial Integrity Act); and
(3) report any significant deficiency in a policy, procedure,

or practice identified under paragraph (1) or (2)

(A) as a material weakness in reporting under section

3512 of title 31; and

(B)  if  relating  to  financial  management  systems,  as
an  instance  of  a  lack  of  substantial  compliance  under  the
Federal  Financial  Management  Improvement  Act  (31
U.S.C. 3512 note).

(d)  PERFORMANCE PLAN.(1)  In  addition  to  the  requirements
of  subsection  (c),  each  agency,  in  consultation  with  the  Director,
shall include as part of the performance plan required under section
1115 of title 31 a description of

(A) the time periods, and
(B) the resources, including budget, staffing, and training,
that  are  necessary  to  implement  the  program  required  under  sub-
section (b).

(2)  The  description  under  paragraph  (1)  shall  be  based  on

the risk assessments required under subsection (b)(2)(1).

(e) PUBLIC NOTICE AND COMMENT.Each agency shall provide
the  public  with  timely  notice  and  opportunities  for  comment  on
proposed information security policies and procedures to the extent
that  such  policies  and  procedures  affect  communication  with  the
public.

 3545. Annual independent evaluation

(a)  IN GENERAL.(1)  Each  year  each  agency  shall  have  per-
formed  an  independent  evaluation  of  the  information  security  pro-
gram  and  practices  of  that  agency  to  determine  the  effectiveness
of such program and practices.

(2) Each evaluation under this section shall include

H. R. 245855

(A)  testing  of  the  effectiveness  of  information  security
policies,  procedures,  and  practices  of  a  representative  subset
of the agencys information systems;

(B)  an  assessment  (made  on  the  basis  of  the  results  of

the testing) of compliance with

(i) the requirements of this subchapter; and
(ii)  related  information  security  policies,  procedures,

standards, and guidelines; and
(C)  separate  presentations,  as  appropriate,  regarding

information security relating to national security systems.
(b) INDEPENDENT AUDITOR.Subject to subsection (c)

(1)  for  each  agency  with  an  Inspector  General  appointed
under the Inspector General Act of 1978, the annual evaluation
required  by  this  section  shall  be  performed  by  the  Inspector
General  or  by  an  independent  external  auditor,  as  determined
by the Inspector General of the agency; and

and

(2) for each agency to which paragraph (1) does not apply,
the  head  of  the  agency  shall  engage  an  independent  external
auditor to perform the evaluation.
(c)  NATIONAL SECURITY SYSTEMS.For  each  agency  operating
or  exercising  control  of  a  national  security  system,  that  portion
of  the  evaluation  required  by  this  section  directly  relating  to  a
national security system shall be performed

(1)  only  by  an  entity  designated  by  the  agency  head;

(2)  in  such  a  manner  as  to  ensure  appropriate  protection
for information associated with any information security vulner-
ability  in  such  system  commensurate  with  the  risk  and  in
accordance with all applicable laws.
(d)  EXISTING EVALUATIONS.The  evaluation  required  by  this
section  may  be  based  in  whole  or  in  part  on  an  audit,  evaluation,
or report relating to programs or practices of the applicable agency.
(e)  AGENCY REPORTING.(1)  Each  year,  not  later  than  such
date  established  by  the  Director,  the  head  of  each  agency  shall
submit to the Director the results of the evaluation required under
this section.

(2)  To  the  extent  an  evaluation  required  under  this  section
directly relates to a national security system, the evaluation results
submitted to the Director shall contain only a summary and assess-
ment of that portion of the evaluation directly relating to a national
security system.

(f)  PROTECTION OF INFORMATION.Agencies  and  evaluators
shall take appropriate steps to ensure the protection of information
which, if disclosed, may adversely affect information security. Such
protections  shall  be  commensurate  with  the  risk  and  comply  with
all applicable laws and regulations.

(g)  OMB  REPORTS TO CONGRESS.(1)  The  Director  shall
summarize  the  results  of  the  evaluations  conducted  under  this
section in the report to Congress required under section 3543(a)(8).
(2)  The  Directors  report  to  Congress  under  this  subsection
shall  summarize 
information  security
relating to national security systems in such a manner as to ensure
appropriate protection for information associated with any informa-
tion  security  vulnerability  in  such  system  commensurate  with  the
risk and in accordance with all applicable laws.

information  regarding 

(3) Evaluations and any other descriptions of information sys-
tems  under  the  authority  and  control  of  the  Director  of  Central

H. R. 245856

Intelligence  or  of  National  Foreign  Intelligence  Programs  systems
under  the  authority  and  control  of  the  Secretary  of  Defense  shall
be  made  available  to  Congress  only  through  the  appropriate  over-
sight  committees  of  Congress,  in  accordance  with  applicable  laws.
(h)  COMPTROLLER GENERAL.The  Comptroller  General  shall

periodically evaluate and report to Congress on

(1)  the  adequacy  and  effectiveness  of  agency  information

security policies and practices; and

(2) implementation of the requirements of this subchapter.

 3546. Federal information security incident center

(a)  IN GENERAL.The  Director  shall  ensure  the  operation  of

a central Federal information security incident center to

(1)  provide  timely  technical  assistance  to  operators  of
agency 
incidents,
including guidance on detecting and handling information secu-
rity incidents;

information  systems  regarding  security 

(2)  compile  and  analyze  information  about  incidents  that

threaten information security;

(3)  inform  operators  of  agency  information  systems  about
information  security  threats,  and

current  and  potential 
vulnerabilities; and

(4)  consult  with  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and
Technology,  agencies  or  offices  operating  or  exercising  control
of  national  security  systems  (including  the  National  Security
Agency),  and  such  other  agencies  or  offices  in  accordance  with
law  and  as  directed  by  the  President  regarding  information
security incidents and related matters.
(b)  NATIONAL SECURITY SYSTEMS.Each  agency  operating  or
exercising control of a national security system shall share informa-
tion 
and
vulnerabilities with the Federal information security incident center
to the extent consistent with standards and guidelines for national
security  systems,  issued  in  accordance  with  law  and  as  directed
by the President.

information 

incidents, 

security 

threats, 

about 

 3547. National security systems

The  head  of  each  agency  operating  or  exercising  control  of
a  national  security  system  shall  be  responsible  for  ensuring  that
the agency

(1)  provides  information  security  protections  commensu-
rate  with  the  risk  and  magnitude  of  the  harm  resulting  from
the  unauthorized  access,  use,  disclosure,  disruption,  modifica-
tion, or destruction of the information contained in such system;
(2) implements information security policies and practices
as  required  by  standards  and  guidelines  for  national  security
systems,  issued  in  accordance  with  law  and  as  directed  by
the President; and

(3)  complies  with  the  requirements  of  this  subchapter.

 3548. Authorization of appropriations

There  are  authorized  to  be  appropriated  to  carry  out  the
provisions  of  this  subchapter  such  sums  as  may  be  necessary  for
each of fiscal years 2003 through 2007.

H. R. 245857

 3549. Effect on existing law

Nothing in this subchapter, section 11331 of title 40, or section
20 of the National Standards and Technology Act (15 U.S.C. 278g
3)  may  be  construed  as  affecting  the  authority  of  the  President,
the  Office  of  Management  and  Budget  or  the  Director  thereof,
the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology,  or  the  head
of  any  agency,  with  respect  to  the  authorized  use  or  disclosure
of  information,  including  with  regard  to  the  protection  of  personal
privacy  under  section  552a  of  title  5,  the  disclosure  of  information
under  section  552  of  title  5,  the  management  and  disposition  of
records  under  chapters  29,  31,  or  33  of  title  44,  the  management
of  information  resources  under  subchapter  I  of  chapter  35  of  this
title, or the disclosure of information to the Congress or the Comp-
troller  General  of  the  United  States.  While  this  subchapter  is  in
effect, subchapter II of this chapter shall not apply..

(2)  CLERICAL AMENDMENT.The  table  of  sections  at  the
beginning  of  such  chapter  35  is  amended  by  adding  at  the
end the following:

SUBCHAPTER IIIINFORMATION SECURITY

Sec.
3541. Purposes.
3542. Definitions.
3543. Authority and functions of the Director.
3544. Federal agency responsibilities.
3545. Annual independent evaluation.
3546. Federal information security incident center.
3547. National security systems.
3548. Authorization of appropriations.
3549. Effect on existing law..

(c) INFORMATION SECURITY RESPONSIBILITIES OF CERTAIN AGEN-

CIES.

amended

(1)  NATIONAL SECURITY RESPONSIBILITIES.(A)  Nothing  in
this  Act  (including  any  amendment  made  by  this  Act)  shall
supersede  any  authority  of  the  Secretary  of  Defense,  the
Director  of  Central  Intelligence,  or  other  agency  head,  as
authorized by law and as directed by the President, with regard
to  the  operation,  control,  or  management  of  national  security
systems,  as  defined  by  section  3542(b)(2)  of  title  44,  United
States Code.

(B)  Section  2224  of  title  10,  United  States  Code,  is

(i)  in  subsection  (b),  by  striking  (b)  OBJECTIVES AND
MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS.(1)  and  inserting  (b)  OBJEC-
TIVES OF THE PROGRAM.;

(ii)  in  subsection  (b),  by  striking  paragraph  (2);  and
(iii)  in  subsection  (c),  in  the  matter  preceding  para-
graph  (1),  by  inserting  ,  including  through  compliance
with  subchapter  III  of  chapter  35  of  title  44  after  infra-
structure.
(2) ATOMIC ENERGY ACT OF 1954.Nothing in this Act shall
supersede  any  requirement  made  by  or  under  the  Atomic
Energy  Act  of  1954  (42  U.S.C.  2011  et  seq.).  Restricted  data
or  formerly  restricted  data  shall  be  handled,  protected,  classi-
fied,  downgraded,  and  declassified  in  conformity  with  the
Atomic Energy Act of 1954 (42 U.S.C. 2011 et seq.).

SEC. 302. MANAGEMENT OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY.

H. R. 245858

(a) IN GENERAL.Section 11331 of title 40, United States Code,

is amended to read as follows:
 11331.  Responsibilities  for  Federal  information  systems

standards

(a) STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES.

(1)  AUTHORITY TO PRESCRIBE.Except  as  provided  under
paragraph  (2),  the  Secretary  of  Commerce  shall,  on  the  basis
of standards and guidelines developed by the National Institute
of  Standards  and  Technology  pursuant  to  paragraphs  (2)  and
(3)  of  section  20(a)  of  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and
Technology  Act  (15  U.S.C.  278g3(a)),  prescribe  standards  and
guidelines pertaining to Federal information systems.

(2)  NATIONAL SECURITY SYSTEMS.Standards  and  guide-
lines  for  national  security  systems  (as  defined  under  this  sec-
tion)  shall  be  developed,  prescribed,  enforced,  and  overseen
as  otherwise  authorized  by  law  and  as  directed  by  the  Presi-
dent.
(b) MANDATORY REQUIREMENTS.

(1) AUTHORITY TO MAKE MANDATORY.Except as provided
under  paragraph  (2),  the  Secretary  shall  make  standards  pre-
scribed  under  subsection  (a)(1)  compulsory  and  binding  to  the
extent  determined  necessary  by  the  Secretary  to  improve  the
efficiency  of  operation  or  security  of  Federal  information  sys-
tems.

(2) REQUIRED MANDATORY STANDARDS.(A) Standards pre-
scribed  under  subsection  (a)(1)  shall  include  information  secu-
rity standards that

(i)  provide  minimum  information  security  require-
ments  as  determined  under  section  20(b)  of  the  National
Institute of Standards and Technology Act (15 U.S.C. 278g
3(b)); and

(ii)  are  otherwise  necessary  to  improve  the  security

of Federal information and information systems.
(B)  Information  security  standards  described  in  subpara-

graph (A) shall be compulsory and binding.
(c) AUTHORITY TO DISAPPROVE OR MODIFY.The President may
disapprove  or  modify  the  standards  and  guidelines  referred  to  in
subsection  (a)(1)  if  the  President  determines  such  action  to  be
in  the  public  interest.  The  Presidents  authority  to  disapprove  or
modify such standards and guidelines may not be delegated. Notice
of  such  disapproval  or  modification  shall  be  published  promptly
in  the  Federal  Register.  Upon  receiving  notice  of  such  disapproval
or  modification,  the  Secretary  of  Commerce  shall  immediately
rescind  or  modify  such  standards  or  guidelines  as  directed  by  the
President.

(d)  EXERCISE OF AUTHORITY.To  ensure  fiscal  and  policy
consistency,  the  Secretary  shall  exercise  the  authority  conferred
by this section subject to direction by the President and in coordina-
tion  with  the  Director  of  the  Office  of  Management  and  Budget.
(e)  APPLICATION OF MORE STRINGENT STANDARDS.The  head
of  an  executive  agency  may  employ  standards  for  the  cost-effective
information  security  for  information  systems  within  or  under  the
supervision of that agency that are more stringent than the stand-
ards  the  Secretary  prescribes  under  this  section  if  the  more  strin-
gent standards

H. R. 245859

(1) contain at least the applicable standards made compul-

sory and binding by the Secretary; and

(2)  are  otherwise  consistent  with  policies  and  guidelines

issued under section 3543 of title 44.
(f) DECISIONS ON PROMULGATION OF STANDARDS.The decision
by the Secretary regarding the promulgation of any standard under
this section shall occur not later than 6 months after the submission
of the proposed standard to the Secretary by the National Institute
of  Standards  and  Technology,  as  provided  under  section  20  of  the
National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology  Act  (15  U.S.C.
278g3).

(g) DEFINITIONS.In this section:

(1)  FEDERAL INFORMATION SYSTEM.The  term  Federal
information system means an information system used or oper-
ated  by  an  executive  agency,  by  a  contractor  of  an  executive
agency,  or  by  another  organization  on  behalf  of  an  executive
agency.

(2)  INFORMATION SECURITY.The  term  information  secu-
rity  has  the  meaning  given  that  term  in  section  3542(b)(1)
of title 44.

(3) NATIONAL SECURITY SYSTEM.The term national secu-
rity  system  has  the  meaning  given  that  term  in  section
3542(b)(2) of title 44..
(b) CLERICAL AMENDMENT.The item relating to section 11331
in  the  table  of  sections  at  the  beginning  of  chapter  113  of  such
title is amended to read as follows:

11331. Responsibilities for Federal information systems standards..

SEC.  303.  NATIONAL  INSTITUTE  OF  STANDARDS  AND  TECHNOLOGY.
Section  20  of  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Tech-
nology  Act  (15  U.S.C.  278g3),  is  amended  by  striking  the  text
and inserting the following:

(a) IN GENERAL.The Institute shall

(1)  have  the  mission  of  developing  standards,  guidelines,
and  associated  methods  and  techniques  for  information  sys-
tems;

(2)  develop  standards  and  guidelines,  including  minimum
requirements,  for  information  systems  used  or  operated  by  an
agency  or  by  a  contractor  of  an  agency  or  other  organization
on  behalf  of  an  agency,  other  than  national  security  systems
(as defined in section 3542(b)(2) of title 44, United States Code);
and

(3)  develop  standards  and  guidelines,  including  minimum
requirements,  for  providing  adequate  information  security  for
all agency operations and assets, but such standards and guide-
lines shall not apply to national security systems.
(b)  MINIMUM REQUIREMENTS FOR STANDARDS AND GUIDE-
LINES.The  standards  and  guidelines  required  by  subsection  (a)
shall include, at a minimum

(1)(A)  standards  to  be  used  by  all  agencies  to  categorize
all information and information systems collected or maintained
by  or  on  behalf  of  each  agency  based  on  the  objectives  of
providing  appropriate  levels  of  information  security  according
to a range of risk levels;

(B) guidelines recommending the types of information and
information  systems  to  be  included  in  each  such  category;  and

H. R. 245860

(C)  minimum 

for
information  and  information  systems  in  each  such  category;
(2)  a  definition  of  and  guidelines  concerning  detection

information  security  requirements 

and handling of information security incidents; and

(3)  guidelines  developed  in  conjunction  with  the  Depart-
ment  of  Defense,  including  the  National  Security  Agency,  for
identifying an information system as a national security system
consistent  with  applicable  requirements  for  national  security
systems,  issued  in  accordance  with  law  and  as  directed  by
the President.
(c)  DEVELOPMENT OF STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES.In  devel-
oping  standards  and  guidelines  required  by  subsections  (a)  and
(b), the Institute shall

(1) consult with other agencies and offices and the private
sector  (including  the  Director  of  the  Office  of  Management
and  Budget,  the  Departments  of  Defense  and  Energy,  the
National  Security  Agency,  the  General  Accounting  Office,  and
the Secretary of Homeland Security) to assure

(A)  use  of  appropriate  information  security  policies,
procedures, and techniques, in order to improve information
security  and  avoid  unnecessary  and  costly  duplication  of
effort; and

(B)  that  such  standards  and  guidelines  are  com-
plementary  with  standards  and  guidelines  employed  for
the protection of national security systems and information
contained in such systems;
(2)  provide  the  public  with  an  opportunity  to  comment

on proposed standards and guidelines;

(3) submit to the Secretary of Commerce for promulgation

under section 11331 of title 40, United States Code

(A)  standards,  as  required  under  subsection  (b)(1)(A),
no  later  than  12  months  after  the  date  of  the  enactment
of this section; and

(B)  minimum  information  security  requirements  for
each  category,  as  required  under  subsection  (b)(1)(C),  no
later  than  36  months  after  the  date  of  the  enactment
of this section;
(4) issue guidelines as required under subsection (b)(1)(B),
no  later  than  18  months  after  the  date  of  the  enactment  of
this section;

(5)  to  the  maximum  extent  practicable,  ensure  that  such
standards and guidelines do not require the use or procurement
of specific products, including any specific hardware or software;
(6)  to  the  maximum  extent  practicable,  ensure  that  such
standards  and  guidelines  provide  for  sufficient  flexibility  to
permit  alternative  solutions  to  provide  equivalent  levels  of
protection for identified information security risks; and

(7)  to  the  maximum  extent  practicable,  use  flexible,
performance-based  standards  and  guidelines  that  permit  the
use of off-the-shelf commercially developed information security
products.
(d) INFORMATION SECURITY FUNCTIONS.The Institute shall
(1)  submit  standards  developed  pursuant  to  subsection
(a),  along  with  recommendations  as  to  the  extent  to  which
these should be made compulsory and binding, to the Secretary
of  Commerce  for  promulgation  under  section  11331  of  title
40, United States Code;

H. R. 245861

(2) provide technical assistance to agencies, upon request,

regarding

(A)  compliance  with  the  standards  and  guidelines

developed under subsection (a);

(B)  detecting  and  handling 

information  security

incidents; and

(C) information security policies, procedures, and prac-

tices;
(3)  conduct  research,  as  needed,  to  determine  the  nature
and  extent  of  information  security  vulnerabilities  and  tech-
niques for providing cost-effective information security;

(4) develop and periodically revise performance indicators
and measures for agency information security policies and prac-
tices;

(5)  evaluate  private  sector  information  security  policies
and  practices  and  commercially  available  information  tech-
nologies  to  assess  potential  application  by  agencies  to
strengthen information security;

(6)  assist  the  private  sector,  upon  request,  in  using  and

applying the results of activities under this section;

(7)  evaluate  security  policies  and  practices  developed  for
national  security  systems  to  assess  potential  application  by
agencies to strengthen information security;

(8)  periodically  assess  the  effectiveness  of  standards  and
guidelines developed under this section and undertake revisions
as appropriate;

(9)  solicit  and  consider  the  recommendations  of  the
Information  Security  and  Privacy  Advisory  Board,  established
by  section  21,  regarding  standards  and  guidelines  developed
under  subsection  (a)  and  submit  such  recommendations  to  the
Secretary  of  Commerce  with  such  standards  submitted  to  the
Secretary; and

(10)  prepare  an  annual  public  report  on  activities  under-
taken  in  the  previous  year,  and  planned  for  the  coming  year,
to carry out responsibilities under this section.
(e) DEFINITIONS.As used in this section

(1)  the  term  agency  has  the  same  meaning  as  provided

in section 3502(1) of title 44, United States Code;

(2)  the  term  information  security  has  the  same  meaning

as provided in section 3542(b)(1) of such title;

(3)  the  term  information  system  has  the  same  meaning

as provided in section 3502(8) of such title;

(4)  the  term 

information  technology  has  the  same
meaning as provided in section 11101 of title 40, United States
Code; and

(5)  the  term  national  security  system  has  the  same
meaning  as  provided  in  section  3542(b)(2)  of  title  44,  United
States Code.
(f) AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.There are authorized
to  be  appropriated  to  the  Secretary  of  Commerce  $20,000,000  for
each  of  fiscal  years  2003,  2004,  2005,  2006,  and  2007  to  enable
the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Technology  to  carry  out
the provisions of this section..
SEC.  304.  INFORMATION  SECURITY  AND  PRIVACY  ADVISORY  BOARD.
Section  21  of  the  National  Institute  of  Standards  and  Tech-

nology Act (15 U.S.C. 278g4), is amended

H. R. 245862

(1) in subsection (a), by striking Computer System Security
and  Privacy  Advisory  Board  and  inserting  Information  Secu-
rity and Privacy Advisory Board;

(2)  in  subsection  (a)(1),  by  striking  computer  or  tele-

communications and inserting information technology;

(3) in subsection (a)(2)

(A)  by  striking  computer  or  telecommunications  tech-

nology and inserting information technology; and

(B) by striking computer or telecommunications equip-

ment and inserting information technology;
(4) in subsection (a)(3)

(A)  by  striking  computer  systems  and  inserting

information system; and

(B)  by  striking 

computer  systems  security  and

inserting information security;
(5) in subsection (b)(1) by striking computer systems secu-

rity and inserting information security;

(6) in subsection (b) by striking paragraph (2) and inserting

the following:

(2)  to  advise  the  Institute,  the  Secretary  of  Commerce,
and  the  Director  of  the  Office  of  Management  and  Budget
on information security and privacy issues pertaining to Federal
Government  information  systems,  including  through  review  of
proposed standards and guidelines developed under section 20;
and;

(7)  in  subsection  (b)(3)  by  inserting 

annually  after

report;

(8) by inserting after subsection (e) the following new sub-

section:
(f)  The  Board  shall  hold  meetings  at  such  locations  and  at
such  time  and  place  as  determined  by  a  majority  of  the  Board.;
(9)  by  redesignating  subsections  (f)  and  (g)  as  subsections

(g) and (h), respectively; and

(10)  by  striking  subsection  (h),  as  redesignated  by  para-

graph (9), and inserting the following:
(h)  As  used  in  this  section,  the  terms  information  system
and  information  technology  have  the  meanings  given  in  section
20..

SEC. 305. TECHNICAL AND CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.

(a) COMPUTER SECURITY ACT.Section 11332 of title 40, United
States  Code,  and  the  item  relating  to  that  section  in  the  table
of sections for chapter 113 of such title, are repealed.

(b)  FLOYD D.  SPENCE NATIONAL DEFENSE AUTHORIZATION ACT
FOR FISCAL YEAR 2001.The  Floyd  D.  Spence  National  Defense
Authorization  Act  for  Fiscal  Year  2001  (Public  Law  106398)  is
amended by striking section 1062 (44 U.S.C. 3531 note).

(c)  PAPERWORK REDUCTION ACT.(1)  Section  3504(g)  of  title

44, United States Code, is amended

(A) by adding and at the end of paragraph (1);
(B) in paragraph (2)

(i)  by  striking  sections  11331  and  11332(b)  and  (c)
of  title  40  and  inserting  section  11331  of  title  40  and
subchapter II of this chapter; and

(ii)  by  striking  ;  and  and  inserting  a  period;  and

(C) by striking paragraph (3).

H. R. 245863

end

(2)  Section  3505  of  such  title  is  amended  by  adding  at  the

(c) INVENTORY OF MAJOR INFORMATION SYSTEMS.(1) The head
of  each  agency  shall  develop  and  maintain  an  inventory  of  major
information  systems  (including  major  national  security  systems)
operated by or under the control of such agency.

(2)  The  identification  of  information  systems  in  an  inventory
under this subsection shall include an identification of the interfaces
between  each  such  system  and  all  other  systems  or  networks,
including those not operated by or under the control of the agency.

(3) Such inventory shall be

(A) updated at least annually;
(B) made available to the Comptroller General; and
(C)  used  to  support  information  resources  management,

including

(i)  preparation  and  maintenance  of  the  inventory  of

information resources under section 3506(b)(4);

(ii) 

information 

technology  planning,  budgeting,
acquisition,  and  management  under  section  3506(h),  sub-
title III of title 40, and related laws and guidance;

(iii) monitoring, testing, and evaluation of information

security controls under subchapter II;

(iv)  preparation  of  the  index  of  major  information
systems  required  under  section  552(g)  of  title  5,  United
States Code; and

(v)  preparation  of  information  system  inventories
required  for  records  management  under  chapters  21,  29,
31, and 33.

(4)  The  Director  shall  issue  guidance  for  and  oversee  the

implementation of the requirements of this subsection..

(3) Section 3506(g) of such title is amended

(A) by adding and at the end of paragraph (1);
(B) in paragraph (2)

(i) by striking section 11332 of title 40 and inserting

subchapter II of this chapter; and

(ii)  by  striking  ;  and  and  inserting  a  period;  and

(C) by striking paragraph (3).

TITLE  IVAUTHORIZATION  OF  APPRO-

PRIATIONS AND EFFECTIVE DATES

SEC. 401. AUTHORIZATION OF APPROPRIATIONS.

Except for those purposes for which an authorization of appro-
priations is specifically provided in title I or II, including the amend-
ments made by such titles, there are authorized to be appropriated
such  sums  as  are  necessary  to  carry  out  titles  I  and  II  for  each
of fiscal years 2003 through 2007.
SEC. 402. EFFECTIVE DATES.

(a) TITLES I AND II.

(1)  IN GENERAL.Except  as  provided  under  paragraph  (2),
titles  I  and  II  and  the  amendments  made  by  such  titles  shall
take  effect  120  days  after  the  date  of  enactment  of  this  Act.
(2)  IMMEDIATE ENACTMENT.Sections  207,  214,  and  215

shall take effect on the date of enactment of this Act.

