Still No Service 
for Cell Phone 
Radiation 
Litigation

P r o d u c t   L i a b i L i t y
Past Is Prologue

By Lawrence G. Cetrulo,  
Michael J. Cahalane  
and Robert J.L. Moore
Prospective defendants 
should still be advised 
to prepare for litigation, 
although actual liability 
is unlikely to result.

In May 2011, the International Agency for Research on 
Cancer (IARC), a research branch of the World Health 
Organization (WHO), released a press statement indicat-
ing that the IARC had classified the radiofrequency elec-

  Lawrence G. Cetrulo is a founding part-
ner and Michael J. Cahalane and Robert J.L. 
Moore are associates in the Boston office 
of Cetrulo & Capone LLP. Mr. Cetrulo chairs 
the firms Toxic Tort Practice Group and 
has more than 35 years of litigation experi-
ence. Mr. Cahalane is a member of the firms 
Toxic Tort Practice Group where he focuses 
on multi- jurisdictional, multi- plaintiff 
complex litigation. Mr. Moore prac-
tices primarily in the areas of toxic 
torts, product liability, personal injury, 
and complex litigation. The authors 
specially thank Ryan Hanofee for his 
contributions to this article.

tromagnetic  fields  emitted  by  cellular 
phones  as  possibly  carcinogenic  to  hu-
mans. Press Release No. 208, IARC Classi-
fies Radiofrequency Electromagnetic Fields 
as Possibly Carcinogenic to Humans, May 
31,  2011,  http://www.iarc.fr/en/media- centre/
pr/2011/pdfs/pr208_E.pdf. The IARCs press re-
lease triggered waves of reports in the me-
dia that [r]adiation from cell phones can 
possibly cause cancer[.] Danielle Delloroto, 
WHO: Cell Phone Use Can Increase Possible 
Cancer Risk, CNN Online (May 31, 2011).

Given  the  IARC  classification  and  the 
headlines  that  followed,  the  public  will 
understandably  feel  alarm.  News  reports 
could  turn  the  10-year  trickle  of  litiga-

26    For The Defense    December 2011

 2011 DRI. All rights reserved.

tiffs  attorneys  can  establish  a  causal 
relationship between cell phone radiofre-
quency electromagnetic field exposure and 
adverse  health  effects,  regardless  of  the 
IARCs alarming classification. Courts pre-
viously  evaluated  the  science  underlying 
claims of personal injury caused by elec-
tromagnetic  fields  and  found  it  wanting. 
See, e.g., San Diego Gas & Elec. Co. v. Supe-
rior Court, 920 P.2d 669 (Cal. 1996). The 
science on the supposed danger associated 
with electromagnetic fields has not mate-
rially advanced since the 1990s, and only 
limited evidence supports the IARCs find-
ing, which ranked radiofrequency electro-
magnetic fields emitted from cell phones in 
the same cancer- risk classification group as 
pickles, coffee, and insecticides.

Second,  even  if  a  particular  plain-
tiff  could  establish  specific  causationa 
Daubert- proof causal link between radia-
tion from radiofrequency electromagnetic 
fields and his or her particular disease
science has not linked radiofrequency elec-
tromagnetic field exposure to a signature 
disease,  such  as  asbestosis  for  asbestos 
exposure  or  silicosis  for  silica  exposure. 
Without  a  signature  disease,  plaintiffs 
attorneys, even the most experienced advo-
cates,  will  find  the  burden  of  proof  and 
expense of establishing specific causation 
between an exposure and a disease excep-
tionally daunting.

Third, as most of the appellate courts to 
address the matter have held, federal law 
probably  preempts  lawsuits  of  this  kind. 
The Federal Communications Commission 
(FCC) has set standards, including stand-
ards  for  radiofrequency  electromagnetic 
field  emissions,  to  which  all  cell  phones 
must conform, and federal law establish-
ing these standards likely trumps contrary 
state law.

Thus, while the recent reporting on the 
alleged hazards of cell phone radiation will 
likely lead to litigation, and while prospec-
tive defendants should take steps to prepare 
themselves for this scenario, this litigation 
is unlikely to result in much actual liability.

Cellular Phones and Radiofrequency 
Electromagnetic Fields
Electromagnetic fields are a type of radi-
ation  emitted  from  all  electric  currents, 
natural or manmade. Radiofrequency elec-
tromagnetic fields are a particular category 

of electromagnetic fields, specifically those 
occupying the radio portion of the electro-
magnetic spectrum.

All  cell  phones  emit  radiofrequency 
electromagnetic fields. Cell phones operate 
by transmitting information between a low 
powered radio transmitter in a phone and 
a base station, usually a tower with a large 
antenna. When a cell phone is charged, it 

Science has not 
determined whether 
nonionizing radiation... 
can directly affect genetic 
material, and radiofrequency 
electromagnetic field 
emission litigation 
will likely address this 
question in the future.

emits a low level of nonionizing radiation, 
radiofrequency electromagnetic fields. Ion-
izing radiation, such as x-rays and gamma 
rays, can strip electrons from atoms and 
molecules, changing cellular makeup and 
causing,  at  times,  tumors.  On  the  other 
hand, science has not determined whether 
nonionizing radiation, particularly in the 
levels emitted by cell phones, can directly 
affect genetic material, and radiofrequency 
electromagnetic  field  emission  litigation 
will  likely  address  this  question  in  the 
future.

Since  1934,  the  FCC  has  regulated 
radiofrequency emissions. See Pub. L. No. 
73-415, 48 Stat. 1064, 47 U.S.C. 151, et seq. 
The  National  Environmental  Policy  Act 
of  1969,  42  U.S.C.  4321,  et  seq.,  charged 
the  FCC  and  all  other  federal  agencies 
with evaluating the impact of major reg-
ulatory  actions  significantly  affecting 
the  quality  of  the  human  environment. 
42  U.S.C.  4332(2)(C).  The  FCC  first  pro-
mulgated  standards  for  radiofrequency 
exposure in 1985, regulating exposure in 
For The Defense    December 2011    27

tion over radiofrequency electromagnetic 
fields into a torrent. See, e.g., Deborah Kotz 
& Carolyn Johnson, Cell Phones Are Added 
to List of Potential Risks for Cancer, Boston 
Globe Online (June 1, 2011).

In this regard, the past may well be pro-
logue. In the 1990s, media reports insinu-
ated a link between various forms of cancer 
and  electromagnetic  fields  from,  among 
others,  power  lines.  See,  e.g.,  Paul  Bro-
deur, The Cancer at Slater School, The New 
Yorker (Dec. 7, 1992). Litigation soon fol-
lowed. The science behind the litigation 
proved meritless, but litigating these claims 
nonetheless cost defendants a great deal.

Todays  headlines  may  be  a  harbinger 
of claims alleging a link between radiofre-
quency electromagnetic field exposure and 
adverse health effects. For at least three rea-
sons history is apt to repeat itself, by which 
we  mean  that  lawsuits  stemming  from 
the  IARC  classification  are  apt  to  prove 
unavailing.

First, the chances are remote that plain-

specific facilities that it licensed. See 100 
FCC 2d 543 (1985). Excluded from this reg-
ulation were relatively low- powered com-
munications systems such as cell phones. 
2 FCC Rcd. 2064, 2065 14 (1987). In 1993, 
prompted  by  the  adoption  of  guidelines 
that set limits on these exposures by indus-
try consortia, the FCC began the rulemak-
ing  process  to  set  federal  standards  for 

Plaintiffs had a difficult 
time proving causation, 
as the science underlying 
their claims never 
established a causal link 
between exposure and 
adverse health effect.

radiation  from  cell  phones.  8  FCC  Rcd. 
2849 (1993).

While  the  FCC  proceeded  with  rule-
making,  Congress  enacted  the  Telecom-
munications  Act  of  1996,  which  directed 
the  FCC  to  complete  federal  standards 
within six months and to make effective 
rules regarding the environmental effects 
of radiofrequency emissions[.] Pub. L. No. 
104-104, 704(b), 110 Stat. 56, 152 (1996); 
see 47 U.S.C. 332(c). The goals of this direc-
tive,  according  to  the  House  Commerce 
Committee, which drafted this portion of 
the  Telecommunications  Act,  were  two-
fold: (1) to safeguard cell phone users from 
potential hazards; and (2) to ensure that a 
hodgepodge of conflicting state standards 
did not retard the development of a nation-
wide  wireless  communications  network. 
See  H.R.  Rep.  No.  204,  104th  Cong.,  1st 
Sess. Pt. 1, at 9495 (1995). As the commit-
tee report noted, [a] high quality national 
wireless telecommunications network can-
not exist if each of its component[s] must 
meet different [radiofrequency] standards 
in each community[.] Id.

In August 1996, the FCC completed the 
rulemaking  and  issued  an  order  setting 
the maximum radiofrequency electromag-
28    For The Defense    December 2011

netic field that a cell phone could emit. See 
11 FCC Rcd. 15123, 15127  9 (1996). All 
phones sold in the United States fall under 
that  limit,  though  some  popular  phones 
come  close.  Additionally,  under  these 
standards,  the  FCC  must  authorize  the 
sale of cell phones, and the manufacturer 
of a phone must certify that the equipment 
will not expose humans to levels of radio-
frequency radiation in excess of the estab-
lished limits. See Murray v. Motorola, Inc., 
982 A.2d 764, 775776 (D.C. 2009).

Previous Electromagnetic 
Field Radiation Litigation Led 
to Insignificant Liability
Commentators  began  to  express  concern 
about a link between electromagnetic field 
exposure and adverse health effects in the 
late  1980s,  and  it  reached  a  peak  in  the 
1990s.  After  widespread  publicity  about 
these potential hazards, plaintiffs initiated 
a number of lawsuits, a large majority of 
which courts dismissed.

As  mentioned,  Paul  Brodeur,  a  well-
known investigative reporter and author, 
published  several  articles  in  The  New 
Yorker magazine in 1989 regarding poten-
tial hazards of electromagnetic field expo-
sure. See, e.g., Paul Brodeur, The Hazards 
of Electromagnetic Fields IPower Lines, 
The New Yorker (June 12, 1989). Brodeurs 
previous  articles  on  environmental  haz-
ards  and  health  risks,  including  asbes-
tos, had set off media frenzies that led to 
entire industries of litigation, and his writ-
ing on the hazards of electromagnetic fields 
drew the attention of many, including some 
plaintiffs attorneys.

According to the 1989 articles, the pre-
vious  decades  saw  a  marked  increase  in 
the number of electric power lines across 
the country, and these power lines emitted 
radiation  in  the  form  of  electromagnetic 
fields. Citing epidemiological studies, the 
articles  indicated  that  exposure  to  these 
electromagnetic fields was associated with 
adverse health effects, such as cancer and 
birth  defects.  Brodeur  further  suggested 
that  various  levels  of  government  con-
spired with the utility industry to cover up 
and  discredit  evidence  of  an  association 
between  electromagnetic  field  exposure 
and adverse health effects.

Follow-up pieces by others in the media 
resulted in what one commentator called 

an atmosphere of suspicion concerning 
electromagnetic field exposure. Harold R. 
Piety,  What  We  Dont  Know  About  EMF, 
128 Pub. Util. Fort. 14, 16 (Nov. 15, 1991). 
That Brodeur did not have a motive to dis-
close the potential dangers of electromag-
netic field exposure lent credibility to his 
arguments in the eyes of many commen-
tators  and  readers.  In  contrast,  the  util-
ity industry employed most of those who 
offered different views of the science at the 
time, a fact that led some to discount state-
ments that proof of adverse health effects 
did not exist.

As the media continued to publish arti-
cles on the hazards of electromagnetic field 
exposure and the almost limitless number 
of  exposed  persons,  massive  numbers  of 
lawsuits seemed inevitable. Some prognos-
ticators  proclaimed  that  electromagnetic 
field  radiation  would  become  the  next 
asbestos. Patsy W. Thomley, EMF at Home: 
The National Research Council Report on 
the Health Effects of Electric and Magnetic 
Fields, 13 J. Land Use & Envtl. L. 309, 319 
(1998). One legal scholar in the early 1990s 
predicted that the omnipresence of EMF 
[electromagnetic  fields]  in  our  lives  sug-
gests that EMF litigation could dwarf the 
legal abyss created by asbestos. Roy W. 
Krieger,  On  the  Line,  80  A.B.A.  J.  40,  41 
(Jan. 1994).

At one point in the early 1990s, it ap-
peared that these predictions would prove 
correct, as plaintiffs attorneys filed lawsuits 
arising  from  electromagnetic  field  expo-
sure as frequently as once a month. How-
ever, plaintiffs did not win verdicts in any 
of these lawsuits. In fact, courts dismissed 
nearly all the claims before trials. Plaintiffs 
had a difficult time proving causation, as the 
science underlying their claims never estab-
lished a causal link between exposure and 
adverse  health  effect.  See,  e.g.,  San  Diego 
Gas & Elec. Co. v. Superior Court, 920 P.2d 
669 (Cal. 1996). But see Zuidema v. San Di-
ego Gas & Elec. Co., No. 638222 (Cal. Super. 
Ct. Apr. 30, 1993) (rendering a defense ver-
dict in the first electromagnetic field case 
tried). Over time, the number of lawsuits 
alleging injury from electromagnetic field 
exposure from electric utilities diminished. 
In the late 1990s, research into the hazards 
of electromagnetic field exposure shifted to 
the study of electromagnetic fields from the 
soon- ubiquitous cell phones.

Product LiabiLityNeither the IARC Report nor Its 
Cited Studies Prove Causation
Plaintiffs alleging that they have suffered 
adverse health due to cell phone radiation 
will have difficulty proving causation. As 
discussed above, previous electromagnetic 
field- related litigation failed largely because 
the science available at the time did not es-
tablish  credible  general  causation  para-
digms between exposure to electromagnetic 
fields and adverse health effects. While the 
May 31, 2011, IARC press statement classi-
fying radiofrequency electromagnetic fields 
emitted by cellular phones as possibly car-
cinogenic to humans grabbed headlines, the 
report released shortly afterward describ-
ing the work on which that classification 
rested neither proffered nor relied on new 
science establishing such carcinogenicity. 
Robert Baan, et al., Carcinogenicity of Ra-
diofrequency Electromagnetic Fields, 12 The 
Lancet Oncology 624626 (July 2011). Con-
sequently, regardless of the uproar caused 
by  the  press  release  and  the  report,  cell 
phone litigation plaintiffs probably will not 
succeed relying on the report or the stud-
ies that it cites.

In  May  2011,  an  IARC  working  group 
consisting of 30 scientists from 14 countries 
met to assess the carcinogenicity of radia-
tion from radiofrequency electromagnetic 
fields. While the IARC working group most 
extensively  considered  exposure  through 
cell  phones,  radiofrequency  electromag-
netic  fields  also  emanate  from  occupa-
tional sources such as industrial equipment, 
broadcast antennas, and medical devices. 
However, as the IARC working group ac-
knowledged, most human exposure to ra-
diofrequency electromagnetic fields stems 
from devices, such as cell phones, held close 
to someones body. Baan, supra, at 624.

The IARC had asked the working group 
members  to  classify  various  particles, 
materials,  and  radiation  into  categories 
that corresponded to the agents carcino-
genicity  to  humans  and  the  quantum  of 
evidence  indicating  that  degree  of  carci-
nogenicity. The classifications range from 
carcinogenic to humans to probably not 
carcinogenic to humans. Press Release No. 
208, IARC Classifies, supra, at 46 (defin-
ing the possible classifications).

In performing the assessment, the IARC 
working group reviewed hundreds of past 
scientific  articles  but  did  not  indepen-

dently  conduct  testing  or  experiments. 
Ultimately, the IARC working groups con-
clusion rested upon six human studies that 
it deemed most credible and about 40 ani-
mal  studies  assessing  the  carcinogenic-
ity of radiofrequency electromagnetic field 
exposure to rodents. Id. at 62425. Several 
of the human studies found an increased 
risk of glioma, a type of tumor, in mobile 
phone  users.  Id.  Another  study  in  Japan 
found some evidence of heightened risk of 
acoustic neuroma, another type of tumor, 
within the human study population. Id. at 
625. Though the animal studies appeared 
to show some increased cancer incidence, 
the  predictive  value  of  those  studies  for 
human  cancer  is  unknown,  as  the  IARC 
working group acknowledged. Id.

Consequently, the IARC working group 
classified  radiofrequency  electromagnetic 
field  exposure  as  belonging  in  the  Group 
2B, possibly carcinogenic to humans, in 
view of the limited evidence of carcino-
genicity in humans and animals. Accord-
ing to the IARC, the category is reserved for 
agents for which there is limited evidence of 
carcinogenicity in humans and insufficient 
evidence in animals, or when there is inade-
quate evidence of carcinogenicity in humans 
but sufficient evidence in of carcinogenicity 
animals. Press Release No. 208, IARC Clas-
sifies, supra, at 5 (defining Group 2B). The 
Group 2B category contains 267 agents, in-
cluding  coffee,  pickled  vegetables,  expo-
sure to dry cleaning and firefighting. David 
Spiegelhalter, a professor of the University 
of Cambridge in England, commented that 
[the] report is clear that any risk appears 
to  be  so  small  that  it  is  very  hard  to  de-
tecteven in the masses of people now us-
ing mobile phones. Ben Hirschler, Evidence 
Increasingly Against Phone Cancer Risk, 
Reuters Online (July 1, 2011). Spiegelhalters 
characterization highlights how statistically 
weak the existing epidemiological evidence 
is to support a causative connection between 
cell phone use and cancer.

The  IARC  working  group  finding  that 
limited  evidence  indicates  that  radio-
frequency  electromagnetic  fields  are  car-
cinogenic  to  humans  is  misleading.  The 
carcinogenicity evidence is actually decid-
edly mixed. For every study that the IARC 
working  group  identified  that  found  a 
causal or even correlative link between cell 
phone radiation and cancer, another study 

reached  the  opposite  conclusion.  To  wit, 
according to the National Cancer Institute, 
the incidence of brain cancer actually has 
changed little in the past decade, while 
cell phone use has drastically increased to 
over five billion users. See National Can-
cer Institute, Cell Phones and Cancer Risk, 
Fact Sheet, http://www.cancer.gov/cancertopics/
factsheet/Risk/cellphones. The IARC working 
group itself added nothing to this melange 
of contradictory studies. It did not perform 
any  new  studies  itself.  Rather,  it  simply 
selected  certain  studies  without  articu-
lating  the  methodology  underlying  the 
selections and deemed them reliable and 
supportive of the position that it took.

The IARC working group ipse dixit pro-
nouncement  of  these  studies  reliability, 
however, is just one of the methodological 
flaws in its selections. The IARC working 
group report failed to quantify the possi-
ble risk for glioma and acoustic neuroma, 
the  two  types  of  cancer  allegedly  associ-
ated with cell phone use. Baan, supra, at 
625; Press Release No. 208, IARC Classi-
fies, supra, at 2.

Further, each study selected by the IARC 
working group had flaws. One study had 
a  case- control  participant  bias;  another 
relied on suspect data on cell phone usage. 
Multiple  members  of  the  IARC  working 
group  noted  these  flaws  and  inconsis-
tencies  between  studies  in  declining  to 
endorse the groups overall finding.

For  these  reasons,  neither  the  IARC 
working group report nor the studies cited 
in the report will likely assist plaintiffs to 
prove causation if they allege that they suf-
fer from the effects of cell phone radiation. 
With only contradictory, flawed studies on 
which plaintiffs can rely, plaintiffs attor-
neys  probably  could  not  defeat  defense 
motions for summary judgment.

Scientists Have Not Identified a Cell 
Phone Radiation Signature Disease
Another factor weighing against cell phone 
radiation becoming cottage litigation sim-
ilar to asbestos is that it is not associated 
with  a  signature  disease.  A  signature 
disease is a specific adverse health effect 
associated  with  exposure  to  a  particular 
toxin and few, if any, other potential causes. 
Many  experts  consider  pleural  mesothe-
lioma, for example, a signature asbestos- 
related  disease.  The  two  cancers  most 
For The Defense    December 2011    29

commonly associated with radiofrequency 
electromagnetic field exposure, glioma and 
acoustic neuroma, fall well short of meet-
ing the standard for signature diseases, as 
evidenced by the fact that the IARC work-
ing group report did not list those condi-
tions  specifically  as  among  the  diseases 
that may be linked to radiofrequency elec-
tromagnetic field exposure, and the press 

With only contradictory, 
flawed studies on which 
plaintiffs can rely, plaintiffs 
attorneys probably could 
not defeat defense motions 
for summary judgment.

release simply stated that the evidence of an 
association between the two diseases and 
cell phone use was limited. Press Release 
No. 208, IARC Classifies, supra, at 2.

The lack of a signature disease will likely 
prove an impediment to cell phone radi-
ation  litigation.  Once  a  toxin  is  associ-
ated  with  a  signature  disease,  plaintiffs 
attorneys can conduct screenings for that 
disease  to  find  new  clients  more  easily. 
Plaintiffs counsel also can invest heavily 
in developing the science of causation for 
just a single disease, rather than many, and 
could encounter difficulty finding appro-
priate experts to establish causation for the 
particular disease at issue in a case. With-
out a signature disease, plaintiffs attorneys 
will  have  difficulty  identifying  potential 
clients  suitable  for  pursuing  cell  phone 
radiation claims. These attorneys will also 
need to find and demonstrate that experts 
qualify  as  experts  to  establish  causation 
for whatever diseases plaintiffs allege that 
they developed in their cases, which will 
increase  the  attorneys  expenses.  These 
impediments promise to reduce the num-
ber of cell phone radiation- related lawsuits.

FCC Standards Probably Preempt 
Cell Phone Radiation Litigation
Under federal law, the FCC is charged with, 
30    For The Defense    December 2011

among other things, promulgating stand-
ards for emissions from cell phones. Most, 
but not all, courts addressing the issue have 
ruled that this federal law conflicts with law-
suits that seek to impose liability for emis-
sions from cell phones in compliance with 
all applicable FCC standards, and the federal 
law preempts such lawsuits. Courts adjudi-
cating cell phone radiation claims hence-
forth likely will adopt this position as well.
Cell  phone  radiation  lawsuits  to  date 
have not alleged that the cell phones at is-
sue failed to comply with FCC standards for 
radiation, but, rather, that such standards 
are inadequate. See Farina v. Nokia, Inc., 625 
F.3d. 97, 122 (3d Cir 2010); Murray v. Mo-
torola, Inc., 982 A.2d 764, 775 (D.C. 2009). 
The circuits have split, therefore, on whether 
federal law preempts these lawsuits.

The Farina case illustrates the view that 
federal law preempts cell phone radiation 
litigation.  There,  a  putative  class  consist-
ing  of  Pennsylvania  cell  phone  purchas-
ers  and  lessees  alleged  that  cell  phones 
expose users to unsafe levels of radiofre-
quency  electromagnetic  fields  when  they 
hold their phones to their heads and that 
phones should not have been sold or leased 
without  headsets.  The  putative  class  fur-
ther alleged that this fact rendered untrue 
statements  that  cell  phone  manufactur-
ers and others in the mobile phone indus-
try made in advertisements, and, in that 
respect, those advertisements were decep-
tive. The U.S. District Court for the Eastern 
District of Pennsylvania ruled that federal 
law  preempted  the  plaintiffs  claims.  On 
appeal, the United States Court of Appeals 
for the Third Circuit affirmed. The plain-
tiffs claims would erect an obstacle to the 
accomplishment of the objectives of Con-
gress[,] specifically protecting the health 
and  safety  of  the  public,  [and]  ensuring 
the rapid development of an efficient and 
uniform network, one that provides effec-
tive and widely accessible service at a rea-
sonable cost. Farina, 625 F.3d. at 105107, 
124127; accord Bennett v. T- Mobile USA, 
Inc., 597 F. Supp. 2d 1050, 1053 (C.D. Cal. 
2008) (a jury verdict finding cell phones 
unsafe because of the [radiofrequency elec-
tromagnetic  fields  that]  they  emit  would 
unquestionably  trample  upon  the  FCCs 
authority  to  determine  the  maximum 
standard for RF emissions[.]). The plain-
tiffs  have  petitioned  the  Supreme  Court 

of  the  United  States  for  a  writ  of  certio-
rari.  The  Court,  however,  seems  unlikely 
to grant the writ, judging by the fact that 
it requested the view of the United States 
on the writ petition, and the United States 
opposes granting the writ.

Those courts that ruled that federal law 
did not preempt cell phone radiation liti-
gation would likely reach a different out-
come today. In Pinney v. Nokia, Inc., the 
Fourth Circuit held that a conflict did not 
exist  between  this  litigation  and  federal 
law, and the litigation, therefore, was not 
preempted. See Pinney v. Nokia, Inc., 402 
F.3d 430 (4th Cir. 2005). This opinion, and 
the  others  that  reached  that  conclusion, 
predated public FCC statements that such 
litigation conflicts with FCC regulations. A 
2009 amicus curiae brief submitted jointly 
by the FCC and the United States in a cell 
phone radiation case stated that state-law 
claims would upset the balance of safety 
and efficiency struck by the FCC standards. 
Amicus Curiae Br. of United States & Fed. 
Comm. Commm, Murray v. Motorola, Inc., 
982  A.2d  764  (D.C.  2009).  In  the  future, 
courts likely will defer to this agency deter-
mination  of  conflict  with  state  laws.  See 
Williamson v. Mazda Motor of Am., Inc., 
131 S. Ct. 1131, 1139 (2011).

Conclusion
Though  cell  phone  radiation  litigation 
probably will not succeed, attorneys rep-
resenting  defendants  and  potential  de-
fendants  can  and  should  nonetheless 
recommend the following two measures to 
reduce exposure.

First, recommend that potential defend-
ants continue to follow the science on the 
hazards  of  radiofrequency  electromag-
netic field exposure as it develops, to stay 
on  the  cutting  edge  of  consumer  safety. 
And  recommend  that  potential  defend-
ants also document their consumer safety 
efforts informed by the science. While this 
science now does not appear to establish a 
link between radiofrequency electromag-
netic  field  exposure  and  adverse  health 
effects,  conceivably  the  prevailing  scien-
tific view could change. In that event, de-
fendants  that  could  point  to  a  record  of 
inquiry into and adherence to state-of-the-
art safety standards would have a potent 
defense during trials.

Cell Phone, continued on page 81

Product LiabiLityCell Phone, from page 30

Second, when representing defendants 
in  state  courts,  defense  attorneys  should 
consider removal. Some states have more 
lenient  standards  for  the  admission  of 
expert  testimony,  raising  the  possibility 
that a court could admit as evidence the 
questionable  science  cited  in  the  IARC 
report. The IARC does plan to release a lon-
ger version of the report, although it prob-
ably will not include anything that would 

make the IARC cell phone findings more 
credible  evidence.  See  Press  Release  208, 
IARC  Classifies,  supra,  at  1;  Baan,  et  al., 
supra, at 624.

Also,  federal  courts  tend  to  rule  on 
issues of preemption more frequently that 
state courts. Given federal courts relative 
familiarity with preemption doctrine, it is 
more probable that they will rule that fed-
eral law preempts a radiofrequency electro-
magnetic field lawsuit.

In sum, although it appears unlikely at 
this  point  that  those  involved  in  mobile 
telephony will incur significant liability for 
personal injuries caused by radiofrequency 
electromagnetic  field  emissions,  defense 
attorneys advising those parties would do 
well by those clients by preparing them to 
defend themselves on the general causation 
front, given the potential number of claim-
ants. 

For The Defense    December 2011    81

