 
Indicator 2: Uptake of mitigation methods  
 

 

 
Rationale: there are a wide range of farm practices that can reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions  from  agriculture.  Monitoring  the  uptake  of  these  mitigation  methods,  particularly 
those which have been assessed to be cost neutral or cost negative (i.e. which save money) 
provides  an  indicator  of  progress  towards  achieving  the  industrys  ambition  to  reduce 
agricultural production emissions by 3 MtCO2e by 2020 compared to a 2007 baseline. 

 
Indicator: overall progress is measured by the reductions delivered through the uptake of a 
range  of  mitigation  methods.  (Note:  Mitigation  methods  relating 
to  slurry/manure 
management and application including anaerobic digestion have been assessed separately 
within indicators 9 and 10 respectively) 

 
Desired  outcome:  increased  uptake  of  these  mitigation  methods  will  be  reflected  by 
reduction in estimated GHG emissions.  

Current status   Long term: (last 10 years) 

...  Short term: (last 2 years) 

 

 

 

 

By February 2015, approximately 1Mt CO2 equivalent reduction in GHG emissions had been 
achieved from the uptake of the key mitigation  methods. In terms of moving to the desired 
outcome  this  was  little  change  on  the  2013  or  2014  levels  and  compares  to  an  estimated 
maximum technical potential1 reduction of 3.1Mt CO2e were all of these methods to be fully 
implemented on relevant farms. 

 
                                                           
1 Maximum technical potential is the amount that could be saved if all mitigation potential was enacted regardless 
of cost assuming no prior implementation of measures. 

Page 1 of 14 

 

0.000.501.001.502.002.503.003.50GHG reduction potentialGHG reduction achieved byFeb 2014GHG reduction achieved byFeb 2015MT CO2eGHG reduction based on uptake of key on-farm mitigation measures 
Indicator 2: Uptake of mitigation methods  
 

 

 
The headline indicator has been sub-divided into five activity groups each containing related, 
relevant mitigation methods. Progress for each of these groups is shown in the chart below. 

 

Nutrient management 

Good  nutrient  management  can  bring  a  number  of  important  benefits:  minimising  GHG 
emissions,  reducing  the  incidence  of  diffuse  water  pollution,  and  helping  farmers  save 
money  through  optimising  productivity.  This  group  of  6  mitigation  methods  collectively 
provides the greatest potential reduction in emissions (1.4 Mt CO2e) on relevant farm types. 
By  2015,  uptake  of  these  mitigation  methods  has  been  assessed  to  have  delivered  an 
estimated  GHG  reduction  of  just  over  0.5Mt  CO2e,  around  36%  of  the  maximum  technical 
potential reduction.  

 
 

 

 

Page 2 of 14 

 

05001,0001,500Nutrient managementPlants with improvednitrogen use efficiencyLand and soil managementLivestock breedingLivestock nutritionGHG reduction potentialGHG reduction achieved by Feb 2015GHG reduction based on uptake of  key on-farm mitigationmethods by activity groupingKt CO2e0200400600800Use a fertiliser recommendationsystemDo not apply manufactured fertiliserto high-risk areasIntegrate fertiliser and manurenutrient supplyFertiliser spreader calibrationUse manufactured fertiliserplacement technologiesAvoid spreading manufacturedfertiliser to fields at high-risk timesGHG emissionreductionachieved by2015GHG emissionreductionpotentialPotential and achieved GHG emission reduction: nutrient management mitigation methodsKt CO2eEmission reduction calcualtaed using FARMSCOPER Upscaling tool 
Indicator 2: Uptake of mitigation methods  
 

 

 
The uptake of each mitigation method has been assessed using relevant survey data. In 
some cases where relevant data are not available (e.g. Do not apply manufactured fertiliser 
to high-risk areas), the default FARMSCOPER uptake has been assumed, based on an 
ADAS assessment of uptake. This default implementation rate is a pre-determined level of 
adoption set within the model based on expert opinion2. For some of the mitigation methods 
data are currently available over a short timeframe only; as data continues to be collected it 
will be possible to assess longer term trends.   

Related survey data and current uptake: nutrient management mitigation methods 
2014 
uptake 

Assessed by: 

Proportion of all farms that have a nutrient 
management plan created using the following tools: 
PLANET, Muddy Boots, Farmade / Multicrop or 
Industry plan (e.g. Tried & Tested etc)   

2015 
uptake 
(unless 
stated) 

38% 

36% 

 
Mitigation method 

Use a fertiliser 
recommendation 
system 

Do not apply 
manufactured 
fertiliser to high-risk 
areas (where there 
are direct flow paths 
to watercourses) 

Integrate fertiliser 
and manure nutrient 
supply 

No suitable survey data. 

(a) 

(a) 

Nutrient management plans: uptake 
(% of farms with plan) 
Of which:  
Nutrient management plans: frequency of update (% of 
farms with a plan updated at least annually) 
Nutrient management plan: frequency of referral (% of 
farms with plan referring to it at least 5 times per year) 
Soil pH: frequency of testing  
(% of farms testing at least every 5 years)  
Soil nutrient content: frequency of testing  
(% of farms testing soil at least every 5 years)  
Manure management plans: uptake 
(% of farms with plan) 
Nutrient content of manure: testing by taking samples 
(% of farms testing samples by lab analysis and on 
farm testing)  
Nutrient content of manure: assess / calculate 
(% of farms that assess /calculate the nutrient content 
of manure)  

60% 

60% 

76% 

75% 

26% 

25% 

74% 

75% 

70% 

71% 

64% 

63% 

14% 

17% 

36% 

37% 

(a)  FARMSCOPER default uptake rate used 25% within NVZs and 10% outside NVZs. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                           
2 Expert opinion took into account information such as survey data and experience of farming practice on the 
ground. 

Page 3 of 14 

 

 
Indicator 2: Uptake of mitigation methods  
 

 

 
Related survey data and current uptake: nutrient management mitigation methods (contd) 

 
Mitigation method  Assessed by: 

2014 Uptake 
(unless stated) 

2015 uptake 
(unless stated) 

Fertiliser  spreader:  frequency  of  spread 
pattern checks using catch trays - at least 
once a year / at change of fertiliser type / 
factory set (% of farms with a spreader) 

Fertiliser  spreader:  check  &  correction  of 
application  rate  (at  least  once  a  year  on 
farms with at least one spreader) 

Use  of  precision 
(Variable Rate Application) 

farming 

technology 

60%        

59%        

(BSFP 2013) 

(BSFP 2014)  

na 

na 

23%  

20% 

Use  of  nitrogen  by  month  of  application 
(% of nitrogen spread between March and 
September) 

95%             

97%             

(BSFP 2013)  

(BSFP 2014)  

Fertiliser spreader 
calibration3 

Use manufactured 
fertiliser placement 
technologies 

Avoid spreading 
manufactured 
fertiliser to fields at 
high-risk times 

 
 

of 

relating 

to 

(NMPs) 

uptake 
plans 

nutrient 
The 
overall 
management 
has 
increased from  46%  of farms  in  2006  to 
60%  in  2015.  NMPs  can  be  prepared 
using a variety of tools. In 2015, 36% of 
all  farms  had  NMPs  that  were  created 
using  either  PLANET,  Muddy  Boots, 
Farmade  /  Multicrop  or  an  Industry  plan 
(i.e.  Tried  &  Tested).  This  compares  to 
38%  in  2014  and  36%  in  2013.  Other 
mitigation  methods 
the 
updating  of  nutrient  management  plans, 
and the testing of soil and manure have 
shown  little  change  between  2014  and 
2015.  
 
Plants with improved nitrogen use efficiency 
 
This group of mitigation methods also offers a significant GHG emission reduction potential 
(0.8Mt CO2e). Plants with improved nitrogen use efficiency (i.e. able to remove more mineral 
nitrogen from the soil) offer the greatest abatement potential within this group. Improving the 
nitrogen use efficiency of plants potentially offers reduced nitrogen fertiliser applications and 
improved nutritional characteristics of fodder. Using clover within a grass sward reduces the  
                                                           
3 Data previously sourced from the Farm Practices Survey now taken from the British Survey of 
Fertiliser Practice. 

 

 

Page 4 of 14 

0%20%40%60%200920112012201320142015% of  farmsSource: Farm Practices SurveyProportion of farms with nutrient management plan that was created using either: PLANET, Muddy Boots, Farmade/ Multicrop or Industry plan  
Indicator 2: Uptake of mitigation methods  
 

 

 
need  for  manufactured  nitrogen  use  and  potentially  reduces  costs.  It  is  can  be  applied    to 
most  grassland  systems  but  may  entail  a  reduction  in  stocking  rates  where  high  rates  of 
manufactured nitrogen fertiliser have previously been used. 

 
The 2015 assessment of emission reductions suggests that 85 Kt CO2e has been achieved 
(10%  of  the  maximum  technical  potential  reduction).  Farm  Practice  Survey  data  suggests 
that 34% of farms with livestock currently sow more than 80% of their temporary grassland 
with a clover mix.  However, there is no current source of survey data to monitor uptake of 
plants  with  improved  nitrogen  use  efficiency.  The  2015  assessment  assumes  no  current 
uptake.  
 

 

Mitigation method 

Assessed by: 

Use plants with improved 
nitrogen use efficiency 

Use clover in place of fertiliser 
nitrogen 

No suitable survey data. 

Proportion of farms that have sown 
more than 80% of their temporary 
grassland with a clover mix 

(a) No data are available to measure uptake of this mitigation method.  

 

2014 
uptake 

2015 
uptake 

(a) 

(a) 

42% 

34% 

Land and soil management 
 
Land  and  soil  management  mitigation  methods  can  help  to  preserve  good  soil  structure 
preventing  erosion  and  compaction,  both  of  which  can  lead  to  GHG  emissions.    The 
mitigation  methods  in  this  activity  group  include  using  low  ground  pressure  tyre  set-ups  to 
reduce  soil  compaction,  loosening  compacted  soil  in  grassland  fields,  adopting  reduced 
cultivation  systems  and  keeping  livestock  away  from  water  courses.    Together  these  have 
been estimated to have achieved GHG emission reductions of 204Kt CO2e by 2015, 45% of 
the maximum technical potential reduction (448Kt CO2 e).  
 
 
 

Page 5 of 14 

 

0200400600800Use plants with improved nitrogenuse efficiencyUse clover in place of fertilisernitrogenGHG emissionreductionachieved by2015GHG emissionreductionpotentialPotential and achieved GHG emission reduction: plants with improved nitrogenuse efficiencyKt CO2eEmission reduction calcualtaed using FARMSCOPER Upscaling tool 
Indicator 2: Uptake of mitigation methods  
 

 

 

 

 
Data collected as part of the October 2012 Farm Practices Survey provided information on 
soils (removal of compaction and use of low ground pressure tyres).   
 
In  spring  2010,  around 40%  of  arable  land  had been  cultivated  using  reduced  or  minimum 
cultivation systems (at least 30% of stubble/crop residue left on the surface) in the previous 
12  months  and  a  further  4%  had  been  cultivated  using  zero  tillage  (direct  seeding).    The 
2015  Farm  Practices  Survey  indicated  that  75%  of  all  livestock  farms  took  action  to  keep 
livestock  out  of  watercourses  (always  or  at  least  some  of  the  time)  and  89%  reduced 
stocking rates when fields were excessively wet (either routinely or some of the time).  
 

 
Mitigation methods 

 
Assessed by: 

Reduce field stocking rates 
when soils are wet 

Loosen compacted soil layers in 
grassland fields 

Construct bridges for livestock 
crossing rivers/streams 

Locate out-wintered stock away 
from watercourses 

Adopt reduced cultivation 
systems 

Use correctly-inflated low 
ground pressure tyres on 
machinery 

 

 

% of all livestock farms that reduce stocking 
rates when fields excessively wet (routinely / 
some of the time)  
% of farms removing compaction from grassland 
after harvest (in last 12 months) 
% of farms removing compaction from grassland 
through turf lifting or spiking 
 
% of all livestock farms that keep livestock out of 
water courses (always / some of the time) 
 

 
Uptake 
(year shown) 

89%       

(FPS 2015) 

  9%      

(FPS 2012) 

14%       

(FPS 2012) 

75%      

(FPS 2015) 

% of arable land cultivated in the past 12 months  
using zero, reduced or minimum tillage (at least 
30% of stubble, crop residue left on surface) 

44%      

(FBS 2010) 

% of farms that have used low ground pressure 
set-ups in the last 12 months to reduce soil 
compaction 

43%       

(FPS 2012) 

Page 6 of 14 

050100150Reduce field stocking rates when soilsare wetLoosen compacted soil layers ingrassland fieldsLocate out-wintered stock away fromwatercoursesAdopt reduced cultivation systemsConstruct bridges for livestock crossingrivers/streamsUse correctly-inflated low groundpressure tyres on machineryGHG emissionreductionachieved by2015GHG emissionreductionpotentialPotential and achieved GHG emission reduction: land and soil management mitigation methodsEmission reduction calcualtaed using FARMSCOPER Upscaling toolKt CO2e 
Indicator 2: Uptake of mitigation methods  
 

 

 
Livestock Breeding 

Breeding  practices can play  an  important  role  in  herd  and flock  productivity  and  efficiency, 
factors which can in turn influence GHG emissions.  The mitigation method within this group 
relates to the use of improved genetic resources. Uptake has been assessed by the use of 
bulls and rams with a high Estimated Breeding Value (EBV) when breeding beef cattle and 
lambs  and  the  use  of  bulls  with  a  high  Profitable  Lifetime  Index  (PLI)  when  breeding  dairy 
cows.  In 2015, uptake of these mitigation methods has been assessed to have achieved an 
abatement of 86Kt CO2e, 31% of maximum technical potential reduction of 273Kt CO2e.  

 

The use of rams and bulls with a high Estimated Breeding Value is further evaluated within 
indicator 5. 
 

 
Mitigation method 

 
Assessed by: 

2014 uptake 

 
2015 uptake 

Make use of improved 
genetic resources in 
livestock 

% of farms with dairy cows that use 
bulls with a high PLI (at least most of 
the time) 

% of farms with beef cows that use 
bulls with a high EBV when breeding 
beef cattle (at most most of the time) 

% of farms with lambs that use rams 
with a high EBV when breeding lambs 
(at least most of the time) 

59% 

45%  

34% 

33% 

22% 

22% 

 
The  SAC  MACC  2  analysis4  completed  in  2010  includes  additional  livestock  breeding 
mitigation methods which could provide an additional 1Mt CO2e of GHG emission reductions 
over  and  above  that  estimated  by  the  those  currently  included  within  FARMSCOPER. 
However,  the  mitigation  methods  provided  by  the  SAC  MACC  2  analysis  are  not  specific 
enough to be measurable using existing statistics, i.e. improving productivity / fertility in dairy 
herds. We are working to resolve this lack of coverage and specificity in the FARMSCOPER  
                                                           
4 Review and update of UK marginal abatement cost curves for agriculture 
http://www.theccc.org.uk/wp-content/uploads/2010/12/pr_supporting_research_SAC_agriculture.pdf  

 

 

Page 7 of 14 

0100200300Make use of improved geneticresources in livestockGHG emissionreductionachieved by2015GHG emissionreductionpotentialPotential and achieved GHG emission reduction: livestock breeding measuresEmission reduction calcualtaed using FARMSCOPER Upscaling toolKt CO2e 
Indicator 2: Uptake of mitigation methods  
 

 

 
model and will update the methods contained within this indicator as and when appropriate. 
The  livestock  productivity  indicators  provide  a  high  level  insight  of  improvements  in 
productivity across the livestock sectors. 

Livestock nutrition  

Livestock feeding regimes also  play an  important  role in productivity and efficiency, factors 
which can impact on GHG emissions.  Mitigation methods relating to livestock nutrition have 
been  assessed  to  have  a  maximum  technical  potential  GHG  reduction  of  144Kt  CO2e.  
There is currently little data available to assess these  methods. However, using the default 
ADAS estimates of uptake (see Indicator Methodology for more details) it is estimated that a 
115 Kt CO2e reduction had been achieved by 2015   
 
As with our list of livestock breeding mitigation methods, the FARMSCOPER upscaling tool 
currently  provides  little  coverage  of  livestock  nutrition  mitigation  methods.  The  mitigation 
methods  within  this  indicator  will  be  updated  as  coverage  within  the  FARMSCOPER 
upscaling tool is improved. The livestock productivity indicators provide a high level insight 
into improvements in productivity across the livestock sectors. 
 

 

 
Survey  data  do  not  currently  map  directly  to  these  mitigation  methods,  although  the  2015 
Farm  Practices  Survey  indicates  that  35%  of  farmers  with  cattle  or  sheep  used  a  ration 
formulation  programme  or  nutritional  advice  from  an  expert  either  always  or  most  of  the 
time  when planning the feeding regime of their livestock. This  rose to 86% of those farms 
where dairy was the main activity.  
 
 
 
 
 

Page 8 of 14 

 

050100150Reduce dietary N and P intakes:DairyReduce dietary N and P intakes: Pigsand PoultryAdopt phase feeding of livestockGHG emissionreductionachieved by2015GHG emissionreductionpotentialPotential and achieved GHG emission reduction: livestock nutrition mitigation methodsEmission reduction calcualtaed using FARMSCOPER Upscaling toolKt CO2e 
Indicator 2: Uptake of mitigation methods  
 

 

 

Mitigation methods 

 

 
Assessed by: 

Adopt phase feeding of livestock 

Reduce dietary N and P intakes: 
pigs and poultry 

Reduce dietary N and P intakes: 
dairy 

 % of farms with cattle or sheep 
using a ration formulation 
programme / nutritional advice (at 
least most of the time)  

2014 
uptake 

 
2015 
uptake 

33% 

35% 

Estimates of GHG  emission reductions are not available for all on-farm mitigation  methods 
within  the  FARMSCOPER  upscaling  modelling  tool,  particularly  those  relating  to  livestock 
breeding,  nutrition,  health  and  welfare.  Over  time,  it  is  planned  to  extend  coverage.  The 
following mitigation methods have, therefore, been assessed on a qualitative basis only. 

Farm Health Planning 

result 

Farm  health  planning  can  benefit 
livestock  farmers  by  helping  to  prevent 
disease  and  as  a 
improve 
performance. In 2015, 71% of farms with 
livestock had a farm health plan; 58% of 
livestock farms had a written or recorded 
plan,  a  slight  decrease  from  61%  in 
2014.    In  2015,  72%  of  plans  were 
created  with  the  help  of  a  vet  or  other 
advisor.  Around  51%  reported  routine 
use  of  their  farm  health  plan  to  inform 
disease  management  decisions.  14% 
reported  that  they  did  not  use  the  plan, 
which  was  slightly  less  than  previous 
years.  In  2015,  18%  of  farms  routinely 
undertook staff training on animal health and welfare and disease management compared to 
14% in 2014 

This indicator and others in the framework that focus on livestock are intended to be viewed 
within  the  context  of  animal  welfare  regulations  and  legislation.    In  order  to  examine  the 
wider  potential  implications  of  GHG  mitigation  measures  Defra  has  commissioned  a 
research  (project  AC02265)  to  consider  the  impacts  of  efficiency  measures  on  a  range  of 
areas including animal health and welfare.  
 
 

                                                           
5 Quantifying, monitoring and minimising wider impacts of GHG mitigation measures  AC0226 
http://randd.defra.gov.uk/Default.aspx?Menu=Menu&Module=More&Location=None&ProjectID=1778
0&FromSearch=Y&Publisher=1&SearchText=AC0226&SortString=ProjectCode&SortOrder=Asc&Pagi
ng=10#Description 

Page 9 of 14 

 

0%20%40%60%80%200920112012201320142015% of  farmsSource: Farm Practices SurveyProportion of livestock farms with a written or recorded farm healthplan, England  
Indicator 2: Uptake of mitigation methods  
 

 

Data Sources 

This indicator uses estimates of potential and achieved GHG emission reductions that have 
been  calculated  using  the  FARMSCOPER  tool  developed  by  ADAS  for  Defra6.  The  data 
feeding into this model are drawn from a variety of sources including land use and livestock 
population  data  from  the  June  Agricultural  Survey.  The  majority  of  the  data  relating  to  the 
uptake of the mitigation methods used within this indicator are from Defras Farm Practices  

Survey  and  the  British  Survey  of  Fertiliser  Practice.  For  a  minority  of  mitigation  methods 
there  is  no  current  survey  information  on  uptake  levels.  In  these  cases  default  rates  have 
been used from the model, based on expert opinion.  

Indicator methodology 

The measures  of  maximum technical  potential7  and  achieved  GHG  emission  reductions 
have  been  calculated  by  linking  data  (measuring  the  uptake  of  mitigation  methods)  to 
outputs from the FARMSCOPER upscaling tool.  

The FARMSCOPER model quantifies farm-level environmental impacts, including emissions 
of  nitrous  oxide  and  methane,  for  over  100  on-farm  practices.  Building  on  this  model,  the 
upscaling  tool  has  been  developed  by  Defra  analysts  to  produce  national  estimates  of 
these environmental impacts.  

The upscaling tool uses June Agricultural Survey data to construct 12 representative farm 
types based on land use and livestock numbers.  Information relating to the Nitrate 
Vulnerable (NVZ) status, soil type and average rainfall are also mapped to these 12 farm 
types.  Default fertiliser application rates provided by ADAS are used to estimate the overall 
quantity of nitrogen applied to land. This information is then used to scale up the 
FARMSCOPER model results to deliver national (England) estimates that quantify the 
overall environmental impact and cost of the mitigation measures.   

The FARMSCOPER estimates can then be adjusted to reflect varying levels of uptake of 
individual mitigation measures.  Where possible uptake has been based on responses to the 
Farm Practices Survey and the British Survey of Fertiliser Practice.  In 2013, in order to gain 
a more refined picture of the level of uptake of mitigation measures, responses from these 
surveys have, wherever possible, been divided into those from farms within Nitrate 
Vulnerable Zones (NVZs) and those outside.  This was not done for the initial assessment in 
November 2012 and any changes in mitigation achieved shown here reflect are more likely 
to reflect this improved method rather than any marked variation in uptake.   

Where no survey data are currently available, FARMSCOPERs default levels of uptake  
                                                           
6 Cost-curves for mitigating multiple water pollutants, ammonia and greenhouse gas emissions on 
farms  FARMSCOPER decision support tool, USER-GUIDE and economic analysis for pollution 
mitigation methods - WQ0106 
http://randd.defra.gov.uk/Default.aspx?Menu=Menu&Module=More&Location=None&Completed=0&P
rojectID=14421 
7 Maximum technical potential is the amount that could be saved if all mitigation potential was enacted 
regardless of cost. 

Page 10 of 14 

 

 
Indicator 2: Uptake of mitigation methods  
 

 

 
Indicator methodology (continued) 

(based on expert opinion8) have been used as proxies. Where survey data are available the 
following  uptake  ranges  (see  table)  were  used,  as  the  model  is  not  sensitive  to  small 
changes in uptake. 

Uptake ranges and corresponding average used within FARMSCOPER  

Uptake range (%) 

Average input into 

FARMSCOPER 

0 

1-5 

6-15 

16-25 

26-35 

36-45 

46-55 

56-65 

66-75 

76-85 

86-95 

96-99 

100 

0 

3 

10 

20 

30 

40 

50 

60 

70 

80 

90 

97 

100 

 
The mitigation measures included in this indicator have been chosen, as far as possible, to 
reflect stakeholder feedback, the farm practices to be targeted by the Industrys Action Plan9 
and to also acknowledge the indicators set out in the Committee on Climate Changes (CCC) 
3rd  progress  report10.  Measures  that  the  FARMSCOPER  model  identified  as  having  no 
associated cost but a mitigation potential are also included where possible. 

There are instances where survey data for a range of mitigation measures are covered by a 
single  measure  in  the  FARMSCOPER  model.    Where  this  is  the  case  the  abatement 
potential  associated  with  the  FARMSCOPER  measure  has  been  apportioned  between  the 
component practices, at present this has been done on an equal basis across measures.   

Although the FARMSCOPER model covers over 100 farm practices, including many of those 
in  the  latest  Mitigation  Method  User  Guide  developed  as  part  of  Defra project WQ01063,  it 
does  not  currently  provide  a  fully  comprehensive  view  of  domestic  agriculture.  The  most 
notable  gaps  include  anaerobic  digestion,  livestock  nutrition,  genetics,  breeding  practices, 
livestock health and associated biosecurity practices. Over time, it is planned to extend the 
coverage of the model. 

                                                           
8 Expert opinion took into account information such as survey data and experience of farming practice 
on the ground. 
9 http://www.nfuonline.com/Our-work/Environment/Climate-change/GHG-emissions---agriculture-s-action-plan/ 
10 http://www.theccc.org.uk/reports/3rd-progress-report 

Page 11 of 14 

 

 
Indicator 2: Uptake of mitigation methods  
 

 

 
Statistical Background  

FARMSCOPER 

The  project  report  covering  the  development  of  the  FARMSCOPER  model,  including 
methodological details, can be found at: 
http://www.adas.co.uk/Home/Projects/FARMSCOPER/tabid/345/Default.aspx  

The  results  from  the  FARMSCOPER  upscaling  tool  have  been  validated  against  the 
national agricultural GHG inventory estimates. The FARMSCOPER estimate of total nitrous 
oxide  and  methane  emissions  from  English  agriculture  for  2010  was  30.5  Mt  CO2e 
(assuming no prior uptake of any FARMSCOPER farm practices) compared to the national 
inventory estimate of 28.9 Mt CO2e. This difference is well within the uncertainty bands11 of 
the current GHG Inventory Model, providing reassurance that the method gives a reasonable 
approximation of on farm emissions. 

 
June Agricultural Survey 

Defras June Agricultural Survey is an annual postal survey collecting detailed information on 
arable  and  horticultural  cropping  activities,  land  usage,  livestock  populations  and  labour 
force  figures.  The  survey  is  compulsory  with  samples  sizes  varying  between  30,000  and 
70,000  holdings  each  year,  dependent  on  EU  requirements.  A  full  Census  is  carried  out 
once every ten years with 2010 being the most recent.  Further methodological details can 
be found at: 

https://www.gov.uk/government/uploads/system/uploads/attachment_data/file/182206/defra-
stats-foodfarm-landuselivestock-june-junemethodology-20120126.pdf  
 
Farm Practices Survey (FPS) 

The  FPS  is  an  annual,  voluntary,  postal  survey  conducted  by  Defra  which  collects 
information  on  a  diverse  range  of  topics  relating  to  the  impact  of  farming  practices  on  the 
environment.  Since 2011 the survey has focused on practices relating to GHG mitigation.   

In  2015  the  survey  was  sent  to  approximately  6,000  holdings  in  England.  These  holdings 
were  targeted  by  farm  type  and  size  to  ensure  a  representative  sample.  Thresholds  are 
applied  to  ensure  that  very  small  holdings  with  little  agricultural  activity  are  not  included  in 
the survey. To be included in the sample, holdings had to have at least 50 cattle, 100 sheep, 
100  pigs,  1,000  poultry  or  20  hectares  of  arable  crops  or  orchards.  All  results  reflect  only 
those holdings that exceed these thresholds. 

Sample sizes and response rates are shown on the following page. 

 
                                                           
11 95% confidence intervals (Source: National Inventory Report 2010) are N2O (soils): +249%, -93%; N2O & CH4 
(manure management): +/-25%;CH4 (enteric fermentation): +/-16%. 

Page 12 of 14 

 

 
Indicator 2: Uptake of mitigation methods  
 

 

 
Statistical Background (continued) 

Farm Practices Survey sample sizes and response rates 

 
 
Sample size 
Response rate 

2011 

2012 

2013 

2014 

2015 

6,000 
59% 

3,000 
46% 

5,500 
37% 

6,000 
41% 

6,000 
44% 

 
Results  are  calculated  using  a  standard  methodology  for  stratified  random  surveys  to 
produce  national  estimates.  With  this  method,  all  of  the  data  is  weighted  according  to  the 
inverse sampling fraction. Where reference is made to the type of farm in this document, this 
refers to the robust type, which is a standardised farm classification system. Farm sizes are 
based on the estimated labour requirements for the holding, rather than its land area. 

Results from the FPS and the June Survey of Agriculture are designated National Statistics.  
These  are  official  statistics  which  have  been  assessed  and  comply  with  the  National 
Statistics code of practice.  

British Survey of Fertiliser Practice (BSFP) 

The British Survey of Fertiliser Practice (BSFP) is a voluntary annual survey.  Respondents 
are selected from the population of agricultural holdings compiled using the June Agricultural 
Survey.      The  target  sample  size  is  1,500  farms  which  is  designed  to  achieve  a  nationally 
representative  sample.  In  2014  responses  were  received  from  955  respondents  from  the 
main sample (64%); this was increased to 1,363 (91% of the target) by contacting 'reserves'.  
The overall response rate from all those contacted was 52%. The survey year for 2014 ran 
from autumn 2013 to autumn 2014, corresponding to the 2014 season or harvest year. 

BSFP  data  collection  is  undertaken  mainly  through  face  to  face  interviews  with  individual 
farmers.  At  data  entry,  any  omitted  responses,  figures  outside  pre-agreed  limits  or  other 
discrepancies  are  flagged  for  checking  and  followed  up,  often  by  contacting  the  survey 
respondent.   Additionally, 10% of the interviews undertaken are subject to a call back by an 
independent  reviewer  to  check  responses  as  part  of  data quality  assurance  arrangements. 
The aggregated figures are checked for consistency and trend analysis against historic data 
and are subject to independent expert peer review. 

The  BSFP  sample  responses  are  raised  to  be  representative  of  the  national  population  by 
using  the  inverse  of  the  achieved  sampling  fraction  (i.e.  the  number  of  holdings  in  the 
population divided by the achieved sample size in each stratum) as the weight. The validity 
of  the  derived  weights  are  assessed  by  calculating  a  weighted  crop  area  for  the  most 
extensively grown crops by this method and comparing this to the latest available crop area 
estimates from the June Agricultural Survey. Standard errors are calculated for key results 
(major crops) using standard survey statistical methodology.  

 

 

 

Page 13 of 14 

 
Indicator 2: Uptake of mitigation methods  
 

 

 
The sampling variation/standard errors associated with the application rates reported for the 
main arable crops, all tillage and grass and further methodological details can be found at: 

https://www.gov.uk/government/organisations/department-for-environment-food-rural-
affairs/series/fertiliser-usage  

The  BSFP  has  National  Statistics  status.    These  are  official  statistics  which  have  been 
assessed and comply with the National Statistics code of practice.   

 

 

 

Page 14 of 14 

