Global Warming is melting glaciers in every region of the world, putting millions of people at risk from floods,
droughts and lack of drinking water.

Glaciers are ancient rivers of compressed snow that creep through the landscape, shaping the planets surface. They
are the Earths largest freshwater reservoir, collectively covering an area the size of South America. Glaciers have
been retreating worldwide since the end of the Little Ice Age (around 1850), but in recent decades glaciers have
begun melting at rates that cannot be explained by historical trends1.

Projected climate change over the next century will further affect the rate at which glaciers melt. Average global
temperatures are expected to rise 1.4-5.8oC by the end of the 21st century2. Simulations project that a 4oC rise in
temperature would eliminate nearly all of the worlds glaciers (the melt-down of the Greenland ice sheets could
be triggered at a temperature increase of 2 to 3oC). Even in the least damaging scenario  a 1oC rise along with an
increase in rain and snow  glaciers will continue to lose volume over the coming century3.

Although only a small fraction of the planets permanent ice is stored outside of Greenland and Antarctica, these
glaciers  are  extremely  important  because  they  respond  rapidly  to  climate  change  and  their  loss  directly  affects
human populations and ecosystems. Continued, widespread melting of glaciers during the coming century will
lead to floods, water shortages for millions of people, and sea level rise threatening and destroying coastal
communities and habitats.

1979

2002

Dramatic  changes  can  be  seen  over  a
23 year period at the Aletsch Glacier in
Valais, Switzerland.  Back  in  1979, the
end of the glacier reached far down the
mountain slopes. By 2002, considerable
glacier  retreat  is  visible.  The  glaciers
end is nearly out of sight and new vege-
tation is covering the slopes.
 Pro Natura Zentrum Aletsch

Laudo ALBRECHT

REGIONS AT RISK
 Ecuador, Peru and Bolivia  where shrinking glaciers supply water year-round, and are often

the sole source of water for major cities during dry seasons.

 The Himalayas  where the danger of catastrophic flooding is severe, and glacier-fed rivers

supply water to one third of the worlds population.

 Small  island  nations  such  as Tuvalu  and  some  of  the  Solomon  Islands    where  sea  level

rise is submerging low-lying land and saltwater is inundating vital groundwater reserves.

NATURE AT RISK
 Royal Bengal tiger  endangered tigers that will lose a large portion of their worldwide habitat

as the Sundarbans succumb to sea level rise.

 Kittlitzs murrelet  rare birds specialized to hunt in cloudy glacier water and nest on top of ice.
 Coral reefs  unique organisms that can be starved of energy from the sun when sea levels rise.

Rising sea level will submerge small island nations. Salty sea
water will also make their groundwater undrinkable.
 WWF-Canon / Soh Koon CHNG

Since the early 1960s, mountain glaciers worldwide have experienced an estimated net loss of over 4000 cubic

kilometers of water  more than the annual discharge of the Orinoco, Congo, Yangtze and Mississippi
Rivers combined; this loss was more than twice as fast in the 1990s than during previous decades.

MEASURING GLACIER LOSS
The most accurate measure of glacier change is mass balance, the difference between accumulation (mass added as
snow) and ablation (mass lost due to melting or calving off of chunks). Even if precipitation increases, mass balance
may decline if warmer temperatures cause precipitation to fall as rain rather than snow. Mass change is reported in
cubic meters of water lost, or as thickness averaged over the entire area of the glacier. Because mass changes are
difficult to measure, glacier shrinkage is more often described as a loss of glacier area, or as the distance the front
(terminus) of the glacier has retreated.

HABITAT LOSS
While many species are likely to be affected by changes in stream flow and sea level associated with glacier melting,
animals that dwell on or near glaciers may be pushed towards extinction by the disappearance of their icy habitats.
Far from being barren expanses of ice, glaciers are home to some of the most unique organisms and ecosystems on Earth.
For example, the tiny ice worm spends its entire life on ice, roaming over glaciers at night, feeding on glacial algae,
and occasionally being snatched up by a hungry snow bunting46. The physiological adaptation that allows these
worms to survive at 0oC remains unknown, and because these worms disintegrate at temperatures over 5oC, their
secret may be lost as temperatures rise and their glacial habitat melts away.

Climate change has already led to the loss of an entire ecosystem on the
crumbling  ice  shelves  of  the  Arctic.  Between  2000  and  2002, Ward
Hunt Ice Shelf off of Ellesmere Island in Canada broke in two, drain-
ing much of the water from overlying Disraeli Fjord, the largest remain-
ing epishelf (ice shelf-bounded) lake in the Northern Hemisphere. This
3000-year  old  lake  supported  a  rare  ecosystem  where  microscopic
marine  organisms  near  the  bottom  of  the  lake  lived  in  harmony  with
their freshwater brethren in the brackish surface waters. By 2002, 96%
of this unique low-salinity habitat had been lost42.

Even animals that do not live directly on glaciers can be severely affect-
ed by their disappearance. Kittlitzs murrelet, for example, is a small,
diving seabird that forages for food almost exclusively in areas where
glacial meltwater enters the ocean. These birds are already in serious
trouble; their global population (located mostly in Alaska) is thought to
have  plummeted  from  several  hundred  thousand  in  1972  to  less  than
20,000  in  the  early  1990s41.  Several  conservation  groups  have  filed  a
petition to declare Kittlitzs murrelet an endangered species, citing cli-
mate change and the loss of critical glacier-associated habitat as one of
the primary reasons for the species decline.

Even farther away from the melting glaciers themselves, coral reefs will
be affected by rising sea level. Corals require light for photosynthesis
to survive. The depth at which corals can live is limited by how far light
can penetrate the water. When light diminishes as sea level rises, corals
living  at  this  light  limiting  depth  will  be  lost47.  Coral  reefs  at  other
depths will also see reduced growth rates as light quality changes from
rising sea level. In one simulation, it was shown that coral reefs in the
Caribbean are not expected to be able to keep up with sea level rise48.
This has consequences not only for the corals and marine life, but for
the human communities that rely on these reefs for subsistence.

CONTAMINANTS
Although persistent organic pollutants (POPs) such as PCBs and DDT
are widely banned today, they were used extensively in the middle of
the last century. These long-lived pollutants are transported in the air
from their source to cooler areas where they condense and are deposit-
ed in glacial ice. Until recently, these compounds had remained trapped
in the ice, but rapid melting has begun to release them back into the
environment. For example, in one Canadian lake, glacial meltwater is
the  source  of  50-97%  of  the  various  POPs  entering  the  lake17. At
least 10% of this glacial melt is from ice that was deposited between the
1950s and 1970s, as shown by the presence of tritium, a by-product of
nuclear bomb tests conducted during this era.

The Kittlitzs murrelet is found only in Alaska and
portions of the Russian Far East. Because of their
affinity to glaciers, their survival is threatened.
 Bob DAY

Corals need light in order to
survive, but as sea level rises
the deeper water can block the
suns nourishing rays.
 WWF-Canon / Jurgen FREUND

Pesticides  used  in  temperate  and  tropical  areas
are  transported  to  the  Arctic  and  deposited  in 
glacial ice.
 WWF-Canon / Mauri RAUTKARI

THE ARCTIC
Over  recent  decades, Arctic  glaciers  have  generally  been  shrinking, with  the  exception  of  Scandinavia  and
Iceland, where  increased  precipitation  has  resulted  in  a  positive  balance36.  Arctic  melting  appears  to  have
accelerated in the late 1990s; estimates of combined annual melting rose from 100 sq km per year from
1980-89 to 320 sq km in 1997 and 540 sq km in 199837. Greenland alone contains 12% of the worlds ice. While
portions of the interior are gaining mass, there has been significant thinning and ice loss around the periphery. 
This loss is not simply due to melting at the edges; entire portions of the Greenland ice sheet appear to be sliding
towards the sea. Because this sliding accelerates when surface melting is most intense, it is believed that surface
meltwater may be trickling down to the glacial bed and lubricating ice sheet movement38. This recent discovery
provides a mechanism for rapid response of ice sheets to climate change, a process that was previously believed
to require hundreds or thousands of years.

Exit  Glacier  from  camp  ground  Kenai  Fjords
National Park Alaska, USA
 WWF-Canon / Anthony B. RATH

NORTH AMERICA
Glaciers in the Rocky Mountains and Western Coastal Ranges have experienced considerable
losses  during  this  century, and  melting  is  accelerating  rapidly  in  southern  Alaska.  Since
Glacier National Park (Montana, USA) was established in 1910, more than two thirds of
its  glaciers  and  about  75%  of  its  glacier  area  has  disappeared29;  if  the  present  rate  of
warming continues, there will be no glaciers left in the Park by 203030. In Banff, Jasper,
and Yoho National Parks in the Canadian Rockies, glacier cover has decreased by at least 25%
during the 20th century31. South Cascade Glacier in coastal Washington (USA) lost 19 m of ice
thickness between 1976 and 1995, ten times more than during the previous 18 years32. Nearly
all glaciers surveyed in Alaska are melting, and thinning rates in the last 5-7 years are more
than twice those seen in previous decades13.

Columbia Glacier thinned by 300 m at its oceanfront
terminus from the 1950s to 1995, and an astounding
150 meters more in just the 5 years from 1995-2000.
 Mark F. MEIER

SOUTH AMERICA
The northern Andes contain the largest concentration of glaciers in the tropics, but these
glaciers  are  receding  rapidly  and  losses  have  accelerated  during  the  1990s. In  Peru,
Yanamarey Glacier lost a quarter of its area during the last fifty years25, and Uruashraju and
Broggi Glaciers lost 40-50% of their length from 1948-199026. In Ecuador, Antizana Glacier
shrank  7-8  times  faster  during  the  1990s  than  in  previous  decades.  Similarly, Glacier
Chacaltaya (Bolivia) lost nearly half of its area and two thirds of its volume during the mid-
1990s alone, and could disappear by 201027. In the sub-tropical wet Andes, the large ice mass-
es of the North Patagonia Icefield (Chile) and South Patagonia Icefield (Chile and Argentina)
had lost only 4-6% of their 1945 area by the mid 1990s28, but thinning has accelerated recent-
ly. Parts of the southern icefield experienced thinning rates from 1995-2000 that were over
twice as fast as their average rates during the previous three decades14.

According to recent research by NASA, the Patagonia icefields
of Chile and Argentina are thinning at an accelerating pace and
now account for nearly 10 percent of global sea-level change
from mountain glaciers.
 WWF-Canon / Michel GUNTHER

ANTARCTICA
Antarctica is blanketed by ice sheets that contain about 95% of the planets freshwater. Cold temperatures
prevent significant surface melting, but recent work shows that bottom melting underneath glaciers at the
junction  between  land  and  sea  is  rapid  and  widespread  throughout  Antarctica, possibly  due  to
increased ocean temperatures39. Warmer seas have also contributed to the rapid thinning and breakup of
many  large, floating  ice  shelves.  These  shelves  may  buttress  and  slow  the  glaciers  flowing  into  them;
although there was no change in glacier velocity after the loss of the Wordie Ice Shelf, several major ice
streams that nourished the Larsen A shelf are flowing as much as 2-3 times faster towards the sea since its
breakup in 199540. At the same time, the interior has experienced an increase in accumulation because more
water is being evaporated from warmer seas and falling as snow2. The extent to which these gains com-
pensate for ice loss at the edges is unknown.

Of all the worlds glaciers, Antarctic ice will contribute
the most significantly to global sea level rise. Its glaciers
flow across the continent towards the coast where
the ice melts or breaks away to produce icebergs.
 WWF / Fritz POLKING

EUROPE
In the past four decades, the majority of glaciers in the Alps
have experienced considerable mass losses; this is illustrated
by the Hintereisferner (Austria), Gries (Switzerland), and Sarennes
(France), each of which lost the equivalent of 14 m ice thickness
since the 1960s. Glacier melting has accelerated since 1980,
and 10-20% of glacier ice in the Alps was lost in less than
two decades18. The discovery of a 5300-year old ice man in a
melting  glacier  in  Italy  demonstrates  that  many  glaciers  are
now smaller than they have been for thousands of years. The
World Meteorological Organization reports that summer 2003
temperatures, which triggered floods, land slides, and the rapid
formation  of  glacial  lakes, were  the  hottest  ever  recorded  in
northern  and  central  Europe;  if  current  trends  continue, the
European Alps will lose major parts of their glacier coverage
within the next few decades18.

Glaciers and stream Cogne Valley. Grand Paradiso National Park. Italy.
 WWF-Canon / Michele DEPRAZ

ASIA
The  vast  majority  of  all  Himalayan  glaciers
have been retreating and thinning over the past
30  years, with  accelerated  losses  in  the  last
decade.  For  example, glaciers  in  the  Bhutan
Himalayas are now retreating at an average rate
of 30-40 m per year22. In Central Asia, glaciers
are  wasting  at  exceptionally  high  rates.  In  the
northern Tien Shan (Kazakhstan), glaciers have
been collectively losing 2 sq km of ice (0.7% of
their  total  mass)  per  year  since  1955, and
Tuyuksu glacier has receded nearly a kilometer
since  192310.  Glaciers  in  the Ak-shirak  Range
(Kyrgyzstan) have lost 23% of their area since
197723, similar  to  area  losses  in  the  northern
Tien  Shan  (29%  from  1955-1990)  and  the
Pamirs (16% from 1957-1980). In the Chinese
Tien Shan, Urumqihe Glacier lost the equivalent
of 4 m ice thickness from 1979-199524, and the
Chinese  Meteorological  Administration  pre-
dicts that Chinas northwestern mountains will
lose over a quarter of their current glacier cov-
erage by 2050. These glaciers supply 15-20%
of the water to over 20 million people in the
Xinjiang and Qinghai Provinces alone45.

Himalayan glacier lake. Khumbu
valley, Annapurna region, Nepal
 WWF-Canon

NEYRET & BENASTAR

Drinking water is already scarce
in parts of Asia where Himalayan
glaciers supply freshwater to 
a third of the worlds population.
In Bhutan, wooden troughs made
from hollowed tree branches carry
glacial runoff to communities.
 WWF-Canon / Roel A. BURGLER

AFRICA
Tropical glaciers in Africa have decreased in area by 60-70% on
average since the early 1900s. The ice fields atop Mt. Kilimanjaro
have lost 80% of their area during this century and despite
persisting for over 10,000 years, they are likely to disappear
by 202019. On Mt. Kenya, 7 of the 18 glaciers present in 1900
had disappeared by 199320, and four glaciers (Lewis, Tyndall,
Gregory  and  Cesar)  had  lost  between  60%  and  92%  of  their
area.  The  remaining  glaciers  in  the  Ruwenzori  Mountains  of
Uganda and the Democratic Republic of Congo are also melt-
ing  rapidly, with  area  losses  during  the  20th  century  ranging
from 53% (Speke) to 90% (Moore)21.

SOUTH PACIFIC
The tropical Carstensz Glaciers in Papua Province (formerly Irian Jaya),
Indonesia are melting rapidly; 80% of their collective area was lost between
1942 and 200033. The West Meren Glacier receded 2600 m since it was
first surveyed in 1936, before melting away sometime between 1997
and  1999. In  Papua  New  Guinea, three  summit  ice  domes  that  were
known to exist in the Central Cordillera Range disappeared in the 1960s34.
In  temperate  New  Zealand, 127  glaciers  surveyed  in  the  Southern Alps
have shortened by 38% and lost 25% of their area since the mid 1850s35;
however, many  of  these  glaciers  have  advanced  in  recent  decades, pre-
sumably due to increased precipitation.

1993

Mt. Kilimanjaro

2000

Melting snows of Kilimanjaro
The  snows  of  Kilimanjaro  formed  some  11,000  years  ago
but some scientists now believe that it will melt away over
the next two decades. These satellite images captured dra-
matic changes between 1993 and 2000.
 NASA and USGS

The Meren Valley in the Carstenz
Mountains  of  Indonesia  was
carved by glaciers, but the last
ice melted away completely in
the late 1990s.
 WWF-Canon / John RATCLIFFE

Map view of the Mt. Jaya glaciers in Papua Province, New Guinea
and changes in their extent since 1936.
 Michael PRENTICE

Glaciers And Freshwater 
Although our planet appears to be a watery oasis when viewed from space, most of this liquid is far too salty
for humans, plants or animals to consume. Only about 2.5% of the water on earth is freshwater, and less
than one-hundredth of one percent is drinkable and renewed each year through precipitation.

WATER SHORTAGES
Seventy percent of the worlds freshwater is frozen in glaciers, which buffer ecosystems against climate variabili-
ty by releasing water during dry seasons or years. In tropical areas, glaciers melt year-round, contributing contin-
uously to streamflow and often providing the only source of water for humans and wildlife during dry parts of the
year. Freshwater is already a limiting resource for much of the planet, and in the next 30 years population growth
is likely to far exceed any potential increases in available water.

The  Himalayan  glaciers  that  feed  seven  of  the  great  rivers  of Asia  (the  Ganga, Indus, Brahmaputra, Salween,
Mekong, Yangtze and Huang He) and ensure a year-round water supply to 2 billion people are retreating at a
startlingly fast rate. In the Ganga, the loss of glacier meltwater would reduce July-September flows by two thirds,
causing water shortages for 500 million people and 37% of Indias irrigated land8,9. In the northern Tien Shan
mountains of Kazakhstan, more than 90% of the regions water supply is used for agriculture and 75-80% of river
runoff is derived from glaciers and permafrost, which are melting at accelerated rates10. In the dry Andes, glacial
meltwater contributes more to river flow than rainfall, even during the rainy season11. Most large cities in Ecuador,
Peru  and  Bolivia  rely  on  meltwater  from  rapidly  disappearing  glaciers  for  their  water  supply  and  hydroelectric
power, and many communities are already experiencing shortages and conflicts over use12.

FLOODING
Rapid melting of glaciers can lead to flooding of rivers and to the for-
mation of glacial meltwater lakes, which may pose an even more serious
threat. Continued melting or calving of ice chunks into lakes can cause
catastrophic glacial lake outburst floods. In 1985, such a flood at the 
Dig Tsho (Langmoche) Lake in Nepal killed several people and destroyed
bridges, houses, arable land, and a nearly completed hydropower plant4.
A recent UNEP study found that 44 glacial lakes in Nepal and Bhutan
are in immediate danger of overflowing as a result of climate change5,6.
In Peru, a chunk of glacier ice fell into Lake Palcacocha in 1941, causing
a flood that killed 7000 people; recent satellite photos reveal that another
chunk  of  loose  ice  is  poised  over  this  lake, threatening  the  lives  of
100,000 people below7.

SEA LEVEL RISE
Average global sea level rose by 1-2 mm per year during the 1900s and 
is projected to continue rising, with an estimated contribution of 0.2-0.4 mm
per year from melting glaciers2. The effect of glaciers may be underes-
timated, however, as recent studies suggest that accelerated melting in
Alaska and the Patagonia Icefields since the mid-1990s has increased
the  combined  contribution  of  just  these  two  areas  to  0.375  mm  per
year13,14.  Sea-level  rise  will  affect  coastal  regions  throughout  the
world, causing  flooding, erosion, and  saltwater  intrusion  into
aquifers and freshwater habitats. Even the modest sea-level rise seen
during the 20th century led to erosion and the loss of 100 sq km of wet-
lands  per  year  in  the  U.S.  Mississippi  River  Delta15.  In  Trinidad  and 
Tobago, as in many low-lying islands, beaches are retreating several meters
per  year  and  salinity  levels  have  begun  to  rise  in  coastal  aquifers43.
Small  Pacific  islands  such  as  Tonga,
the  Marshall  Islands  and 
the Federated States of Micronesia are particularly vulnerable, and could
lose large portions of their land area to rising seas and storm surges44. A global
sea level rise of 1 m would inundate 80% of the Maldives, displace 24 million
people in Bangladesh, India and Indonesia, and completely eliminate
the Sundarbans, the worlds largest mangrove forest and home to the
endangered Royal Bengal Tiger and hundreds of other species16.

Flooding caused by runoff from melting glaciers
could have disastrous consequences for people living
nearby. Source of La Borgne River, Ferpecle Glacier,
Valais, Switzerland.
 WWF-Canon / Michele DEPRAZ

Bengal tigers face a loss of habitat as glaciers retreat.
Their natural habitat in the mangrove forests of the
Sundarbans region of Bangladesh and India is being
drowned as sea level rises and inundates this area.
 WWF-Canon / Martin HARVEY

SOLUTIONS
Worldwide, accelerating glacier loss provides independent and startling evidence that global warming is occurring1.
It is now clear that the Earth is warming rapidly due to man-made emissions of carbon dioxide and other heat-trap-
ping gases, which blanket the planet and cause temperatures to rise2. Climate change is already happening, but we
can strive to keep global warming within tolerable limits if we act now.

Based on scenarios of projected damage to ecosystems and human communities, WWF seeks to limit global warm-
ing  to  a  maximum  of  2oC  over  pre-industrial  levels. Although  a  warming  of  1-2oC  will  clearly  threaten  human
health, water supplies and vulnerable ecosystems, a warming of at least 1oC appears unavoidable. Warming beyond
2oC is likely to result in rapidly escalating damages, with severe threats to human populations and the loss of unique
and irreplaceable ecosystems. It is therefore imperative that emissions of the main heat-trapping gas, carbon diox-
ide (CO2), are significantly reduced, in order to avoid exceeding this 2oC threshold.

The majority of CO2 pollution is released when fossil fuels such as coal, oil and natural gas are burned for trans-
portation, heating, or the production of electricity. Coal is particularly damaging, as it produces 70% more CO2
emissions than natural gas for the same energy output. Electricity generation is the single largest source of man-
made CO2, amounting to 37% of worldwide emissions.

WWF is challenging the electric power sector to become CO2-free by the middle of this century in industrialized
countries, and to make a significant shift towards that goal in developing countries. A number of power companies
have already signed on to WWFs vision, but in order to reduce emissions significantly, power utilities, financial
institutions, consumers, and policy makers must all play a role:
 Utilities  can  support  meaningful  global  warming  legislation, improve  the  energy  efficiency  of  power  plants,

increase their use of renewable energy sources, and halt investment in new coal plants and coal mining.

 Financial institutions can call upon the companies they invest in to disclose their emissions policies, and switch 
their investments to companies that are striving to be more competitive under future limits on carbon emissions. 
 Electricity consumers should opt for green power where it is available, demand this choice where it is not, and 

invest in highly efficient appliances.

 Policy makers must ease the transition to a carbon-free energy industry by passing legislation that creates favorable 
market conditions, shaping new frameworks for change, and ensuring that the Kyoto Protocol, the worlds primary 
legal tool to combat global warming, enters into force as soon as possible.

LITERATURE CITED
A full list of literature cited in this brochure can be found at http://www.panda.org/climate/glaciers

CREDITS
Text by Stacey Combes, Michael L. Prentice, Lara Hansen and Lynn Rosentrater
Designed by IPMA Worldwide Press

WWF CLIMATE CHANGE PROGRAMME
Director: Jennifer Morgan
c/o WWF Germany
Grosse Prasidentenstrasse 10 - 10178 Berlin - Germany
Tel : +49 30 308 742 19
Fax: +49 30 308 742 50
Email: morgan@wwf.de
Website: http://www.panda.org/climate

WWFs mission is to stop the degradation of the planets natural environment
and to build a future in which humans live in harmony with nature, by:
- conserving the worlds biological diversity
- ensuring that the use of renewable natural resources is sustainable
- promoting the reduction of pollution and wasteful consumption

m
o
c
.
p
w
w
A
M
P

-

I
 
y
b

 

 

d
e
c
u
d
o
r
p
&
d
e
n
g
s
e
D

 

i

 
 
-

.

d
n
a
l
r
e
z
t
i

w
S

 
,

d
n
a
G

l

 
,
)
d
n
u
F

 

e

f
i
l

 

l
i

d
W
d
l
r
o
W
 
y
l
r
e
m
r
o
f
(
 

e
r
u
a
N

t

 
r
o

f
 

i

 

 

d
n
u
F
e
d
W
d
l
r
o
W
-
F
W
W

 
,

6
8
9
1


 

 
r
e
n
w
O
 
k
r
a
m
e
d
a
r
T
d
e
r
e
t
s
g
e
R
F
W
W


 

i

