Health Facts
“If you look at climate
change over the long
term, it will profoundly
affect the pillars of
public health: water,
sanitation, air quality
and sufficient food.” 1
Dr. David Heymann, Assistant
Director-General for Health
Security and Environment,
World Health Organization

For more information,
please contact
Kim Knowlton at
(212) 727-4579.

www.nrdc.org/policy

Global Warming And Our
Health: Addressing the most
serious health impacts of climate
change
Science has shown that global warming will affect human health across
the world. From diminished air quality and degradation of food and water
supplies to increasing levels of allergens and catastrophic weather events, we
will experience a number of worsening health threats during our lifetimes.
Fortunately, urgent action can help us avoid the worst of these impacts.
First, Congress must address global warming through mandatory legislation
that reduces global warming pollution on the order of 80 percent by 2050.
In addition, the national and local public health system must protect
communities by preparing for eight of the most pressing health hazards
associated with climate change.
1. Extreme Storms Will Affect Health and
Infrastructure: Science tells us that global
warming has contributed to more hurricanes and
intense storms in the North Atlantic during the last
several decades. Increased storm wind speeds and
more intense rainfall are projected as the climate
warms.2 More severe storms and floods can lead
to drownings, injuries, and outbreaks of infectious
disease. Storms also damage basic infrastructure,
with moisture leading to mold growth that can
exacerbate allergies and respiratory illnesses.
2. Heat Waves Will Lead to Increased Death
and Illness: The frequency and duration of heat
waves in the United States is projected to increase
substantially because of global warming.3 As
temperatures increase, so do the number of deaths
and illnesses occurring from heat exhaustion or

heatstroke, cardiovascular disease, and kidney
disease. Extreme heat waves cause the most
harm among elderly and young children. City
dwellers are at particular risk because of elevated
temperatures in cities, known as the “urban heat
island effect.”
3. Air Pollution Will Contribute to More
Smog and Respiratory Illness: More than
100 million Americans currently live in counties
with ozone levels above national EPA standards.
Rising temperatures will increase ozone smog in
many areas, especially in cities. Increasing levels
of ground-level ozone are associated with increased
hospital admissions for people with respiratory
diseases such as asthma and will worsen the
health of people suffering from cardiac or
pulmonary disease.4

Health Facts

Global Warming’s
Effects On:
Floods, storms
Heat waves
Air pollution

Airborne allergen
production
Insect-borne
infections
Water-borne
infections

Water and food
supplies

Sea-level rise

4. Pollen Allergens Will Proliferate:
Higher temperatures and increased levels of
carbon dioxide may cause allergenic pollen season
to start earlier, last longer, and be more intense.5
For example, higher levels of carbon dioxide can
cause ragweed to produce
60 percent more pollen
Adverse Health Impacts:
than normal. With
Deaths, injuries, infectious disease outbreaks,
increases in airborne
mental health impacts on affected communities
pollen, those who suffer
Deaths, hospitalizations, emergency department
from seasonal allergies are
visits, and heat-related illnesses
Increased concentrations of ground-level ozone
likely to experience worse
smog and fine particulate matter, increasing
symptoms, including
premature mortality and hospitalizations
hayfever and asthma.
Increased allergic illnesses (hay fever, asthma)
due to longer pollen season and increases in the
amount of pollen produced
Infections carried by mosquitos, ticks, and
other insects can spread into new areas
Risk of cholera could be increased as coastal
and estuarine waters warm; extreme rainfall
events are associated with increased risks of
Cryptosporidium outbreaks
More frequent drought, reduced drinking water
supplies and crop yields, increasing world food
insecurity; declining fisheries can contribute to
protein shortages; increased risks of food-borne
illnesses
Contamination of coastal soils and drinking
water supplies; increasing storm surges and
floods; large numbers of displaced people

Table adapted from McMichael et al. (2006)
Walsh B. 2008. Can climate change make us sicker? TIME
Magazine (April 4, 2008).
1

IPCC. 2007. Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis.
Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
[Solomon S, Qin D, Manning M, Chen Z, Marquis M, Averyt
KB, Tignor M, Miller HL (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.
2

Confalonieri U, Menne B, Akhtar R, Ebi KL, Hauengue
M, Kovats RS, Revich B, Woodward A. 2007. Human health
(Chapter 8). Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and
Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth
Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change, Parry ML, Canziani OF, Palutikof JP, van der Linden PJ,
Hanson CE, Eds. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK.
3 4,5,6

McMichael AJ, Woodruff RE, Hales S. 2006. Climate change
and human health: present and future risks. The Lancet
367:859-869.
7

Patz J, Engelberg D, Last J. 2000. The effects of changing
weather on public health. Annu Rev Public Health 21:271–307.
8

United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP). 2007. UNEP
2007 Annual Report. Available at: http://www.unep.org/PDF/
AnnualReport/2007/AnnualReport2007_en_web.pdf .
9

Global Warming And Our Health:
Addressing the most serious health
impacts of climate change

5. Mosquito- and
Tick-Borne Infectious
Diseases Will Spread
More Widely: Climate
change will affect the
patterns of diseases such
as malaria, West Nile
virus, dengue fever,
and Lyme disease.6
Warming temperatures
and increasing amounts
of rainfall have been
associated with increases
in the occurrence and
transmission of insect-borne diseases, and higher
temperatures lead to more rapid development
of dangerous pathogens within insect carriers.
Warming temperatures allow these diseases to
expand their range into new, once cooler, regions.
6. Drinking Water Will Become Increasingly
Contaminated: Outbreaks of water-borne
diarrheal diseases caused by parasites, like Giardia
and Cryptosporidium, have been associated with
heavy rainfall events, which are likely to become
more frequent due to global warming. For
example, recent cholera outbreaks in Bangladesh
have been brought on by heavy rains.7 The impact
of global warming on the safety of water supplies
will be most severe in developing countries, where
water treatment is less available.

© Natural Resources Defense Council May 2008

7. Water and Food Supplies Will Be
Threatened: Global warming is expected to
worsen floods and droughts, threatening the
availability of water for drinking and irrigation.
Droughts diminish food variety, nutritional
content, and availability—all of which can
contribute to malnutrition, infectious diseases,
and starvation. Warming ocean temperatures bring
shifts in the geographic range of fish populations
and can severely impact local food supplies. One
analysis predicts that by the year 2060, there will
be an additional 40 to 300 million people at risk of
malnutrition from human-caused climate change.8
And global warming’s higher temperatures can
increase the risk of food-borne illnesses.
8. There Will Be Large Numbers of
Environmental Refugees: Sea-level rise will leave
some areas uninhabitable, forcing people to flee
their homes in coastal regions. The United Nations
estimates that in the next 10 years there will be up
to 50 million “environmental refugees”—people
forced to migrate from their homes by a range of
climate change-related environmental disasters
like floods, droughts, and desertification.9 Health
among these refugees will be threatened by
associated increases in urban crowding, lack of
water, and transmission of infectious diseases.
Protecting Ourselves from the Worst
Impacts of Global Warming
The range of potential threats to health and
life posed by global warming has never been
clearer. NRDC encourages national, state,
and local officials and other policymakers to
act immediately to reduce global warming
emissions at least 80 percent by 2050 in order
to avoid the worst potential impacts of a changing
climate. We must also prepare the public health
system to respond to the range of anticipated
health threats that will accompany global
warming. For more information, see the fact
sheet titled “Preparing for Global Warming” at
www.nrdc.org/globalwarming/preparedness.pdf.

www.nrdc.org/policy

Printed on recycled paper

