Can we defuse 
The Global Warming Time Bomb? 
All glaciers in Glacier National Park are retreating inexorably 
to their final demise.  Global warming is real, and the melting 
ice is an apt portent of potentially disastrous consequences.  
Yet most gloom-and-doom climate scenarios exaggerate trends 
of the agents that drive global warming.  Study of these forcing 
agents shows that global warming can be slowed, and stopped, 
with practical actions that yield a cleaner, healthier 
atmosphere.  

Figure 1. Wind and tides mix the ocean to great depths.  Thus, because of the thermal inertia of this 
ocean water, it requires at least several decades for the ocean temperature to respond fully to a climate 
forcing.  

 

 

1

A paradox in the notion of human-made global warming became strikingly apparent to me one 
summer afternoon in 1976 on Jones Beach, Long Island. Arriving at midday, my wife, son and I 
found a spot near the water to avoid the scorching hot sand. As the sun sank in the late afternoon, 
a brisk wind from the ocean whipped up whitecaps. My son and I had goose bumps as we ran 
along the foamy shoreline and watched the churning waves. 

It was well known by then that human-made "greenhouse gases," especially carbon 

dioxide (CO2) and chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), were accumulating in the atmosphere.  These 
gases are a climate "forcing," because they alter the energy budget of the planet (see Box 1).  
Like a blanket, they absorb infrared (heat) radiation that would otherwise escape from the Earth's 
surface and atmosphere to space. 

That same summer, Andy Lacis and I, along with other colleagues at the NASA Goddard 
Institute for Space Studies, had calculated that these human-made gases were heating the Earth's 
surface at a rate of almost 2 W/m2.  A miniature Christmas tree bulb dissipates about 1 W, 
mostly in the form of heat. So it was as if humans had placed two of these tiny bulbs over every 
square meter of the Earth's surface, burning night and day. 

The paradox that this result presented was the contrast between the awesome forces of 

nature and the tiny light bulbs. Surely their feeble heating could not command the wind and 
waves or smooth our goose bumps. Even their imperceptible heating of the ocean surface must 
be quickly dissipated to great depths, so it must take many years, perhaps centuries, for the 
ultimate surface warming to be achieved (Figure 1).  

This seeming paradox in the notion of human-made global warming has now been largely 

resolved through study of the history of the Earth's climate, which reveals that small forces, 
maintained long enough, can cause large climate change. And, consistent with the historical 
evidence, the Earth has begun to warm in recent decades, at a rate predicted by climate models 
that take account of the atmospheric accumulation of human-made greenhouse gases. The 
warming is having noticeable impacts as glaciers are retreating worldwide, Arctic sea ice has 
thinned, and spring, defined by the cyclical behavior of organisms, the average temperature and 
the breakup of winter ice, comes about one week earlier than when I grew up in the 1950s.  

Yet many issues remain unresolved. How much will climate change in coming decades? 
What will be the practical consequences? What, if anything, should we do about it? The debate 
over these questions is highly charged because of the economic stakes inherent in any attempts to 
slow the warming. 

Objective analysis of global warming requires quantitative knowledge of (1) the 

sensitivity of the climate system to forcings, (2) the forcings that humans are introducing, and (3) 
the time required for climate to respond. All of these issues can be studied with global climate 
models, which are numerical simulations on computers. But our most accurate knowledge about 
climate sensitivity, at least so far, is based on empirical data from the Earth's history. 

 

2

The Lessons of History 
Over the past few million years the Earths climate has swung repeatedly between ice ages and 
warm interglacial periods.  Twenty thousand years ago an ice sheet covered Canada, reaching as 
far south as Seattle, Iowa and New York City.  More than a mile thick, the ice sheet, should it 
return, would tower over and crush to dust the tallest buildings in its path. 

A 400,000 year record of temperature is preserved in the Antarctic ice sheet, which, 

except for coastal fringes, escaped melting even in the warmest interglacial periods.  H2O 
isotopes (deuterium and 18O) in the annual snow layers reveal the temperature at which the snow 
formed.  This record (Figure 2) suggests that the present interglacial period (the Holocene), now 
about 12,000 years old, is already long of tooth.  Absent humans, the Earth might soon (in 
thousands of years) be headed into its next ice age.The next ice age will never come, however, 
unless humans desert the planet.  As we shall see, the small forces that drove millennial climate 
changes are now overwhelmed by human forcings.  A small fraction of the gases that civilization 
emits is sufficient to avert global cooling.  The problem is now the opposite: human forcings are 
driving the planet toward a warmer climate.  Our best guide for how much the Earths climate 
will change is provided by the record of how the Earth responded to past forcings. 

The natural millennial climate changes are associated with slow variations of the Earths 

orbit induced by gravitational torque by other planets, mainly Jupiter and Saturn (because they 
are so heavy) and Venus (because it comes so close).  These torques cause the Earths spin axis, 
now tilted 23 degrees from perpendicular to the plane of the Earths orbit, to wobble more than 
one degree (about 40,000 year periodicity), the season at which the Earth is closest to the sun to 
move slowly through the year (about 20,000 year periodicity), and the Earths orbit to vary from 
near circular to elliptical with as much as 7 percent elongation (no regular periodicity, but large 
changes on 100,000 year and longer time scales). 

These perturbations hardly affect the annual mean solar energy striking the Earth, but 

they alter the geographical and seasonal distribution of insolation as much as 10-20 percent.  The 
insolation changes, over long periods, affect the building and melting of ice sheets.  Today, for 
example, the Earth is nearest the sun in January and farthest away in July.  This orbital 
configuration increases winter atmospheric moisture and snowfall and slows summer melting in 
the Northern Hemisphere, thus, other things being equal, favoring buildup of glaciers.  Insolation 
and climate changes also affect uptake and release of CO2 and CH4 by plants, soil and the ocean, 
as shown by changes of atmospheric CO2 and CH4 that are nearly synchronous with the climate 
changes (Figure 2). 

When the temperature, CO2 and CH4 curves are carefully compared, it is found that the 
temperature changes usually precede the CO2 and CH4 changes, on average by 500-1000 years.  
This indicates that climate change causes CO2 and CH4 changes.  However, these greenhouse gas 
changes are a positive feedback that contributes to the large magnitude of the climate swings. 
Climatologists are still developing a quantitative understanding of the mechanisms by 

which the ocean and land release CO2 and CH4 as the Earth warms, but the paleoclimate data are 
already a goldmine of information.  The most critical insight that the ice age climate swings 
provide is an empirical measure of climate sensitivity.

 

3

 

The composition of the ice age atmosphere is known precisely from air bubbles trapped 
as the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets and numerous mountain glaciers built up from annual 
snowfall.  The geographical distributions of the ice sheets, vegetation cover, and coastlines 
during the ice age are well mapped.  From these data we know that the change of climate forcing 
between the ice age and today was about 612 W/m2 (Figure 3).  This forcing maintains a global 
temperature change of 5C, implying a climate sensitivity of 34  14C per W/m2.  Climate 
models yield a similar climate sensitivity.  However, the empirical result is more precise and 
reliable because it includes all the processes operating in the real world, even those we have not 
yet been smart enough to include in the models. 

The paleo data provide another important insight.  Changes of the Earths orbit are an 

instigator of climate change, but they operate by altering atmosphere and surface properties and 
thus the planetary energy balance.  These atmosphere and surface properties are now influenced 
more by humans than by our planets orbital variations.  Greenhouse gases are increasing today 
and glaciers and ice sheets are melting back.  The old maxim, that the Earth is heading toward a 
new ice age, has been rendered void by the power of modern technology. 
 
Box 1: Climate Forcings, Sensitivity, Response Time and Feedbacks. 
A climate forcing is an imposed perturbation of the Earths energy balance. If the sun brightens, 
that is a positive forcing that warms the Earth.  Aerosols (fine particles) blasted by a volcano into 
the upper atmosphere reflect sunlight to space, causing a negative forcing that cools the Earths 
surface. These are natural forcings. Human-made gases and aerosols are also important forcings.  
Climate sensitivity is the response to a specified forcing, after climate has time to reach a 
new equilibrium, including effects of fast feedbacks.  A common measure of climate sensitivity 
is the global warming for doubled atmospheric CO2.  Climate models suggest that doubled CO2 
would cause 3oC global warming, with an uncertainty of at least 50%.  Doubled CO2 is a forcing 
of about 4 W/m2, implying that global climate sensitivity is about 34oC per W/m2 of forcing. 

Climate response time is the time needed to achieve most of the climate response to an 

imposed forcing, including the effects of fast feedbacks.  The response time of the Earths 
climate is long, at least several decades, because of the thermal inertia of the ocean and the rapid 
mixing of waters within the upper few hundred meters of the ocean. 

Climate sensitivity and response time depend upon climate feedbacks, which are changes 

of the planetary energy balance induced by the climate change that can magnify or diminish 
climate response.  Feedbacks do not occur immediately in response to a climate forcing; rather 
they develop as the climate changes. 

Fast feedbacks come into play quickly as temperature changes.  For example, the air 

holds more water vapor as temperature rises, which is a positive feedback magnifying the 
climate response, because water vapor is a greenhouse gas.  Other fast feedbacks include changes 
of clouds, snow cover, and sea ice.  It is uncertain whether the cloud feedback is positive or 
negative, because clouds can increase or decrease in response to climate change.  Snow and ice 
are positive feedbacks, because as they melt the darker ocean and land absorb more sunlight. 

Slow feedbacks, such as ice sheet growth and decay, amplify millennial climate changes.  
Ice sheet changes can be treated as forcings in evaluating climate sensitivity on decade to century 
time scales. 

 

4

 
 

Figure 2. Record of atmospheric temperature, CO2 and CH4 extracted from Antarctic ice core by Petit et al. (Nature, 
399, 429, 1999) 

 

5

 

Figure 3. Climate was dramatically different than today during the last ice age, which peaked 20,000 years ago.  
Global climate forcing was about 612 W/m2 less than in the current inter-glacial period.  This forcing maintained a 
planet 5C colder than today. [Drawing from Reports to the Nation, Fall, 1997.] 

 

6

 
Box 2: But What About... 
 
Last winter was so cold!  I dont notice any global warming!  Global warming is ubiquitous, 
but its magnitude so far is only about 1F.  Day-to-day weather fluctuations are of order 10F.  
Even averaged over a season this natural (year-to-year) variability is about 2F, so global 
warming does not make every season warmer than a few decades ago.  However, global 
warming already makes the probability of a warmer than normal season about 60%, rather than 
the 30% that prevailed in 1950-1980 [Plate XV in Carl Sagans Universe, Cambridge Univ. 
Press, 282 pp., 1997]. 
 
I read that satellites measure global cooling, not warming.  That was the story a few years 
ago, but as the satellite record has lengthened and been studied more carefully it has shifted to 
warming.  The discrepancy with surface measurements is disappearing.  The primary issue now 
is: how fast is the warming? 
 
The surface warming is mainly urban heat island effects near weather stations.  Not so.  
As predicted, the largest warming is found in remote regions such as central Asia and Alaska.  
The largest areas of surface warming are over the ocean, far from urban locations [see maps at 
http://www.giss.nasa.gov/data/update/gistemp].  Temperature profiles in the solid earth, at 
hundreds of boreholes around the world, imply a warming of the continental surfaces between 
0.5 and 1C in the past century. 
 
The warming of the past century is just a natural rebound from the little ice age.  Any 
rebound from the European little ice age, which peaked in 1650-1750, would have been largely 
complete by the 20th century.  Indeed, the natural long-term climate trend is to a colder climate. 
 
Isnt human-made global warming saving us from the next ice age?  Yes, but the gases that 
we have added to the atmosphere are already far more than needed for that purpose. 
 
Climate variations are mainly due to solar variability.  The sun does flicker and the little ice 
age may have been caused, at least in part, by reduced solar output.  Best estimates are that the 
sun contributed about one quarter of global warming between 1850 and 2000.  Climate forcing 
by greenhouse gases is now larger than that by the sun, and the greenhouse forcing is increasing 
monotonically while no significant long-term trend is expected for the sun.  The sun may 
contribute to future climate change, but it is no longer the dominant player. 
 
Global warming will be negligible if the iris effect, suggested by Richard Lindzen, is valid.  
This proposed negative climate feedback (in which it is supposed that tropical clouds adjust to 
allow more heat radiation to escape to space when the Earth gets warmer) has been discredited in 
specific tests against in situ and satellite data.  More generally, any feedbacks that exist in the 
real world are included in the empirical measures of climate sensitivity provided by the history 
of the Earth.  This history shows that the Earth's climate is sensitive to forcings, with a sensitivity 
similar to that of climate models. 
 
 

 

7

The single most important human-made greenhouse gas is CO2, which comes mainly 

 
Climate Forcing Agents Today 
The largest change of climate forcings in recent centuries is caused by human-made greenhouse 
gases.  These gases absorb the Earths infrared (heat) radiation.  Because they make the 
atmosphere more opaque in the infrared region, the Earths radiation to space emerges from a 
higher level in the atmosphere where it is colder.  The energy radiated to space is thus reduced, 
causing a temporary planetary energy imbalance, with the Earth absorbing more energy from the 
sun than it radiates to space.  Thus the Earth gradually warms, but it requires about a century to 
return most of the way to equilibrium, because of the large heat capacity of the oceans.  In the 
meantime, before it achieves equilibrium, more forcings may be added. 
 
from burning of fossil fuels (coal, oil and gas).  However, the combined effect of the other 
human-made gases is comparable to that of CO2.  These other gases, especially tropospheric 
ozone (O3) and its precursors including methane (CH4), are ingredients in atmospheric smog that 
damages human health and agricultural productivity. 
 
Aerosols (fine particles in the air) are, besides greenhouse gases, the other main human-
made climate forcing.  Aerosols cause a more complex climate forcing than that by greenhouse 
gases.  Some aerosols, such as sulfates arising from sulfur in fossil fuels, are highly reflective 
(white) and thus reduce solar heating of the Earth.  However, black carbon (soot), a product of 
incomplete combustion of fossil fuels, biofuels and outdoor biomass burning, absorbs sunlight 
and thus heats the atmosphere. 
This aerosol direct climate forcing is uncertain by at least 50%, in part because aerosol 
 
amounts are not well measured.  In addition, the black carbon effect is complex.  In regions of 
heavy soot, such as India and China, sunlight at the surface is reduced, causing a local surface 
cooling.  However, the heating of the air at higher levels results in surface warming on global 
average, through its influence on atmospheric stability and cloud cover.  These effects must be 
computed with global climate models, and their magnitude differs from one model to another. 
 
Aerosols also cause an indirect climate forcing by altering the properties of cloud drops.  
Human-made aerosols increase the number of condensation nuclei for cloud drops, thus causing 
the average size of the cloud drops to be smaller.  The larger number of smaller drops makes the 
clouds slightly brighter.  Smaller drops also make it more difficult for the clouds to produce rain, 
thus increasing average cloud lifetime.  Brighter long-lived clouds reduce the amount of sunlight 
absorbed by the Earth, so the indirect effect of aerosols is a negative forcing that causes cooling. 
Other human-made climate forcings include replacement of forests by cropland.  Forests 

are dark even with snow on the ground, so their removal reduces solar heating. 

Natural forcings, such as volcanic eruptions and fluctuations of the suns brightness, 

probably have little trend on a time scale of 1000 years.  However, evidence of a small solar                       
brightening over the past 150 years implies a climate forcing of a few tenths of 1 W/m2. 

The net value of the forcings added since 1850 is 1.6 1.0 W/m2.  Despite the large 
uncertainties, there is evidence that this estimated net forcing is approximately correct.  One 
piece of evidence is the close agreement of observed global temperature during the past several 
decades with climate models driven by these forcings.  More fundamentally, the observed heat 
gain by the world ocean in the past 50 years is consistent with the estimated net climate forcing, 
as discussed below. 

 

8

Figure  4.  Climate  forcing  agents  in  the  industrial  era.  Error  bars  are 
partly subjective 1 (standard deviation) uncertainties. 
 

 

 

 

Increases of well-mixed greenhouse gases (excludes O3) are known accurately from in situ 
observations and bubbles of air trapped in ice sheets.  For example, the increase of CO 2 from 
285 parts per million (ppm) in 1850 to 368 ppm in 2000 is accurate to about 5 ppm.  The 
conversion of this gas change to a climate forcing (1.4 W/m2), from calculation of the infrared 
opacity, adds about 10% to the uncertainty. 

  The CH4 increase since 1850, including its effect on stratospheric H2O and tropospheric O3, 
causes a climate forcing half as large as that by CO2.  Principal anthropogenic sources of CH4 
are landfills, coal mining, leaky natural gas lines, increasing ruminant population, rice 
cultivation, and anaerobic waste management lagoons.  In the last decade the growth rate of 
CH4 has slowed, suggesting that the growth of sources is slowing. 

  Tropospheric O3 is increasing partly because CH4 is increasing, but the primary cause is other 

human-made emissions, especially carbon monoxide, nitrogen oxides, and volatile organic 
compounds.  Air quality regulations in the U.S. and Europe reduced O3 precursor emissions in 
recent years, but not quite enough to balance increased emissions in the developing world. 
  Black carbon (soot), a product of incomplete combustion, can be seen in the exhaust of 

diesel-fueled trucks and buses.  It is also produced by biofuels and outdoor biomass burning.  
Black carbon aerosols per se are not well measured, but their climate forcing is estimated from 
wide-spread multi-spectral measurements of total aerosol absorption.  The estimated forcing 
includes the effect of soot in reducing the reflectance of snow and ice. 

  The reflective human-made aerosols are mainly sulfates, nitrates, organic carbon, and soil dust.  
Sources include fossil fuel burning and agricultural activities.  Sources of the abundant sulfates 
are known reasonably well, but the 1 uncertainty in the net forcing by reflective aerosols is at 
least 35%. 

  The indirect effects of aerosols on cloud properties are difficult to compute accurately, but 

recent satellite measurements of the correlation of aerosol and cloud properties are consistent 
with the estimated net forcing of 1 W/m2.  The uncertainty is at least 50%. 

 

 

9

Global Warming 
Global average surface temperature has increased about 34C (1.35F) during the period of 
extensive instrumental measurements, i.e., since the late 1800s.  Most of the warming, about 
12C (0.9F), occurred after 1950.  The causes of observed warming can be investigated best for 
the past 50 years, because most climate forcings were observed then, especially since satellite 
measurements of the sun, stratospheric aerosols and ozone began in the 1970s.  Furthermore, 
70% of the anthropogenic increase of greenhouse gases occurred after 1950. 

Changes of known climate forcings since 1950 are shown in Figure 5.  Largest forcings 

These forcings have been used to drive climate simulations for 1951-1998 with the 

Simulated climate changes are compared with observations in Figure 6.  The five model 

are the positive forcing by greenhouse gases and negative forcing by aerosols.  Stratospheric 
aerosols, which are sulfates from occasional volcanic eruptions, are well-measured.  However, 
human-made aerosols, which have multiple sources and compositions, are poorly measured. 
 
NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies SI2000 climate model [Reference 1b].  This model 
has sensitivity 34C per W/m2, consistent with paleoclimate data and typical of other climate 
models.  The largest suspected flaws in the simulations are omission of poorly understood 
aerosol effects on cloud drops and probable underestimate of black carbon changes.  The first of 
these is a negative forcing and the second is positive, so these flaws should be partially 
compensating in their effect on global temperature. 
 
runs differ only because of unforced (chaotic or weather) variability, which is an inherent 
characteristic of complex coupled dynamical systems.  The stratosphere in the model cools, 
mainly due to ozone depletion, but it warms after volcanoes as the aerosols absorb thermal 
radiation.  The troposphere and surface warm due to increasing greenhouse gases, with brief 
cooling intervals caused by large volcanoes.  These changes are in accord with observations, as 
illustrated.  However, it would be a mistake to take this agreement as quantitative confirmation 
of the principal model parameters and assumptions.  A larger (smaller) value for the net climate 
forcing could yield comparable agreement with the observations, if it were combined with a 
smaller (larger) value of climate sensitivity.  Also, unforced (chaotic) variability in this specific 
version of the GISS model is probably less than unforced variability of real world climate. 
 
imbalance is a consequence of the long time that it takes the ocean to warm.  We conclude that 
the Earth is now out of balance by something between 0.5 and 1 W/m2, i.e. there is that much 
more solar radiation being absorbed by Earth than heat being emitted to space.  One implication 
of this imbalance is that, even if atmospheric composition does not change further, the Earths 
surface will eventually warm another 0.4-0.7C. 
 
The Earths energy imbalance is a vital statistic, because it is the residual climate forcing 
that the planet has not yet responded to.  It is too small to be measured directly, but we can verify 
its value because the only place that the energy can be going is into melting ice or heating the air, 
land and ocean.  It is worth examining simple calculations of these energy sinks, because, as we 
show in the next section, this provides insight about prospects for future global changes. 

The most important quantity is the planetary energy imbalance (Figure 6d).  This 

As summarized in Box 4, most of the energy imbalance has been heat going into the 

ocean.  Sydney Levitus has analyzed ocean temperature changes of the past 50 years, finding that 
the world ocean heat content increased about 10 W years/m2 in the past 50 years, consistent with 
the time integral of the planetary energy imbalance.  Levitus also finds that the rate of ocean heat 
storage in recent years is consistent with our estimate that the Earth is now out of energy balance 
by 0.5-1 W/m2.  Note that the amount of heat required to melt enough ice to raise sea level one  

 

10

 

 

Figure 5. Climate forcing in the past 50 years due to six mechanisms (GHGs = long-lived
greenhouse gases).  The tropospheric aerosol forcing is very uncertain [Reference 1b]. 

Box 4: Planetary Heat Storage: Ice, Air, Land and Ocean. 

 

Estimates of the energy used to melt ice and warm the air, land and ocean in the past 50 years.1  
Ice melting: assume that the 10 cm sea level rise between 1950 and 2000 was from melting ice (thermal 
expansion of warming ocean water contributes about half the rise, but this error is partly balanced by melting sea 
ice and ice shelves, which do not raise sea level).  If the melted ice started at 10C and ended at the mean ocean 
surface temperature, +15C, the energy used is 125 cal/g (100 cal/g for melting).  The heat storage is thus 
10g/cm2  125cal/g   4.19 joules/cal  area Earth  0.71 ~1.9  1022 joules ~ 1.2 watt-years. 
Air warming: 0.5C warming, atmospheric mass ~ 10 m of water, heat capacity air ~ 0.24 cal/g/C, yields heat 
storage in the air: 0.5C  1000 g/cm2  0.24 cal/g/C  4.19 joules/cal  area Earth ~ 0.26 1022 joules  ~ 0.16 
watt-years.   
Land warming: The mean depth of penetration of a thermal wave into the Earths crust in 50 years, weighted by 
T, is about 20 m.  With a density ~ 3 g/cm3, heat capacity ~ 0.2 cal/g/C, and 0.29 fractional land coverage of 
Earth, the land heat storage is 2 103 cm 3 g/cm3  0.2 cal/g/C  0.5C 4.19 joules/cal  area Earth  0.29 ~ 
0.37  1022 joules ~  0.23 watt-years. 
Ocean warming: Levitus finds a mean ocean warming of 0.035C in the upper 3 km of the ocean.  The heat 
storage is thus: 0.035C  3  105 g/cm2   1 cal/g  4.19 joules/cal  area Earth  0.71 ~ 16  1022 joules ~ 10 
watt-years. 
1Note that 1 watt-sec = 1 joule, # sec/year ~ 107, area Earth ~ 5.11018 cm2, 1 watt-yr over full Earth ~ 
1.611022 joules, ocean fraction of Earth ~ 0.71, 1 calorie ~ 4.19 joules.  

11

Figure 6. Simulated and observerd global temperature change for 1951-2000 and simulated 
planetary energy imbalance [Reference 1b]. 

 

12

The agreement with observations, for both the modeled temperature change and ocean 

meter is about 12 watt-years (averaged over the planet), energy that could be accumulated in 12 
years if the planet is out of balance by 1 W/m2. 
 
heat storage, leaves no doubt that observed global climate change is being driven by (natural and 
anthropogenic) forcings.  The current rate of ocean heat storage is a critical planetary metric, 
because it determines the amount of additional global warming that is already in the pipeline.  
It is important for a second, related, reason: it equals the reduction in climate forcings that we 
would need to make if we wished to stabilize the Earths present climate. 
 
The Time Bomb 
The goal of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, produced in Rio de 
Janeiro in 1992, is to stabilize atmospheric composition to prevent dangerous anthropogenic 
interference with the climate system and achieve that in ways that do not disrupt the global 
economy.  The United States was the first developed country to sign the convention, which has 
since been ratified by practically all countries.  Defining the level of warming that constitutes 
dangerous anthropogenic interference (DAI) is thus a crucial but difficult part of the global 
warming problem. 

The United Nations established an Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) 
with responsibility for analysis of global warming.  IPCC has defined climate forcing scenarios, 
used these for simulations of 21st century climate, and estimated the impact of temperature and 
precipitation changes on agriculture, natural ecosystems, wildlife and other matters [Reference 
12a].  Significant effects are found, but even with warming of several degrees there are winners 
and losers.  IPCC estimates sea level change as large as several tens of centimeters in 100 years, 
if global warming reaches several degrees Celsius.  Their calculated sea level change is due 
mainly to thermal expansion of ocean water, with little change in ice sheet volume. 

These moderate climate effects, even with rapidly increasing greenhouse gases, leave the 

impression that we are not close to DAI.  The IPCC analysis also abets the emphasis on 
adaptation to climate change, as opposed to mitigation, in recent international discussions.  
Adaptation is required, to be sure, because climate change is already underway.  However, I will 
argue that we are much closer to DAI than is generally realized, and thus the emphasis should be 
on mitigation. 
 
question of how fast ice sheets can disintegrate.  A large portion of the worlds people live within 
a few meters of sea level, with trillions of dollars of infrastructure.  The need to preserve global 
coast lines, I suggest, sets a low ceiling on the level of global warming that would constitute 
DAI. 

The dominant issue in global warming, in my opinion, is sea level change and the 

The history of the Earth, and the present human-made planetary energy imbalance, 
together paint a disturbing picture about prospects for sea level change.  To appreciate this 
situation we must consider how todays global temperature compares with peak temperatures in 
the current and previous interglacial periods, how long-term sea level change relates to global 
temperature, and the time required for ice sheets to respond to climate change. 
 
cooling was slight.  As shown by the Antarctic temperature record (Figure 2), the polar 
temperature during the Holocene peak was about 1C warmer than it was in the mid 20th century.  
During the previous (Eemian) interglacial period polar temperatures were perhaps another 2C 
warmer.  However, both paleoclimate data and climate models show that polar temperature 

Warmth in the Holocene peaked between 6000 and 10,000 years ago, but subsequent 

 

13

This means that, with the 0.5C global warming of the past few decades, the Earths 

Sea level during the Eemian is estimated to have been 5-6 meters (16-20 feet) higher than 

change is about a factor of two larger than global mean temperature change.  [The ice core 
temperature anomalies at the pole refer to the inversion level, where the snow is formed; surface 
air anomalies are slightly larger (Reference 2d).] 
 
average temperature is just now passing through the peak Holocene temperature level.  
Furthermore, the current planetary energy imbalance of about 34 W/m2 implies that global 
warming already in the pipeline, about another 0.5C, will take us about halfway to the global 
temperature that existed at the peak of the Eemian period. 
 
it is today.  Although the geographical distribution of climate change influences the effect of 
global warming on ice sheets, paleoclimate history suggests that global temperature is a good 
predictor of eventual sea level change.  The main issue is: how fast will ice sheets respond to 
global warming? 
 
calculations include only the gradual effects of changes in snowfall, sublimation and melting.  In 
the real world, ice sheet disintegration is driven by highly nonlinear processes and feedbacks.  
The peak rate of deglaciation following the last ice age was a sustained rate of melting of more 
than 14,000 km3/year, about one meter of sea level rise every 20 years, which was maintained for 
several centuries.  This period of most rapid melt, meltwater pulse 1A, coincided, as well as can 
be measured, with the time of most rapid warming (Reference 2d). 

IPCC calculates only a slight change in the ice sheets in 100 years.  However, the IPCC 

Given the present unusual global warming rate on an already warm planet, we can 
anticipate that areas with summer melt and rain will expand over larger areas of Greenland 
(Figure 7) and fringes of Antarctica.  This will darken the ice surface in the season when the sun 
is high, promote freeze-thaw ice breakup, and, via ice crevasses, provide lubrication for ice sheet 
movement.  Rising sea level itself tends to lift marine ice shelves that buttress land ice, 
unhinging them from anchor points.  As ice shelves break up, this accelerates movement of land 
ice to the ocean. 
 
asymmetric nature of glacial cycles (Figure 3) and the high rate of sea level rise associated with 
rapid warming.  Although building of glaciers is slow, once an ice sheet begins to collapse its 
demise can be spectacularly rapid.  The building of an ice sheet is a dry process, limited by the 
annual snowfall rate, and thus requires millennia.  Ice sheet disintegration, on the other hand, is a 
wet process, nourished by positive feedbacks, and thus, once underway, it can proceed much 
more rapidly.  

This qualitative picture of nonlinear processes and feedbacks is supported by the 

This natural melting process will be accelerated by the human-induced planetary energy 
imbalance.  This imbalance provides an ample supply of energy for melting ice (Box 4), which 
can be delivered to the ice via ocean currents, atmospheric winds, and rainfall, as well as by 
icebergs drifting to lower latitudes.  Furthermore, this energy source is supplemented by 
increased absorption of sunlight by ice sheets darkened by black carbon aerosols, as discussed 
below, and the positive feedback process as melt-water darkens the ice surface. 
A planetary energy imbalance of +1 W/m2, maintained for a century, would cause a sea 
 
level rise of about 8 meters, if the energy went entirely into melting of ice (Box 4).  In the 20th 
century most of the planetary energy imbalance went into warming of the ocean.  In the future, 
as the planet warms, an increasing fraction of the planetary energy imbalance is likely to go into 
melting of ice, as significant portions of the ice sheets become wetter, softer, and more mobile.  
The flux of energy that goes into melting will be increased by positive feedbacks.  One feedback 

 

14

is caused by the increasing area of summer melt and lengthening melt season, as the wetter, 
darker snow and ice surfaces absorb more sunlight.  A second feedback is caused by the 
tendency of melt-water to cool the polar sea surface, thus increasing the regional planetary 
energy imbalance and the downward flux of energy.  A third process affecting the rate of ice 
melt is caused by increasing ocean surface temperatures at low and middle latitudes, which will 
increase the transport of energy to the ice sheets.  The prime mechanism for this is likely to be 
the latent energy carried by occasional summer storms delivering heavy rainfall on portions of 
the ice sheet, which could be very effective in speeding ice sheet motion and disintegration. 

Such multiple positive feedbacks ultimately can drive non-linear disintegration of large 

These considerations do not mean that we should expect large sea level change in the 

portions of the ice sheets.  This is a likely explanation for the rapid ice sheet collapse in melt-
water pulse 1A (about 5 meters of sea level rise per century).  It can be argued that in this 
paleoclimate case the ice sheets had a long period of preconditioning before the ice collapsed.  
On the other hand, it should be noted that the forcing was small in the paleoclimate case and 
changed only slowly over millennia.  Now, on the contrary, there is a continual relentless forcing 
caused by a large human-made planetary energy imbalance that provides ample energy to rapidly 
erase the cooling effect of melting ice that tends to slow the paleoclimate response. 
 
next few years.  Preconditioning of ice sheets for accelerated break-up may require a long time, 
perhaps many centuries.  However, I suspect that a significant measurable increase in the rate of 
sea level rise could begin within decades, especially if the planetary energy imbalance continues 
to increase.  Such a change would presage much larger sea level change over the next century or 
two, because of several long time constants in the system: (1) several decades required for major 
changes of energy systems and thus greenhouse gas emissions, (2) several decades to a century 
for the climate system to approach equilibrium with changed climate forcings, (3) the time 
required for ice sheets to respond in a substantial way to changed climate forcings and changed 
climate, which I suggest may be as small as several centuries or less. 

Whatever the preconditioning period for ice sheet disintegration is, these long time 

constants and the associated system inertia imply that global warming beyond some limit will 
create a legacy of large sea level change for future generations.  And once this process has 
passed a certain point, it will be impractical to stop.  The same inertia of the ice sheets, which 
discourages rapid change, is a threat for the future.  It will not be possible to build walls around 
Greenland and Antarctica.  Dykes may protect limited regions, such as Manhattan and the 
Netherlands, but most of the global coastlines will be inundated. 

I argue that the level of DAI is likely to be set by the global temperature and planetary 

radiation imbalance at which substantial deglaciation becomes practically impossible to avoid.  
Based on the paleoclimate evidence discussed above, I suggest that the highest prudent level of 
additional global warming is not more than about 1C.  In turn, given the existing planetary 
energy imbalance, this means that additional climate forcing should not exceed about 1 W/m2. 
Detection of early signs of accelerating ice sheet breakup, and analysis of the processes 
involved, may be provided by the satellite IceSat recently launched by NASA.  IceSat will use 
lidar and radar to precisely monitor ice sheet topography and dynamics.  We may soon be able to 
investigate whether or not the ice sheet time bomb is approaching detonation. 

 

15

Figure 7.  Surface melt on the Greenland ice sheet descending into a moulin.  The
moulin  is  a  nearly  vertical  shaft,  worn  in  the    glacier  by  the  surface  water,  that
carries the water to the base of the ice sheet. [Photo courtesy of Roger Braithwaite 
and Jay Zwally.]  

Figure 8. Climate forcing scenario for 2000-2050 that yields a forcing of 
0.85 W/m2 (colored bars) [Reference 1a]. 

Figure 9. Growth rate of climate forcing by well-mixed greenhouse gases (5-year 
mean), O3 and stratospheric H2O, which were not well measured, are not included 
[Reference 1a].  

 

16

Climate Forcing Scenarios 
The IPCC defines many climate forcing scenarios for the 21st century based on multifarious 
story lines for population growth, economic development, and energy sources.  The scenarios 
lead to a wide range for added climate forcings in the next 50 years (vertical bars in Figure 8). 

The IPCC added climate forcing in the next 50 years is 1-3 W/m2 for CO2 and 2-4 W/m2 

with other gases and aerosols included.  Even their minimum added forcing, 2 W/m2, would 
cause DAI with the climate system, based on our criterion.  Further, IPCC studies suggest that 
the Kyoto Protocol, designed to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from developed countries, 
would reduce global warming by only several percent.  Gloom and doom seem unavoidable. 
However, are the IPCC scenarios necessary or even plausible?  There are reasons to 

believe that the IPCC scenarios are unduly pessimistic.  First, they ignore changes in emissions, 
some already underway, due to concerns about global warming.  Second, they assume that true 
air pollution will continue to get worse, with O3, CH4 and BC all greater in 2050 than in 2000.  
Third, they give short shrift to technology advances that can reduce emissions in the next 50 
years. 
 
An alternative way to define scenarios is to examine current trends of climate forcing 
agents, to ask why they are changing as observed, and to try to understand whether there are 
reasonable actions that could encourage further changes in the growth rates.  Precise data are 
available for trends of the long-lived greenhouse gases (GHGs) that are well-mixed in the 
atmosphere, i.e., CO2, CH4, N2O and CFCs (chlorofluorocarbons). 
 
The growth rate of the GHG climate forcing peaked in the early 1980s at a rate of almost 
0.5 W/m2 per decade, but declined by the 1990s to about 0.3 W/m2 per decade (Figure 9).  The 
primary reason for the decline was reduced emissions of CFCs, whose production was phased 
out because of the destructive effect of CFCs on stratospheric ozone. 
The two most important GHGs, with CFCs on the decline, are CO2 and CH4.  The growth 
 
rate of CO2, after surging between the end of World War II and the mid-1970s, has since almost 
flattened out to an average growth rate of 1.7 ppm/year over the past decade (Figure 10a).  
Although the exponential growth rate of CO2 has slowed, the annual increments of atmospheric 
CO2 continue to increase, and they are likely to continue to grow until annual CO2 emissions 
flatten out or begin to decline.  The annual CO2 increment has exceeded 2 ppm/year in three of 
the past six years.  The CH4 growth rate has declined dramatically in the past 20 years, by at least 
two-thirds (Figure 10b). 
 
emissions increased by more than 4%/year from the end of World War II until 1975, but 
subsequently by just over 1%/year.  The change in fossil fuel growth rate occurred after the oil 
embargo and price increases of the 1970s, with subsequent emphasis on energy efficiency.  CH4 
growth has also been affected by other factors including changes in rice farming and increased 
efforts to capture CH4 at landfills and in mining operations. 
 
If recent growth rates of these GHGs continued, the added climate forcing in the next 50 
years would be about 1.5 W/m2.  To this must be added the (positive or negative) change due to 
other forcings such as O3 and aerosols.  These forcings are not well-monitored globally, but it is 
known that they are increasing in some countries while decreasing in others.  Their net effect 
should be small, but it could add as much as 0.5 W/m2.  Thus, if there is no slowing of emission 
rates, the human-made climate forcing could increase by 2 W/m2 in the next 50 years. 
This current trends growth rate of climate forcings, 2 W/m2 in 50 years, is at the low 
 
end of the IPCC range of 2-4 W/m2.  The IPCC 4 W/m2 scenario requires 4%/year exponential 

These growth rates are related to the rate of global fossil fuel use (Figure 11).  Fossil fuel 

 

17

Air pollution.  Is it realistic to stop the growth of air pollution, or even achieve some 

This alternative scenario has two components: (1) halt or reverse growth of air pollutants, 

IPCC range, it is larger than the 1 W/m2 level that we suggested as our current best estimate for 
the level of DAI.  This raises the question of whether there is a feasible scenario with still lower 
climate forcing. 
 
A Brighter Future 
I have discussed elsewhere [Reference 6] a specific alternative scenario that keeps added 
climate forcing in the next 50 years at about 1 W/m2.  Expected global warming by 2050 is 
between 12C and 34C, i.e., a warming of about 1F [References 1b, 1c]. 
 
specifically soot, O3, and CH4, (2) keep average fossil fuel CO2 emissions in the next 50 years 
about the same as today.  The CO2 and non-CO2 portions of the scenario are equally important.  I 
argue that they are both feasible and make sense for other reasons, in addition to climate. 
 
reduction?  A million people die every year from air pollution, with large economic cost.  
Actions to improve air quality have been initiated already in the United States and Europe, and 
still stricter standards are likely.  In developing countries, such as India and China, air pollution 
is already about as bad as can be tolerated.  Discussions among scientists from developed and 
developing countries [Reference 3] suggest that cleaner air is practical, and achievement could 
be speeded if there were concerted efforts to develop and share cleaner technologies. 
 
most to global warming.  Methane, a precursor of O3, offers a great opportunity to halt the 
growth of a substance that has been expected to contribute much to future global warming.  If 
human sources of CH4 are reduced, it may even be possible to get the atmospheric CH4 amount 
to decline, thus providing a cooling that would partially offset the CO2 increase.  Reductions of 
black carbon (BC) aerosols would help counter the warming effect of reductions in sulfate 
aerosols.  O3 precursors, besides CH4, especially nitrogen oxides and volatile organic 
compounds, must be reduced to decrease low-level O3, the prime component of smog, which 
damages the human respiratory system and agricultural productivity. 
Actions needed to reduce CH4, such as methane capture at landfills, waste management 
 
facilities, and fossil fuel mining, have economic benefits that partially offset the costs.  Prime 
sources of BC are diesel fuels and biofuels.  These sources need to be dealt with for health 
reasons.  The tiny BC aerosols spewed out in the burning of these fuels are microscopic sponges 
that soak up toxic organic carbon emitted in the same burning process.  When these minuscule 
soot particles are breathed into the lungs they penetrate human tissue deeply.  Some enter the 
bloodstream and are suspected of being the primary carcinogen in air pollution.  Diesel could be 
burned more cleanly with improved technologies.  However, there may be even better solutions, 
such as hydrogen fuel, which would eliminate ozone precursors as well as soot.  
 

Emphasis should be placed, in addressing air pollution, on the constituents that contribute 

growth of CO2 emissions maintained for 50 years and large growth of air pollution.  The 4 W/m2 
scenario yields dramatic climate change for the media to fixate upon, but it is implausible. 

Although the current trends scenario of 2 W/m2 in 50 years is at the low end of the 

Carbon dioxide.  CO2 will be the dominant anthropogenic climate forcing in the future.  
Is the CO2 portion of the alternative scenario feasible?  It would require a near-term leveling off 
of fossil fuel CO2 emissions and a decline of CO2 emissions before mid-century, heading toward 
stabilization of atmospheric CO2 by the end of the century.  Near-term leveling of emissions 
 

 

18

Figure 10. Growth rates of atmospheric CO2 and CH4 [Reference 1a;
data  update  by  Ed  Dlugokencky  and  Tom  Conway,  NOAA  Climate
Monitoring and Diagnostics Laboratory].

Figure 11. Global fossil fuel CO2 emissions based on data of Marland 
and Boden [References 1a and 11]; 2001-2002 update based on 
Reference 11b. 

 

19

Figure 12.  Projections of U.S. energy use made in the early 1970s compared with actual use.  The growth
of  soft  energy  technologies  (renewable  energies,  excluding  large  hydroelectric  dams)  advocated  by
Lovins has not occurred to a noticeable extent, but his projection of total energy use was quite accurate.  

Figure  13.  Observed  CO2  and  CH4  amounts,  compared  with  the  typical  IPCC  scenario  and  the 
alternative scenario.  The alternative scenario falls below all IPCC scenarios for both CH4 and CO2 (see 
Appendix).  In  situ  observations  are  available  from  the  NOAA  Climate  Monitoring  and  Diagnostics
laboratory.  CH4 in Antarctica is less than global mean CH4 because the CH4 sources are primarily in the 
Northern Hemisphere [update of Reference 6a].  

 

20

The plausibility of flattening near-term CO2 emissions is suggested by the history of 

might be accomplished via improved energy efficiency and increased use of renewable energies, 
but a long-term decline of emissions will require development of energy technologies that 
produce little or no CO2 or that capture and sequester CO2. 
 
emissions (Figure 11).  The reduction from 4% annual growth to just over 1% was accomplished 
mainly via improved energy efficiency and without a concerted global scale effort.  Current 
technologies provide great potential for more efficiency improvements (Reference 5).  The 
growth rate of reported global fossil fuel CO2 emissions in the 1990s was about 1%/year, despite 
robust economic growth in the United States, China, and the world as a whole (see Appendix).  
Concerted efforts at efficiencies and renewable energies have the potential to squeeze out an 
additional 1% in the near-term.  The evidence indicates that this additional slowdown of 
emissions will not occur with business-as-usual conditions, as recent CO2 emissions have 
continued to grow at an average of 1 to 1.5% per year, but rather it will require a concerted effort 
to reduce emissions. 
 
to rise.  Progress is needed across the board: continued efficiency improvements, more 
renewable energy, and new technologies.  Next generation nuclear power, if acceptable to the 
public, could be an important contributor.  There may be new technologies before 2050 that we 
have not imagined.  A fallback, should greater fossil fuel use be necessary, is capture and 
sequestration of CO2. 
 
analysts project a quadrupling of world energy needs by 2050 to 50 Terawatts (power use today 
is 10 Terawatts of fossil fuel energy and 2 Terawatts from other sources).  These same persons 
have been projecting such energy growth rates for years without comparing their prior 
predictions with data. 

Long-term reduction of CO2 emissions is a greater challenge, as energy use will continue 

The impact of continual energy efficiency improvements must be recognized.  Some 

As an informative example, we compare in Figure 12 projections of United States energy 

The growth of soft energy technologies (renewable energies, excluding large 

use made in the early 1970s with actual energy use.  The data show that energy use increased 
about 1% per year over the past three decades, far below most projections.  Only in the past few 
years has energy use crept above the level that Amory Lovins, an advocate of energy 
efficiencies, had projected, and then only because the trend toward improving mileage of 
passenger vehicles was reversed in the past decade.  Note that a moderate 1% per year growth in 
energy use was achieved in a period when the real cost of (fossil fuel) energy was declining.  The 
flat energy usage from the 1970s to the 1980s was aided by energy price increases in the 1970s. 
 
hydroelectric dams) advocated by Lovins has not occurred to an extent sufficient to even show 
up in Figure 12.  On the other hand, Lovins projection of total energy use was accurate.  Many 
opportunities exist for continuing improvements of energy efficiency, e,g,. in solid state lighting 
and in transportation.  Thus it may be practical for total energy use in the U.S. to remain nearly 
flat for a substantial period.  Furthermore, U.S. CO2 emissions will increase less than energy use 
if renewable energy contributions are increased.  Thus it seems feasible for U.S. CO2 emissions 
to be flat or even decline. 
 
Improvements of energy efficiency and moderation of energy growth rates are not limited 
to the U.S.  Indeed, the U.S. fractions of global energy use and CO2 emissions actually increased 
slightly in the past decade (Reference 1a).  Realistic moderate global energy growth rates, 
coupled with near-term emphasis on renewable energies and long-term technology development, 
could keep global CO2 emissions flat in the near-term and allow the possibility of long-term 

 

21

Observed trends.  Observed global CO2 and CH4 are shown in Figure 13.  It is apparent 

reductions, as may be required to avoid dangerous anthropogenic interference with climate.  
Quantitative CO2 scenarios of this sort are presented in the Appendix. 
 
that the real world is beginning to deviate from the prototypical IPCC scenario, IS92a.  It 
remains to be proven whether the smaller observed growth rates are a fluke, soon to return to 
IPCC rates, or are a meaningful difference.  The concatenation of the alternative scenario with 
observations is not surprising, since that scenario was defined with observations in mind.  
However, in the three years since the alternative scenario was defined observations have 
continued on that path.  Although I have shown that the IPCC scenarios are unrealistically 
pessimistic, I am not suggesting that the alternative scenario can be achieved without concerted 
efforts to reduce anthropogenic climate forcings. 

The alternative scenario falls below all scenarios in IPCC (2001), as illustrated in the 

Appendix: Climate Forcing Scenarios.  The same is true for the other major climate forcings that 
cause warming: CH4, tropospheric O3, and BC aerosols.  It is likely that all these forcings are less 
than the IPCC pathways, but, unfortunately, except for CH4 and CO2, they are not being 
measured with an accuracy sufficient to define their rates of change. 
Summary.  The strategy for dealing with climate change must evolve as the level of 
 
forcing that produces DAI is better defined and as climate forcings are better measured.  
Monitoring of the ice sheets, together with realistic ice sheet modeling, will help determine how 
close the ice sheets are to accelerating retreat.  Precise monitoring of ocean heat content 
change, averaged over several years, will yield the sum of all current forcings.  Measurements of 
individual climate forcing agents will help define the most effective ways to stop global warming. 
 
My Opinion: Scientific Uncertainties 

The above assessment involves personal judgments, even though it is based on data and 

published papers.  I included estimates of prime uncertainties, e.g., for climate sensitivity and 
climate forcings.  However, there will surely be surprises as we obtain more information about 
climate forcings, observe actual climate change, and improve global climate models.  In this 
section I discuss two areas of uncertainty that I believe deserve special attention. 

Dangerous anthropogenic interference (DAI).  Establishing the level of global 

warming that constitutes DAI deserves greater attention than it has received.  I argue that DAI 
will be determined by the level of warming that threatens eventual large-scale disintegration of 
the ice sheets.  That is probably a good assumption if, indeed, a global warming only of the order 
of 1-2C is enough to initiate eventual removal of large portions of the Greenland or Antarctic 
ice sheets. 

Why choose 1C (relative to present global mean temperature) as a first estimate of the 

level of DAI?  This is based in part on the assertion that global mean temperature at the peaks of 
the current (Holocene) and previous (Eemian) interglacial periods were only 0.5 and 1.5C 
warmer, respectively, than the mid-twentieth century temperature, and the fact that the Earth has 
already warmed 0.5C in the past 50 years.   In presenting that argument, I used records of polar 
temperature and the assumption that polar temperature changes are amplified by at least a factor 
of two over global mean changes.  However, in addition, global climate models driven by early 
Holocene and Eemian boundary conditions provide strong supporting evidence that global mean 
temperatures were not warmer than these estimated levels. 

Michael Oppenheimer [Reference 2b] also has used ice sheet stability as a basis to infer 

the level of DAI, concluding that 2C was his best estimate.  His larger value is primarily a result 

 

22

of differing estimates for the global temperature in previous warm periods.  I agree that the total 
uncertainties in the level of DAI, including those discussed below, encompass both the 1C and 
2C estimates.  Furthermore, other scientists will argue that the level of DAI could be even larger 
than 2C.  Indeed, Wild et al. [Reference 2c], using one of the most sophisticated GCMs with 1 
resolution, calculate that the Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets will grow with doubled CO2, 
leaving only a modest sea level rise due mainly to thermal expansion of ocean water.  In my 
opinion, the IPCC calculations, epitomized by the Wild et al. result, omit the most important 
physics, especially the non-linear effects of meltwater and secondarily the effects of black 
carbon.  Clearly it is crucial to define DAI more accurately.  For example, if there is now 0.5C 
global warming in the pipeline then DAI = 2C would permit three times as much additional 
anthropogenic climate forcing as would DAI = 1C.  The Wild et al. results predict an even 
higher DAI level. 

The time required for ice sheets to respond to global warming, commonly assumed to be 

thousands of years, is another, related, aspect of the uncertainty in estimating DAI.  IPCC 
presumes a negligible change of ice sheet dynamics in the 21st century.  I doubt that assumption, 
because increased ice sheet movement surely must be driven by surface melt and percolation to 
the ice sheet base, rather than penetration of a thermal wave through the solid ice.  Surface melt 
and summer precipitation associated with human-induced warming and planetary energy 
imbalance are likely to be unusual by paleoclimate standards, and even the paleoclimate record 
reveals instances of rapid ice sheet disintegration.  The Blling warming about 14 thousand 
years ago, for example, was accompanied almost simultaneously by sea level rise at a rate of 4-5 
meters per century (Reference 2d). 

Still another uncertainty is the magnitude of actual sea level rise during the Eemian 
period.  This is uncertain because uneven motions of the Earths crust make it difficult to 
determine mean sea level change from the data available for a small number of sites.  If Eemian 
sea level was not much higher than that in the Holocene it would call into question our estimate 
for DAI.  However, it would not eliminate concern about the possibility of large sea level rise 
due to the unique climate forcings in the budding Anthropocene era. 

There are additional interesting issues that could alter the ice sheet response to human 
forcings.  As discussed below, surface melt may be abetted by a slight aerosol darkening of the 
ice sheet surface, which becomes especially effective in the warm season.  Another curiosity is 
that Antarctica (except the Antarctic Peninsula) and Greenland may have been protected in 
recent decades by amplification of the polar vortices, i.e., a strengthening of the zonal winds that 
has limited the warming in Greenland and Antarctica.  To the extent that these enhanced zonal 
winds are driven by ozone depletion, this protection may decrease in coming decades as the 
Earths ozone layer recovers. 

It is apparent that there is considerable uncertainly about the level of global warming that 
will constitute DAI.  This should be an area of focused research in coming years, especially since 
precise monitoring of ice sheet behavior is now possible.  The NASA IceSat mission, monitoring 
ice sheet topography with centimeter scale precision, should be used to revitalize glaciological 
studies and test ice sheet modeling capabilities. 

Carbonaceous aerosols.  Climate modelers should be puzzled by the large negative 
forcings that aerosol scientists estimate as the direct and indirect effects of human-made fine 
particles in the air.  If these forcings were included in full in global climate models, the models 
would tend to have cooling at middle latitudes in the Northern Hemisphere where the aerosols 
are most abundant, as has been stressed by Peter Stone and associates (Reference 7).  In reality, 

 

23

moderate warming has been observed there. 

It is possible that the negative aerosol forcings have been overestimated.  Certainly better 

measurements are needed.  However, we suggested (References 1a, 1b, 6) an alternative 
interpretation: positive human-made climate forcings (in the same regions) have been 
underestimated, especially black carbon aerosols.  Recent analyses of measurements by a global 
network of sun-photometers (Reference 8) provide partial confirmation of this interpretation, 
revealing that BC aerosols absorb about twice as much sunlight as in previous estimates. 

There is another, indirect, forcing of BC aerosols that seems to have been overlooked by 

IPCC: the effect of BC aerosols on the albedo (reflectivity) of snow and ice.  This effect is no 
surprise to a number of researchers (Reference 9) who have pointed out that the amount of 
absorbing aerosols in snow determines its maximum albedo.  Snow albedos in the Arctic are 
seldom found to be much more than 90% at visible wavelengths, even though pure snow should 
have a visible albedo of at least 98%.  Soil dust provides some of the aerosol absorption, but BC 
is believed to be the primary source of absorption. 

We estimate, using the radiative transfer theory of Steve Warren, Warren Wiscombe, Petr 
Chylek and associates (References 9a,b) that this indirect BC climate forcing is about 0.5 W/m2 
in the Northern Hemisphere and about 0.3 W/m2 globally.  Probably two-thirds of this, 0.2 
W/m2, is anthropogenic.  This positive forcing not only adds to global warming, it also 
contributes to (1) thinning of Northern Hemisphere sea ice and reduction of sea ice cover, (2) 
softening and loss of permafrost, (3) melting of alpine glaciers, (4) enhancement and expansion 
of the summer melt season on the Greenland ice sheet. 

The BC forcing of snow and ice is seasonally dependent.  BC has little effect on fresh 
snow, but as the snow ages and partially melts, BC remains as crud on the surface, noticeably 
decreasing the albedo of snow and ice.  As a result, spring snowmelt is completed earlier, 
summer melt of glaciers is increased, and sea ice is thinned and reduced in area.  I believe that 
these effects partially account for several otherwise puzzling phenomena: (1) alpine glaciers have 
retreated faster than expected for the magnitude of global warming, (2) Arctic sea ice has thinned 
in the past 50 years and decreased in area, while Southern Hemisphere sea ice has changed little, 
(3) spring in the Northern Hemisphere is coming noticeably earlier in recent decades, while fall 
has not been extended by an equal amount. 

Unlike well-mixed greenhouse gases, the efficacy of BC as a climate forcing probably 
depends a good deal on the mechanism producing the BC.  Tropical outdoor biomass burning, 
e.g, produces a lot of BC but even much more OC (organic carbon).  The biomass burning lofts 
these aerosols into the middle troposphere where their effect on surface temperature is small, or 
even a slight cooling.  In contrast, diesel fuels and biofuels produce a greater proportion of BC 
that remains mainly in the planetary boundary layer (the lowest mile or two), where it has a 
direct warming effect and an indirect warming effect after deposition on snow and ice surfaces. 
Die ganze welt erstickt im russ (the whole world is suffocating in soot) was a headline 
of a local newspaper during an international conference on black carbon held in Austria in 1983.  
However, climate science has never fully investigated the role of BC in climate change.  Global 
measurements of aerosols, including their effects on snow and ice albedos and their effects on 
clouds, and realistic modeling of all these phenomena are needed.  It will not be possible to 
optimize strategies for dealing with global warming until all important climate forcings, 
including carbonaceous aerosols, have been well quantified. 
 

 

24

Science and politics dont mix.  I believe that active researchers should offer objective 

Perhaps the best way to handle this situation is to point out the positive aspects in the 

The United States cannot practically meet proposed Kyoto Protocol GHG emission 

Lets start with the Kyoto parties.  These countries have agreed to cut their greenhouse 

My Opinion: Practical Matters 
 
assessment of the science problem and leave it to others to extract policy implications.  The 
complication is that the scenarios for climate forcings and climate change are a function of 
peoples actions.  Unless we make clear the relation between those actions and climate change, 
policy makers will not have the information they need. 
 
positions of all three of the relevant parties in the climate change discussion: the Kyoto parties, 
the United States, and the developing countries.  It turns out that each of the three parties is in a 
position to make unique contributions to reducing climate forcings, and, furthermore, the sum of 
these is what is needed to achieve a stable atmospheric composition and a stable climate, as 
universally agreed upon with the Framework Convention on Climate Change. 
 
gas (GHG) emissions to a level several percent below their 1990 level.  This will not be easy but 
it is achievable, based in part on fortuitous happenings: discovery of North Sea gas that allowed 
Britain to close coal mines, German reunification with closing of inefficient East German 
industry, collapse of the Soviet Union that reduced Russian CO2 emissions 30%, and a stagnant 
Japanese economy that slowed their CO2 emission growth.  Adherence to the Kyoto Protocol by 
its signatories will engender improvement of energy efficiencies and development of renewable 
energies.  The implied technological developments will have world-wide applications, reducing 
GHGs by more than the emission reductions within Kyoto party countries themselves. 
 
targets (which are based on 1990 emission levels) given the rapid growth of its economy and 
CO2 emissions in the 1990s.  Because of that growth, it is estimated that two-thirds of the cost of 
the Kyoto targets, if they were extended to the U.S., would be borne by the U.S., so there is no 
expectation that the U.S. will join that accord.  However, President Bush indicated in a June 
2001 Rose Garden speech that the U.S. would take a leadership role in addressing global 
climate change.  He said that the United States would work aggressively on energy efficiencies, 
renewable energies, and longer-term technologies including fuel cells and hydrogen, next 
generation nuclear power, and CO2 sequestration.  In an advance beyond Kyoto, he recognized 
the importance of reducing air pollution climate forcings, specifically mentioning black soot, 
ozone, and its precursors.  He said: Our approach must be consistent with the long-term goal of 
stabilizing greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere.  And: We will act, learn, and act 
again, adjusting our approach as science advances and technology evolves.  This approach, 
together with the planned actions of the Kyoto parties, comprise essential ingredients needed for 
the alternative scenario to be achieved. 
 
climate is not stabilized, and they already have punishing air pollution.  The common 
presumption that their CO2 emissions will soon explode ignores the fact that developing 
countries will wish to pursue high efficiency clean technologies for their own good.  The 
experience with chlorofluorocarbons, in which India and China agreed to limit production in 
exchange for assistance with replacement technology, illustrates that such cooperation is 
possible.  Climate mitigation and pollution reduction will benefit developing countries most of 
all, so attainment of their cooperation must be achievable.  How to carry out these discussions 
and cooperation is a matter for policy makers and beyond the scope of this paper. 

Developing countries, located primarily at low latitudes, stand to suffer the most if 

We note, however, that cooperation of developed and developing countries will be 

 

25

Coal is both the principal root of the CO2 climate problem and the potential solution.  

needed on CO2 emissions as well as air pollution.  Figure 14 shows that the Far East (defined as 
Japan, Korea, China, Taiwan, Mongolia) and the Rest of Asia (includes the Middle East) have 
had the fastest growing CO2 emissions in recent decades and are now near the same level of 
emissions as the United States.  Future global CO2 emissions depend upon the path of Asian 
emissions, yet the U.S. emissions (blue curve in Figure 14) remain critical for defining the global 
emissions curve.  My assertion that such cooperation of developed and developing countries is 
feasible is based on the expectation that objective scientific evaluation will clarify the urgency of 
climate stabilization and the mutual benefits of emission reductions. 
 
Figure 14 also reveals a period of flat emissions in the U.S. during the 1970s and 1980s, 
which was mainly a consequence of energy efficiencies engendered by an oil supply disruption 
that caused a large increase of energy prices.  Economists agree that the most efficient way to 
slow emissions growth would be an increasing cost for energy, but the cost growth should be 
slow and steady to avoid economic disruption and social hardships. 
 
Limitations on global supplies of oil and gas, especially if environmental pressures 
restrict regions of exploration, might themselves tend to increase energy costs.  However, 
improving technologies are likely to increase accessible hydrocarbon resources, and shortages 
that occur are usually in irregular disruptive bursts that create hardships and are less effective for 
improving energy efficiency.  Governments could alleviate these problems via flexible 
assessments that yield a smooth growth of energy costs. 
 
Even if all accessible oil and gas is utilized, atmospheric CO2 growth can be kept within the 2C 
or even the alternative (1C) scenarios, provided that CO2 emissions from coal are limited.  
Coal produces more CO2 per unit energy than oil or gas, and the CO2 in coal resources is ten 
times greater than the CO2 in oil resources (Reference 13), enough to cause global warming of 
several degrees Celsius and certain devastation of the ice sheets.  Note that updating Table 2 in 
Reference 13 to 2002 indicates that the 86 ppm increase of atmospheric CO2 since 1850 is 
composed of 40 ppm from coal, 34 ppm from oil and 12 ppm from gas. 
A flattening of CO2 emissions and a decline as the 21st century progresses thus could be 
 
obtained by requiring that new uses of coal be permitted only in cases where the resulting CO2 is 
sequestered.  This approach would make good economic sense, as the costs of sequestration 
would be attached to coal use, with coal then permitted to compete with other energy sources. 
 
significant amounts exist in other countries.  The international community may need to supply 
technological assistance to developing countries for sequestration capabilities, as it provided 
assistance for CFC replacements.  International cooperation on coal use and sequestration is 
probably the most important action needed to stabilize atmospheric composition and climate. 
Although coal is the key to solving the CO2 problem, this does not mean that other 
 
actions are unneeded.  Halting the growth of the non-CO2 forcings is essential for staying 
beneath the most plausible levels of dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate 
system, as are concerted efforts to improve energy efficiencies, increase use of renewable 
energies, and develop energy technologies that produce little or no CO2. 

The largest reservoirs of coal are in the United States, China and Russia, although 

The bottom line.  How can I be optimistic if, as I have argued, climate is now in the 

hands of humans and it is closer to the level of dangerous anthropogenic interference than has 
been realized?  If we compare the situation today to that 10-15 years ago, we realize that the 
main elements required to halt climate change, as summarized above, have come into being with 
remarkable rapidity.  I realize that it will not be easy to stabilize greenhouse gas concentrations, 

 

26

but I am optimistic because I expect empirical evidence for climate change and its impacts to 
continue to accumulate, and that this will influence the public, public interest groups, industry, 
and governments at various levels.  The question is: will we act soon enough.  It is a matter of 
time. 

 Acknowledgments.  I thank Michelle Press, George Musser, Michael Oppenheimer, Alfred Burdett, Tica Novakov and Lynn Price for 
comments on a draft manuscript, Ed Dlugokencky and Tom Conway for updates of CH4 and CO2 data, Makiko Sato for numerous contributions 
including assistance in converting the Alternative and 2C forcing scenarios (see Appendix) into greenhouse gas amounts, and Darnell Cain 
for technical assistance with the manuscript.  
 
 
Appendix: Climate Forcing Scenarios 
 
broad range of forcings.  However, this approach does not show how much current emission 
trends must be modified in order to stay below an estimated level for dangerous anthropogenic 
interference.  Also the IPCC predilection for exaggerated growth rates of population, energy 
intensity, and pollution calls into question the realism of their results.  Lets try an alternative 
approach that begins with observed rates of change of the forcings.   

IPCC (2001) uses a storyline approach to produce a useful plethora of scenarios with a 

Is it practical to achieve flat CO2 emissions during the next few decades, setting the stage 

CO2 growth rates.  CO2 is the most important forcing.  Its growth depends upon the rate 
at which we add CO2 to the air and upon how fast this human increment is removed via uptake 
by the ocean and the land.  In the past three decades, since the oil embargo of 1973, the growth 
rate of fossil fuel CO2 emissions has been 1.4%/year (Figure 11), yielding an increase of about 
49% in annual CO2 emissions between 1973 and 2002.  The annual growth of CO2 in the air 
increased by a comparable proportion (Figure 10).  If we want the growth rate of CO2 in the air 
to stabilize at the current rate, we probably need to decrease the CO2 emissions growth rate to 
about 0%/year, i.e., CO2 emissions (and thus fossil fuel burning) would need to remain 
approximately the same as today (unless CO2 is captured and sequestered, in which case fossil 
fuel burning could increase). 
 
Actual growth rate of CO2 emissions in the 1990s, based on the recent update of DOE 
(Marland and Boden, Reference 11), was 0.7%/year.  In the IPCC CO2 scenarios (constructed 
before data for the full decade were available) the growth rate of CO2 emissions in the 1990s is 
1.5%/year, about twice the actual growth rate. 
 
for still lower emission rates later in the century?  Such a scenario surely requires all of the 
following: (1) near-term and long-term emphasis on energy efficiency, (2) increased use of 
renewable energies that produce little or no net CO2, and (3) long-term development of large 
energy sources that produce no CO2 (e.g., next-generation nuclear power) and/or technologies to 
capture and sequester CO2.  By the second half of the century it is possible that there will be new 
technologies that help reduce climate forcings, e.g., by removing CO2 from the air.  In the near 
term, experience of recent decades suggests that it would be feasible to achieve flat CO2 
emissions via the multi-pronged effort mentioned above (efficiencies, renewables, other new 
technologies). 
 
aberration resulting from the collapse of the Soviet Unions economy and is affected by possible 
under-reporting of Chinas emissions.  On the contrary, the demise of inefficient systems is 
natural and there is much room for further gains in efficiency.  Reported reductions of coal use in 
China in the late 1990s were probably exaggerated, as indicated by a 28% increase in reported 
coal use between 2001 and 2002 (Reference 11b).  But such uncertainties do not modify the 
conclusion that a realistic description of business-as-usual is 1-1.5%/year growth of global CO2 

It is sometimes suggested that the recent ~1%/year growth rate of CO2 emissions is an 

 

27

The change seems moderate, but it is crucial.  1%/year growth for 50 years yields an 

These arguments do not imply that the transition from 1-1.5%/year CO2 growth rate, 

emissions, not 4%/year (see note 11c in References).   The presumption inherent in the fast-
growth IPCC scenarios, that the entire world will follow the energy path of the U.S. between 
1945 and the early 1970s, developing a comparable dependence on fossil fuel supplies, with all 
the disadvantages that entails, is highly dubious. 
 
which is a realistic description of business-as-usual, to the 0%/year of the alternative 
scenario would be easy.  On the contrary, it requires a concerted global effort of developed and 
developing countries.  However, the change is small enough that it can be attained via 
appropriate emphases on improved energy efficiencies, renewable energies, and other advanced 
technologies such as carbon sequestration and next generation nuclear power.  This further 
reduction of the CO2 growth rate is needed not so much because of its effect on climate change 
during the next few decades, which effect will be small, but rather because of its impact on our 
ability to stabilize atmospheric composition later in the century. 
 
increase of 70% in the emission rate.  1.5%/year yields a factor of 2.1.  The first steps that are 
taken in the 21st century are important, as they will determine the direction that we are headed. 
Non-CO2 forcings.  Methane (CH4) causes the second largest GHG climate forcing.  
 
Hansen and Sato (Reference 1a) show that the actual growth rate of CH4 is falling below all 
IPCC scenarios.  In the past two years the gap between the IPCC CH4 scenarios and reality has 
widened.  Other large anthropogenic forcings are those of BC and O3.  Unfortunately neither of 
these is being measured well enough globally to determine its rate of change.  I leave it to the 
reader to mull: do you believe that the amount of these air pollutants will be larger in 2050 than 
it is today, as it is in the IPCC scenarios?  If it is not, their added forcing will be zero or negative.  
Finally, note that IPCC assumes that the net climate forcing by CFCs and their replacements will 
increase this decade.  Observations show that the CFC forcing is below the IPCC scenarios and 
may shift to a small negative annual change by 2005. 
It is reasonable to project that further change of the non-CO2 forcings could be minimal 
 
in the 21st century.  Small decreases of CFCs and of some air pollutants could tend to balance 
modest increases of other pollutants and N2O.  However, such a near balance will not happen 
automatically.  It will require concerted actions and international cooperation. 

 Alternative and 2C scenarios.  Lets consider two target scenarios: the 

alternative scenario, which yields a maximum additional global warming of about 1C, and a 
2C scenario.  Warmings are defined relative to 2000.  It is assumed that climate sensitivity is 
about 3C for doubled CO2 and that net additional non-CO2 forcings in the 21st century are small.  
Maximum global warmings of ~1C and ~2C for these two scenarios occur in 2125-2150, based 
on simulations with the GISS climate model. 

The alternative scenario is an extension of the scenario we defined for 2000-2050 

(reference 6), with the annual CO2 growth decreasing linearly to zero between 2050 and 2100 
such that atmospheric CO2 stops growing by 2100.  Such an assumption, which is required for 
any scenario that achieves stabilization, implies at least a 50% reduction in fossil fuel use or CO2 
capture and sequestration. 

The 2C scenario permits larger annual CO2 growth, but after 2050 its annual CO2 

growth also decreases linearly to achieve zero CO2 growth in 2100.  The annual CO2 increment 
in the 2C scenario almost doubles by mid-century, reaching 3 ppm/year in 2050.  Thus the 
2C scenario permits a realistic business-as-usual CO2 growth rate (more than 1%/year) to 
persist for 50 years, but it would require a steep reduction of emissions after 2050. 

 

28

CO2 amounts in these scenarios are shown in Figure 15.  CO2 peaks at ~475 ppm in 2100 

 
in the alternative scenario and at ~560 ppm in 2100 in the 2C scenario.  It is perhaps 
unlikely that actual CO2 growth (in the next 50 years) will exceed that of the 2C scenario, 
given the existence of concerns about global climate change. 

It is informative to compare these two scenarios with IPCC scenarios.  The manifold 

story lines in IPCC (2001) produce a plethora of scenarios, but when new scenarios are 
devised with each report it is hard to judge how well prior scenarios have fared against reality. 
 

Figure 14. Fossil fuel CO2 emissions by global region based on data of Marland and Boden [Reference 11]. 

 

 

Figure 15. CO2 in the range of IPCC (2001) marker scenarios, and in our alternative and 2 C scenarios.  In the
alternative scenario CO2 decreases linearly from 1.7 ppm/year in 2000 to 1.3 ppm/year in 2050 and then linearly to
zero in 2100; CO2 peaks at ~475 ppm in 2100.  In the 2C scenario CO2 increases linearly from 1.7 ppm/year in 
2000 to 3 ppm/yr in 2050 and then decreases linearly to zero in 2100; CO2 peaks at ~560 ppm in 2100.  Upper and 
lower limits of IPCC range are their scenarios A1FI and B1 [IPCC, 2001, Appendix II, p. 807 and Figure 18, p.65].
IS92a is the updated version of that scenario in IPCC (2001), which incorporates recent carbon cycle modeling.  A 
still broader range of IPCC scenarios is included in their Special Report on Emission Scenarios (SRES) document
(Reference 
at 
http://www.giss.nasa.gov/data/simodel/ghgases/Fig1A.ext.txt.

12b).  CO2 

alternative 

scenarios 

2C 

scenarios 

are 

given 

for 

the 

and 

 

29

Fortunately the standard emission scenario of previous reports, IS92a, has been retained in IPCC 
(2001) with atmospheric CO2 amounts obtained from updated carbon cycle calculations.  The 
alternative and 2C scenarios both fall far below IS92a.  The alternative scenario falls far 
below the range of IPCC (2001) marker scenarios, while the 2C scenario is near the bottom of 
that IPCC range.  Of late the real world has been close to the alternative scenario (Figure 13). 
The conclusion that the real world is likely to fall somewhere in the range between the 

Summary opinion re scenarios.  Emphasis on extreme scenarios may have been 

alternative and 2C scenarios (at least for the next several decades) has the practical 
implication of heightening the importance of the non-CO2 forcings.  The large CO2 forcing in 
most IPCC scenarios had left the impression that nothing except CO2 was important.  Figure 4 is 
a better measure of the relative importance of different forcings.  The non-CO2 forcings deserve 
emphasis comparable to that placed on CO2. 
 
appropriate at one time, when the public and decision-makers were relatively unaware of the 
global warming issue, and energy sources such as synfuels, shale oil and tar sands were 
receiving strong consideration.  Now, however, the need is for demonstrably objective climate 
forcing scenarios consistent with what is realistic under current conditions.  Scenarios that 
accurately fit recent and near-future observations have the best chance of bringing all of the 
important players into the discussion, and they also are what is needed for the purpose of 
providing policy-makers the most effective and efficient options to stop global warming. 
IPCC scenarios encompass a great range, especially in the IPCC SRES document 

I have argued that achievement of a 1C scenario would be feasible based on increased 

(Reference 12b), which includes CO2 growth rates faster and slower than the range of marker 
scenarios that are included in IPCC (2001) and illustrated in our Figure 15.  However, IPCC does 
not specify the likelihood of the scenarios or examine the direction of current real-world growth 
rates.  A realistic business-as-usual scenario would have CO2 growth rates in the range 1-
1.5%/year, thus on a course comparable to our 2C scenario for the next few decades. 
 
emphasis on energy efficiencies, renewable energies, and advanced technologies.  However, I am 
not implying that this alternative scenario would be easy to achieve.  Indeed, it surely requires 
concerted world-wide actions.  Furthermore, stabilization of atmospheric composition by the end 
of the century eventually will require substantial reductions of CO2 emissions.  If fossil fuels 
remain the prime source of energy, this implies the need for large-scale sequestration of CO2.  I 
have not discussed propositions to counterbalance global warming with geo-engineered cooling, 
because the suggestions that have been made, such as a large shade in space or human-injected 
aerosols in the stratosphere, appear to be uneconomic and fool-hearty in comparison with the 
actions that would slow global warming.  
 
constitute dangerous anthropogenic interference.  I have argued that ice sheet stability may 
require that global warming be kept less than about 1C.  Hopefully I am wrong, because that 
may be a difficult scenario to achieve.  Others have suggested 2C, and IPCC implies that even 
larger warming would have little effect on sea level.  Research on the stability of the ice sheets 
deserves high priority.  A curious point that we have raised concerns the contribution of black 
carbon to the disintegration of ice sheets.  The implication is that by reducing black carbon 
emissions we could raise somewhat the level of warming that would constitute dangerous 
anthropogenic interference.  However, I am not suggesting that black carbon is the primary 
factor affecting ice sheet stability. 

The great uncertainty about scenarios concerns the level of global warming that would 

 
 

 

30

Figure 16.  Fossil fuel CO2 emissions as in Figure 11, but with a linear scale. 
IPCC/SRES  emission  scenarios  were  defined  in  the  mid  1990s,  which 
accounts for their offset in 2000.

 
Lay persons CO2 emissions graph.  The presentation of fossil-fuel CO2 emissions in Figure 11 
reveals the fundamental changes in growth rate that have occurred over long periods and the time scales 
over which different energy sources have penetrated global energy use (an estimate for wood is added to 
that figure in Reference 6a).  However, the logarithmic scale for emissions might mislead a lay person.  
An alternative (linear) presentation (Figure 16) reveals additional information for a limited period. 
 
price increase, is less apparent in Figure 16 than in Figure 11, although the discerning eye might note the 
change from exponential growth prior to 1973 to essentially linear growth (constant growth) since 1973.  
A realistic projection of current trends is a continuation of that constant growth rate, the dash-dot line in 
Figure 16. 

The sea change in energy growth rates that occurred in 1973, with the oil embargo and energy 

Constant growth at the rate of the past three decades falls below the IPCC scenarios, and 

constant emissions falls far below the IPCC scenarios.  The dark blue area is the range of marker 
scenarios in the primary IPCC publication (Reference 6a), while the lighter blue area adds the full range 
of scenarios in the IPCC SRES publication (Reference 6b).  The IPCC scenarios that extend far off-scale 
(high) are impractical to show in entirety with a linear scale, but they do not need to be shown as they are 
unrealistic. 

The constant growth and constant emissions tracks are approximately what is needed to 
achieve the 2C and alternative climate scenarios, which are designed to keep additional global 
warming below 2C and 1C, respectively.  Keeping CO2 emissions from exceeding the constant 
growth track for the next few decades may be, comparatively, easy.  Achievement of the constant 
emissions path, on the other hand, requires a second sea change in fossil fuel use trends.  We will present 
quantitative evidence elsewhere that this alternative scenario could be achieved via feasible emphasis 
on energy efficiencies, renewable energies and other advanced technologies. 

This discussion refers to CO2 emissions during the next few decades.  The (uncaptured) CO2 
emissions in both the 2C and 1C scenarios must begin to decrease prior to mid-century to achieve 
stabilization of atmospheric CO2 amount, as agreed in the Framework Convention on Climate Change. To 
keep additional global warming from exceeding 1C, which I have argued is the most plausible value for 
the level of DAI, implies the need for a change in CO2 emission rates at least as dramatic as that of 
1973. This will require an unprecedented level of international cooperation. 

 

31

James E. Hansen (jhansen@giss.nasa.gov) 
NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies, and 
Columbia University Earth Institute 
2880 Broadway, New York, NY 10025 
 
References 
1. Climate forcing agents: (a) J.E. Hansen & M. Sato, PNAS, 98, 14778, 2001; (b) J. Hansen et al., JGR, 107, D18, 4347, 2002; (c) S. Sun & J. 

Hansen, J. Climate, in press. 

2.  Ice sheets & sea level: (a) H.J. Zwally et al., Science, 297, 218, 2002; (b) B.C. ONeill & M. Oppenheimer, Science, 296, 1971, 2002; (c) Wild 
et al., JGR, 108, D5, 4165, 2003; (d) M. Kienast et al., Geology, 31, 67, 2003; (e) O. Watanabe et al., Nature, 422, 509, 2003; J.R. Petit et al., 
Nature, 399, 429, 1999. 

3.  Air pollution and climate: workshop report, www.giss.nasa.gov/meetings/pollution02/). 
4.  Warming of world ocean: S. Levitus et al., Science, 287, 2225, 2000. 
5.  Energy efficiency: A. Lovins & L.H. Lovins, Climate: Making Sense and Making Money, Rocky Mountain Institute, Snowmass, CO. 
6.  Alternative scenario: (a) J. Hansen et al., PNAS, 97, 9875, 2000; (b) J. Hansen, Clim. Change, 52, 435, 2002; (c) J.Hansen, Open Letter, 

http://naturalscience.com /ns/letters/ns_let25.html. 

7.  Net aerosol forcing: C.E. Forest et al., Science, 295, 113, 2002. 
8.  Black carbon amount from AERONET data: M. Sato et al., PNAS, 100, 6319, 2003. 
9.  Black carbon effect on snow and ice albedo: (a) Warren, S.G. & W.J. Wiscombe, J. Atmos. Sci., 37, 2734, 1981; (b) Chylek, P., V. 

Ramaswamy & V. Srivastava, JGR, 88, 10837, 1983; (c) Clarke, A.D. & K.J. Noone, Atmos. Envir., 19, 2045, 1985; (d) Hansen, A.D.A. and 
T. Novakov, J. Atmos. Chem., 9, 347, 1989. 

10. Black carbon climate effects: J. Hansen and L. Nazarenko, to be submitted to PNAS, 2003. 
11. CO2 emissions data: (a) G. Marland & T. Boden, CO2 Information Center, Oak Ridge Natl. Lab., Oak Ridge, TN 

(http://cdiac.esd.oml.gov/trends/emis/tre_glob.htm); (b) British Petroleum 52nd Statistical Review of World Energy, 2003; (c) Some analysts 
argue that the reported decline of coal use in China beginning in the late 1990s was overstated, while others argue that the reported coal use for 
2002 (28% higher than 2001) is exaggerated.  Despite these uncertainties, the global fossil fuel CO2 emissions growth rate since 1973 is in the 
range 1.3-1.4%/year.  The growth rate required to go from the 1973 emission rate to the 2001 emission (with its low China emissions) is 
1.312%/year, while the rate required to reach the reported 2002 emissions (with its 28% increase in China coal use) is 1.375%/year.   

12. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (a) Climate Change 2001: The Scientific Basis, J.T. Houghton, et al., Cambridge Univ. Press, 
881 pp., 2001, http://www.ipcc.ch; (b) IPCC Special Report on Emission Scenarios, N. Nakicenovic et al., Cambridge Univ. Press, 599 pp., 
2000. 

13. CO2 potential of oil, gas and coal resources: J. Hansen et al., Science, 213, 957, 1981.  The contributions of coal, oil and gas to airborne CO2 

in Table 2 and the update here account for the history of emissions and the decay time of CO2 incremental additions. 

 

 

 
About the author:  Dr. James Hansen heads the Goddard Institute for Space Studies, which is a division of the NASA 
Goddard Space Flight Center and a unit of the Columbia University Earth Institute located on the Columbia 
campus in New York City.  Dr. Hansen was trained in physics and astronomy in the space science program of Dr. 
James Van Allen at the University of Iowa.  His primary research for the past 25 years has been on studies and 
computer simulations of the Earth's climate, for the purpose of understanding the human impact on global climate.  
Dr. Hansen is best known for his testimony on climate change to congressional committees in the 1980s that helped 
raise broad awareness of the global warming issue.  He was elected to the National Academy of Sciences in 1995 
and, in 2001, received both the Heinz Award for the environment as well as the American Geophysical Union's 
Roger Revelle Medal. 
 

                                                 
Affiliations for identification only; interpretations in this paper are the opinion of the author and are not meant to represent the position of any 
organization. 

 

32

