“

Whether you are buying
or selling a residential
property, or staying in
your current home, every
Californian should know
his or her home

energy rating.

Contents

Chairman’s Message
Know the Facts
What Is a Home Energy Rating?
Understanding Your HERS Index
HERS Recommendations
Making Wise Improvements
Utility Bills and Ratings
Financing Your Improvements
Efficiency Adds Value
Go Solar California!

”

3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
12
13

During a real estate transaction, a California
HERS Rating is a great way to disclose facts
about the energy efficiency of a home.
Know the

FACTS
Whether you are getting ready to sell your home – or preparing to
buy one – knowing the energy efficiency facts about the property is a
major consideration. As buyers become more aware of the benefits of
an energy-efficient home, homes with a favorable home energy rating
may be more attractive to buyers.

Selling?
A HERS rating will:
• Help determine facts about
the energy efficiency of your
home.
• Identify energy improvements
that may make your home
more attractive to buyers.
• Alert appraisers to add value
for any energy improvements
you may have made already.

Buying?
• Use a HERS rating to shop and
compare the energy efficiency
of homes you are considering.
• Learn about the most costeffective options for lowering
the energy bills in any home
you are considering buying.
• Identify and qualify for energy
efficiency financing.

Staying in your current home?
• Find out your HERS rating.
• Discover the best options for lowering your energy bills.
•
home more comfortable.
•
• Improve your home’s resale value.

Have you checked
your ducts?
Heating and cooling ducts in an
average California home leak almost
30 percent. That is why when
heating or cooling equipment is
replaced, testing the system’s ducts
for leaks is now required by building
officials in many parts of the state.
If you are selling your home and had
upgrades made without the
required permits or duct testing, be
sure to disclose this on your Real
Estate Transfer Disclosure Statement. If you are preparing to buy a
home that had duct work performed
after October 2005, ask to see the
duct testing report, or an explanation as to why such testing was not
required.
For more information, visit:
www.energy.ca.gov/title24/changeout/

4

You wouldn’t buy a new car without knowing its “miles per gallon” rating. So why buy
a home without a “home energy rating?”
What is a

HOME
ENERGY
R ATING
A Whole-House Home Energy Rating is a comprehensive evaluation of the efficiency of the entire home. The
homeowner receives a written report that includes a numeric score or “rating” of the home, plus recommendations for improvements that will reduce energy bills and make the home more comfortable. Knowing the
energy rating of your home is similar to knowing the miles per gallon rating of your car.
The California Energy Commission has developed the California Home Energy Rating System (HERS) Program
to cover almost every type of residence in California. This includes new and existing single-family homes and
multifamily buildings of three stories or less. Energy Commission-approved HERS Providers train, certify, and
oversee a new type of service professional known as a “California Whole-House Home Energy Rater.”

Each California HERS Rater must follow
standardized energy auditing procedures and use energy analysis software
that meets the Energy Commission’s
technical requirements. The HERS Rater

•
•
•
•
•

will inspect and assess all the major
energy efficiency features of your home:

Air leaks (sealed or unsealed)
Cooling system
Heating system
Water heating system
Heating and cooling ducts and/
or pipes

• Windows
•
• Major appliances
• Solar electricity generating systems (if any)
• Other energy uses

•

Your HERS report will identify the most cost-effective and appropriate energy efficiency improvements for your
home. Only a properly prepared HERS Report will receive an official California Home Energy Rating Certificate
with the California Energy Commission’s seal.
Rating costs vary depending on factors such as the size and features of your home and the extent of rater
services needed. Ask your real estate agent for names of certified HERS Raters in your area or find an Energy
Commission-approved HERS Provider at: www.energy.ca.gov/HERS/index.html or call the Energy Hotline
at (800) 772-3300.

5

•

Your HERS Rating Certificate will

0 to 250-point scale.
•
as determined by the HERS Rater.
• Estimate the home’s annual energy use, operating
cost, and greenhouse gas emissions.
• Calculate the amount of solar or other onsite renewable energy that the home may produce.

Understanding your

HERS index

What is your Home Energy Rating?
How low can it go?

A lower HERS Index indicates a more energy efficient home.
A home with a HERS Index of
• “250” or more is likely to have very high energy bills, and many opportunities for efficiency Improvements.
• “100” uses the same energy as a home that meets California’s 2008 Building Energy Efficiency Standards.
• “0” is a super-efficient “Net Zero Energy Home” that consumes no more energy than it produces with solar or
other onsite renewable sources.
6

HERS Recommendations

Your HERS report will contain
detailed recommendations
so that you can learn about
all the improvements that are
cost-effective and appropriate for your particular home.
Here are a few examples.

Test and seal air leaks
in building envelope
A pressure test will show
where the air is leaking
out so you can make your
home less drafty.

Increase attic insulation to R-38
Properly installed insulation
makes your home quieter
and more comfortable.

Test and seal air duct leaks
Almost every home in California
has leaky ducts, typically
wasting 30 percent or more.

Tune-up the heating
and cooling system
Proper maintenance
saves energy and
improves comfort
and safety.

Upgrade to a correctly sized
ENERGY STAR® furnace
A new ENERGY STAR® furnace
will run more quietly and keep
you warm all winter for less money.
7

Hire a Professional
Don’t trust just anyone to make your improvements. Trying to save a little can sometimes cost you more in the
long run. Instead, find one or more licensed specialty contractors who have the knowledge, tools, and skills to
do each job right. You may want to consider a “building performance” contractor who is a licensed general contractor and is specially trained and certified to help address all of the energy and comfort improvement opportuwebsite www.cslb.ca.gov provides more information on how to choose a qualified contractor.

Making

WISE
IMPROVEMENTS
Do It Yourself
Some improvements are so easy and inexpensive, you don’t need a HERS rating
to know they pay back quickly.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Replace incandescent bulbs with ENERGY STAR® compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs).
Replace all nightlights and holiday lights with light-emitting diodes (LEDs).
Choose ENERGY STAR® appliances, computers, and televisions.
Insulate the first 5 feet of pipes from the cold and hot water heater.
Add or repair weather stripping on all doors and windows.

Plant shade trees.

Energy Wise

HABITS

These no-cost tips will help reduce the •
energy consumption in your home.
•
•

•

Turn off lights and computers
when not in use.
Use a power strip for televisions,
DVD players, VCRs, and chargers,
and turn off power to the strip
when not in use.
Recycle burned-out CFL bulbs,
computer monitors, and all other
electronic waste.

•
old refrigerators and freezers.

•
•

•

your dishwasher and clothes
washer for full loads only. Use
the cold water setting on your
clothes washer when possible.
Turn down the water heater to
120 degrees Fahrenheit.
Use your drapes properly. In the
summer, close your drapes during the day. In the winter, open
your drapes during the day and
close your drapes at night.
Open your windows for natural
ventilation on cool summer mornings and nights.
8

A $100 per month reduction in your utility bills
frees up enough cash to pay for a $17,000 increase
in your mortgage (assuming 6 percent interest
over 30 years).
Utility Bills &

RATINGS
Home energy efficiency ratings are designed to help you focus on the
physical features of the house – not on other factors that can affect energy
consumption like unusual weather or personal energy use habits.
Utility bills give a personal perspective: the history of how much energy
the occupants of the home actually used over a period. Unless you consider a rating coupled with the utility bills, you may get only half of the story.
As a potential buyer, you should always ask to see the previous occupant’s
energy bills. While sellers are not obligated to share their utility bills,
many will if asked.

6/09

te: 11/0

a
Issue D

If the old bills have not been saved, current occupants can access their
records by calling the local utility or by setting up an account on the utility’s website. Your HERS Rater can assist you in obtaining the bills and will
consider them to establish a more complete picture of your home energy
use to make the best recommendations for improvements. A Home
Buyers’ Energy Checklist that helps buyers ask questions related to the
home’s energy use is available at: www.energy.ca.gov/HERS/index.html.

Energy efficiency is different than energy consumption. Efficiency
depends upon the physical features of the home and all the equipment it contains. Consumption is reduced through efficiency but
also depends on the energy use behavior of the occupants.
Wasteful habits, unusual weather, or malfunctioning equipment
can drive up energy bills, even in the most energy-efficient house
in the neighborhood.

9

After your mortgage payment, your energy
bill is often the second largest monthly home
ownership expense.

Financing your

IMPROVEMENTS

If you are buying or refinancing and looking for a way to finance your energy
improvements, you should get advice from a knowledgeable real estate agent or
lender about the many new options now available. The federal government, Fannie Mae/Freddie Mac, and many major lenders are introducing new products to
help you fund your energy efficiency improvements. Some cities and counties also
have programs that allow homeowners to finance efficiency improvements and
solar installations over 20 years.

Principal
+ Interest
+ Taxes
+ Insurance
+ Energy
True cost of owning
your home

You may also be able to qualify for an Energy Efficient Mortgage (EEM). An EEM is
a loan program that recognizes the importance of the energy efficiency of a home
and allows for cost-effective energy upgrades to be financed in the mortgage. A
HERS rating is required to qualify for an EEM. These loans provide borrowers the
opportunity to make energy efficiency improvements to their homes and gain
several desirable benefits including:
•
mortgage rate.
• May stretch your debt-to-income qualifying ratio.
• Enjoy your improvements and energy savings right away.
• Earn a higher resale price when you sell.
Best of all, you get to enjoy all the benefits of your home improvements for the
same total monthly cost (PITI+E)…or maybe even less.
EEM programs are available from:
• Federal Housing Authority (FHA)
• Veterans Administration (VA)
• Conventional lenders (Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac)
•

10

Combine an EEM with other programs and you may be able to borrow up
to $40,000 or more for efficiency improvements. Ask a knowledgeable
lender if an EEM is right for you.
Another way to finance energy improvements is through an equity loan or
equity line of credit. If your HERS rating is low enough, some lenders may
offer a “green” mortgage or equity line of credit at a discount relative to
their regular interest rates or points. Shop around to see if these products
make sense for you. Utilities also offer financial incentives such as rebates, for energy smart improvements, such as:
• Added insulation
• ENERGY STAR® appliances
• Refrigerator recycling
•
•
• Whole-house fans, cool roofs, swimming pool pump motors, and more
Contact your local utility for information on their program offerings. Manufacturers also offer discounts or rebates on efficient products so check
their websites or with a retailer for possible offers.

11

It’s no secret; energy efficiency features may
make your home more valuable and sell faster.

Federal tax credits now available include:
Efficiency

ADDS VALUE

30 percent of the cost, up to $1,500,
through 2010 (existing homes
only) for:
• Windows and Doors
• Insulation
• Roofs
• HVAC
• Water Heaters

30 percent of the cost, with no
upper limit through 2016 (existing
homes and new construction) for:
• Solar electric generation
• Solar water heaters
• Other on-site renewable
generation

For more news on federal energy efficiency tax credits, visit:
w w w.energystar.gov/taxcredits

Did You Know?
• A study of energy-efficient homes in The Appraisal Journal showed
that a $1 reduction in annual energy bills resulted in more than $10
increase in resale value.
• A past president of the California Association of Real Estate
Appraisers recommends that appraisals account for any efficiency
improvements because they “so contribute to the habitability,
enjoyability and economic stability of the home.”
• FHA authorizes the cost of energy efficiency measures to be added
to the mortgage.
• Home builders find that homes with efficiency and solar electricity
up grades sell faster and at higher prices than similar homes nearby.
Make sure your real estate agent knows about any efficiency improvements you have made, let buyers know your home is “Energy-Rated,” and
give the appraiser a copy of your HERS Report.

The energy used in the average home produces roughly twice as much greenhouse gas
pollution as the average car (US EPA).
12

Once you have made all appropriate
energy efficiency improvements,
you may also want to consider solar
electric generation.
If you have already decided on the
size of solar electric system, investing in energy efficiency measures
first will allow your solar system to
power more of your home’s electricity need. Plan ahead and don’t
oversize your new solar electric system to power an energy-inefficient
house. Your HERS Rater will show
you how.

California has a goal to generate
3,000 megawatts of new, solar-produced electricity by 2017 — moving
the state toward a cleaner energy
future and lowering the cost of
solar systems for all consumers.
The California Solar Initiative offers
incentives up to 30 percent off the
installed cost of a solar system for a
typical home. This discount may be
combined with any federal tax credits or other incentives available.
Visit
www.gosolarcalifornia.ca.gov
for details.

13

CUT HERE

Property Address:

I have received a copy of the WHAT IS YOUR HOME
ENERGY RATING? booklet (CEC-400-2009-008-BR)

Buyer’s Signature

Printed Name

Date

Buyer’s Signature

Printed Name

Date

Buyer’s Agent Signature

Printed Name

Date

Broker’s Name

Seller’s Signature

Printed Name

Date

Seller’s Signature

Printed Name

Date

Listing Agent’s Signature

Printed Name

Date

Broker’s Name

ALL SIGNERS SHOULD RETAIN A COPY OF THIS PAGE FOR THEIR RECORDS
California Civil Code Section 2079.10 states that if this booklet is provided to the
buyer by the seller or broker, then this booklet is deemed to be adequate to inform
the home buyer about the existence of California Home Energy Rating Program.
For more information, visit: www.energy.ca.gov/HERS/index.html

The California Energy Commission does not
endorse any product, supplier, manufacturer,
builder or organization.
The text in this booklet is designed to be
informational and not all-inclusive.

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
ADVISORY COMMITTEE
Arlene Baxter	
REALTOR®, Berkeley, CA
Mike Bachand	
CalCERTS, Inc.
Elizabeth Gavric	California Association of REATORS®, Government
Affairs
Greg Harding	
Office of Real Estate Appraisers
Shery Hoellwarth	
ConSol, Inc.
Paula B. Howell	
Energy Documentation Services
William Jansen	
Broker Risk Management
Jana Maddux	
CHEERS®
Scott Muldavin	Green Building Finance Consortium; The Mauldavin
Company
William Neece	
Green Key Real Estate
Chris Neri	
California Department of Real Estate
William Poulton	
California Real Estate Inspection Association
Randal Riedel	California Building Performance Contractors Association
Charles Segerstrom	
Pacific Gas & Electric Company
Bernie Stephan	
Broker, Marin County

PROJECT CONSULTANTS
Tom Conlon	
Charles Eley	
Margaret Kapranos	
Dan Suyeyasu	
Andrew Waegel	

GeoPraxis, Inc.
Architectural Energy Corporation
REALTOR®, Greenbrae, CA
Architectural Energy Corporation
GeoPraxis, Inc.

ADDITIONAL CONTRIBUTORS
Rashid Mir	
Betty LaFranchi	
Vanessa Byrd	
Bruce Maeda	
Beverly Duffy	
Parker Scott	
Lance DeLaura	

California Energy Commission
California Energy Commission
California Energy Commission
California Energy Commission
California Energy Commission
California Energy Commission
SEMPRA

CALIFORNIA
E N E R G Y CO M M I S S I O N

Governor
Arnold Schwarzenegger
Chairman
Karen Douglas
Vice Chairman
James D. Boyd
Commissioners
Jeffrey D. Byron
Anthony Eggert
Robert Weisenmiller, Ph.D
Executive Director
Melissa Jones
Deputy Director
Efficiency and Renewable
Energy Division
Valerie Hall
Office Manager
High Performance Buildings and
Standards Development
Bill Pennington
Project Manager
Helen Lam
California Energy Commission
1516 Ninth Street, MS-37
Sacramento, CA 95814-5512
Need Help? Call the Energy Hotline
(800) 772-3300 or (916) 654-5106
CEC-400-2009-008-BR
September 2010
Prepared by:
Architectural Energy Corporation
San Francisco, California
Contract No. 400-05-020
Photo on page 3 courtesy of the Office of the Governor.
Photo on page 4 courtesy of The Energy Conservatory.
Photos on page 7 courtesy of: National Renewable Energy
Laboratory, CertainTeed, and Carrier

