What is a Hurricane?
A hurricane is a tropical cyclone in which winds reach speeds of 74 miles
per hour or more and blow in a large spiral around a relatively calm
center. The eye of the storm is usually 20-30 miles wide and may extend
over 400 miles. The dangers of the storm include torrential rains, high
winds and storm surges. It produces measurable damage from heavy
rainfalls, winds, and flooding.
High winds are a primary cause of hurricane-inflicted loss of life and property
damage. Another cause is the flooding resulting from the coastal storm surge of the
ocean and the torrential rains, both of which accompany the storm. To decrease
such damage several unsuccessful programs have studied ways to "defuse" hurricanes
in their developing stages; more recent hurricane damage-mitigation steps have
included better warning systems involving real-time satellite imagery. A hurricane
watch is issued when there is a threat of hurricane conditions within 24-36 hours. A
hurricane warning is issued when hurricane conditions (winds greater than 74
mph/119 kph or dangerously high water and rough seas) are expected in 24 hours or
less.

When Are Hurricanes Most Likely?
Hurricane season begins on June 1 and continues through the end of November.
August and September are peak months during hurricane season.

Who Is Most At Risk?
People who live along the coast are most at risk due to storm
surge. Inland areas can also be affected by high winds, floods,
and tornadoes spurned by the hurricane.

What Causes a Hurricane?
Hurricanes can develop when the sun's rays heat tropical waters to at least 82
degrees Fahrenheit. This causes the air to grow warmer and rise. Water rises with it
as vapor, and the heat causes the air to rise faster and faster. In about 12 hours, the

heated air will begin to circle counterclockwise, forming stronger and stronger winds
that whirl with increasing speed. A wind becomes a hurricane when it reaches speeds
of more than 74 miles (120 km) per hour. The moist, hot winds of a hurricane swirl
upward around a calm column of low-pressure air known as the eye. Some hurricanes
can develop more than one eye, but the largest is always the main eye and measures
an average of 15 miles across. Inside the eye there are no storm clouds, almost no
wind, and calm conditions. The rising winds rotate in increasingly tight spirals around
the eye, rising faster and faster. Cooler air is also sucked in, heated, and sent
twisting up the eye. When the hot air rises high enough, it cools and forms water
droplets that cluster together as clouds and drop rain. The rain is blown around by
fierce winds. As a hurricane moves, it churns up the sea beneath the eye, sucking
ocean water up and creating huge ocean waves. The raised water is carried along by
the storm to the shore.

What is the Risk of Hurricanes in New England?
Southern New England is in the unenviable position of receiving all
three-hurricane threats:
•
•
•

Coastal inundation due to the storm surge.
Widespread wind damage.
Widespread inland small stream and river flooding due to torrential rains.

The strongest hurricanes, such as the great New England hurricane
of 1938, have brought severe damage to coastal locations, while
totally disrupting utility power for days across the interior from
downed trees and high winds. Both the stronger hurricanes and
several of the weaker tropical storms have caused inland river flooding in various
parts of New England.
History clearly shows that everyone living in southern New England must take
tropical storms and hurricanes seriously. Whether you live along the
coast, by a river or stream, or far inland, a tropical storm or
hurricane striking New England will have a great impact on you and
your local area.
Whenever a tropical storm or hurricane strikes, tune in the NOAA weather radio for
the latest information, 24 hours a day.

History of Hurricanes in New England
Since 1900, thirty-nine tropical systems have impacted New
England. Twenty-five were hurricanes, while fourteen were
tropical storm strength. Any tropical storm or hurricane is
capable of bringing a combination of high winds, large storm
surges and severe inland flooding along rivers and streams.
Of the 24 hurricanes, 9 made landfall along the southern New England coast. Of
those 9 hurricanes, 7 of them were either of category 2 or 3 intensity based on the
Saffir-Simpson hurricane scale. Though the primary threat to New England is during
August and September, the region has been affected as early as June, and as late as
mid October.
The worst hurricane to affect New England was the great New England hurricane of
1938, which struck on September 21st. The great New England hurricane of 1938
struck at high tide, which coincided with the highest astronomical tide of the year,
pushing a storm surge of 12 to 15 feet across the south coast and up the many bays
and inlets including Narragansett and Buzzards Bays. Winds over 120 mph blew across
the coastal regions. The Blue Hill observatory in Milton MA recorded a
sustained 5-minute wind of 121 mph and a peak gust to 186 mph.
Parts of interior Connecticut and Massachusetts not only bore the
brunt of high winds, but also experienced severe river flooding as rain
from the hurricane combined with heavy rains earlier that week
produced rainfall totals of up to 17 inches. This resulted in some of the worst river
flooding ever experienced in parts of Connecticut and Massachusetts.
This powerful storm caused 564 deaths and over 1700 injuries. Nearly 9000 homes
and businesses were destroyed with over 15000 damaged. The boating community
was equally devastated with 2600 boats destroyed and 3300 damaged.
It is not uncommon for New England to be impacted more than once in a given
season. The area has been impacted by two or more tropical storms or hurricanes in
one season a total of 11 times. The most notable season was 1954, when hurricanes
Carol, Edna, and Hazel impacted the region.

Name
Hurricane of 1635
Hurricane of 1778
Hurricane of 1804
Gale of 1815
Hurricane of 1869
Hurricane of 1938
Hurricane Carol
Hurricane Donna
Hurricane Gloria
Hurricane Bob

1635 - 1991
Event Date
August, 1635
October 18-19, 1778
October 9, 1804
September 23, 1815
September 8, 1869
September 21, 1938
September, 1954
September, 1960
September 28,1985
August, 1991

Wind Speed
40 - 75mph
>50 mph
186 mph (max)
>70 mph
>60 mph

How to Plan for a Hurricane
•
•

•

•

•

Talk to your insurance agent. Homeowners' policies do not cover flooding from
hurricanes. Ask about the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP).
Ask about your community's hurricane preparedness plan. The local emergency
management office or local chapter of the American Red Cross should be able to
provide you with details of this plan, including information on the safest
evacuation routes, nearby shelters, advice on when schools would be closed and
what conditions are necessary for recommended evacuation of certain areas.
Develop an evacuation plan. Everyone in your family should know where to go if
they have to leave. Trying to make plans at the last minute can be upsetting and
create confusion.
Determine where to move your boat in an emergency. Marinas and
other storage facilities may fill up quickly. Some locations may have
less risk of damage than others. You may be required to secure your
boat well in advance of approaching hurricanes.
Discuss hurricanes with your family. Everyone should know what to
do in case all family members are not together. Discussing

hurricanes ahead of time will help reduce fear and anxiety, and lets everyone
know how to respond. Review flood safety and preparedness measures with your
family.

How to Protect Your Property
•

Make a list of items to bring inside in the event of a storm. A list will help you
remember anything that can be broken or picked up by strong winds. Hurricane
winds, often in excess of 100 miles per hour, can turn unanchored items into
deadly missiles, causing damage or injury when they hit.

•

Keep trees and shrubbery trimmed. Make trees more wind resistant by removing
diseased or damaged limbs, then strategically remove branches so that wind can
blow through. Hurricane winds frequently break weak limbs and hurl them at
great speed, causing great damage when they hit property. Debris collection
services may not be operating just before a storm, so it is best to do this well in
advance of approaching storms.

•

Remove any debris or loose items in your yard. Hurricane winds can pick up
anything unsecured, creating damage to property when the debris hits.

•

Clear loose and clogged rain gutters and downspouts. Hurricanes often bring long
periods of heavy rain. Providing clear drainage will help prevent misdirected
flooding.

•

Install permanent hurricane shutters. Hurricane shutters provide the best
protection for your windows and doors. Taping windows could take critical time
from more effective preparedness measures. All tape does is help prevent glass
from broken windows from scattering all over inside. Tape does not prevent
windows from breaking. Cover the outside of windows with shutters or plywood.

•

If you do not have permanent hurricane shutters, install anchors for plywood
(marine plywood is best) and pre-drill holes in precut half-inch outdoor plywood
boards so that you can cover the windows of your home quickly. Mark which board
fits which window. Note: Tape does not prevent windows from breaking, so taping
windows is not recommended. Most homes destroyed during recent hurricanes had
no window protection. When wind enters a home through broken windows, the
pressure builds against the walls and can lift roofs, followed by collapsing walls.

•

Install protection to the outside areas of sliding glass doors. Glass doors are as
vulnerable as windows to breakage by wind-driven objects.

•

Well ahead of time, buy any other items needed to board up windows and protect
your home. When a hurricane threatens, supplies are quickly sold out at many
stores. Stock may not be replenished until after the storm.

•

Strengthen garage doors. Many houses are destroyed by hurricane winds that
enter through damaged garage doors, lifting roofs, and destroying the remainder
of the house. Have an engineer check your home and advise about ways to make
it more resistant to hurricane winds. There are a variety of ways to protect your
home. Professionals can advise you of engineering requirements, building permits
or requirements of local planning and zoning departments to provide the most
effective protection.

•

Elevate coastal homes. Raising houses to a certain height will make them more
resistant to hurricane-driven waters. There may be many local codes affecting
how and where homes can be elevated. Meet with your emergency manager or
planning and zoning official for a description of the process to have your home
elevated. There may also be community funds available for such measures.

•

If you live in a flood plain or are prone to flooding, also follow flood preparedness
precautions. Hurricanes can bring great amounts of rain and frequently cause
floods. Some hurricanes have dropped more than 10 inches of rain in just a few
hours.

What To Do In The Event Of A Hurricane
INDOORS
•

Stay away from windows and doors even if they are covered.

•

Go to the basement. If there is no basement, go to an interior part of the
structure on the lowest level: closets, interior hallway and bathrooms.

•

Close all interior doors. Secure and brace external doors.

IN A CAR

•

Drive only if absolutely necessary and avoid flooded roads and washed-out
bridges.

OUTDOORS
•

Get inside. Wind blown items can cause serious injury.

Items You Should Stock
WATER at least 1 gallon daily per person for 3 to 7 days
FOOD at least enough for 3 to 7 days
non-perishable packaged or canned food and juices
foods for infants or the elderly
snack foods
non-electric can opener
cooking tools/fuel
paper plates/plastic utensils
BLANKETS/PILLOWS, ETC.
CLOTHING seasonal/rain gear/sturdy shoes
FIRST AID KIT/MEDICINES/PERSCRIPTION DRUGS
SPECIAL ITEMS for babies and the elderly
TOILETRIES/HYGIENE ITEMS/MOISTURE WIPES
FLASHLIGHT/BATTERIES
RADIO Battery operated NOAA weather radio
CASH Banks and ATMs may not be open or available for extended periods.

KEYS
TOYS, BOOKS AND GAMES
IMPORTANT DOCUMENTS in a waterproof container insurance, medical
records, bank account numbers, Social Security card, etc.
TOOLS keep a set with you during the storm
PET CARE ITEMS proper identification/immunization records/medications
ample supply of food and water
a carrier or cage
muzzle and leash

SAFFIR-SIMPSON HURRICANE SCALE
CATEGORY

1
2

WIND SPEED

74-95 mph

WHAT TO EXPECT
NO REAL DAMAGE TO BUILDING STRUCTURES. DAMAGE
PRIMARILY TO UNANCHORED MOBILE HOMES,
SHRUBBERY, AND TREES. SOME COASTAL ROAD
FLOODING AND MINOR PIER DAMAGE MAY OCCUR.

SOME ROOFING MATERIAL, DOOR, AND WINDOW
DAMAGE TO BUILDINGS. CONSIDERABLE DAMAGE TO
VEGETATION, MOBILE HOMES, AND PIERS. COASTAL AND
96-110 mph LOW-LYING ESCAPE ROUTES FLOOD 2-4 HOURS BEFORE
ARRIVAL OF CENTER. SMALL CRAFT IN UNPROTECTED
ANCHORAGES BREAK MOORINGS.
SOME STRUCTURAL DAMAGE TO SMALL RESIDENCES

3

111-130 mph

AND UTILITY BUILDINGS WITH A MINOR AMOUNT OF
CURTAIN WALL FAILURES. MOBILE HOMES ARE
DESTROYED. FLOODING NEAR THE COAST DESTROYS
SMALLER STRUCTURES WITH LARGER STRUCTURES
DAMAGED BY FLOATING DEBRIS. TERRAIN

CONTINUOUSLY LOWER THAN 5 FEET BOVE SEA LEVEL
MAY BE FLOODED INLAND 8 MILES OR MORE.

MORE EXTENSIVE CURTAIN WALL FAILURES WITH SOME

4

131-155 mph

COMPLETE ROOF STRUCTURE FAILURE ON SMALL
RESIDENCES. MAJOR EROSION OF BEACH. MAJOR
DAMAGE TO LOWER FLOORS OF STRUCTURES NEAR THE
SHORE. TERRAIN CONTINUOUSLY LOWER THAN 10 FEET
ASL MAY BE FLOODED REQUIRING MASSIVE
EVACUATION OF RESIDENTIAL AREAS INLAND AS FAR AS
6 MILES.

COMPLETE ROOF FAILURE ON MANY RESIDENCES AND
INDUSTRIAL BUILDINGS. SOME COMPLETE BUILDING

5

155 mph +

FAILURES WITH SMALL UTILITY BUILDINGS BLOWN OVER
OR AWAY. MAJOR DAMAGE TO LOWER FLOORS OF ALL
STRUCTURES LOCATED LESS THAN 15 FEET ASL AND
WITHIN 500 YARDS OF THE SHORELINE. MASSIVE
EVACUATION OF RESIDENTIAL AREAS ON LOW GROUND
WITHIN 5 TO 10 MILES OF THE SHORELINE MAY BE
REQUIRED.

ATLANTIC HURRICANE NAMES
Since 1953, Atlantic tropical storms have been named from lists originated by the
National Hurricane Center and now maintained and updated by an international
committee of the World Meteorological Organization. Experience shows that the use
of short, distinctive given names in written as well as spoken communications is
quicker and less subject to error than the older more cumbersome latitude-longitude
identification methods. These advantages are especially important in exchanging
detailed storm information between hundreds of widely scattered stations, coastal
bases, and ships at sea. The lists featured only women's names until 1979, when
men's and women's names were alternated. Six lists are used in rotation; the 2006
list will be used again in 2012. The only time that there is a change in the list is if a
storm is so deadly or costly that the future use of its name on a different storm

would be inappropriate for reasons of sensitivity. If that occurs, the offending name
is removed from the list and replaced by the WMO committee.
2006
Alberto
Beryl
Chris
Debby
Ernesto
Florence
Gordon
Helene
Isaac
Joyce
Kirk
Leslie
Michael
Nadine
Oscar
Patty
Rafael
Sandy
Tony
Valerie
William

2007

2008

2009

Andrea
Barry
Chantal
Dean
Erin
Felix
Gabrielle
Humberto
Ingrid
Jerry
Karen
Lorenzo
Melissa
Noel
Olga
Pablo
Rebekah
Sebastien
Tanya
Van
Wendy

Arthur
Bertha
Cristobal
Dolly
Edouard
Fay
Gustav
Hanna
Ike
Josephine
Kyle
Laura
Marco
Nana
Omar
Paloma
Rene
Sally
Teddy
Vicky
Wilfred

Ana
Bill
Claudette
Danny
Erika
Fred
Grace
Henri
Ida
Joaquin
Kate
Larry
Mindy
Nicholas
Odette
Peter
Rose
Sam
Teresa
Victor
Wanda

2010
Alex
Bonnie
Colin
Danielle
Earl
Fiona
Gaston
Hermine
Igor
Julia
Karl
Lisa
Matthew
Nicole
Otto
Paula
Richard
Shary
Tomas
Virginie
Walter

2011
Arlene
Bret
Cindy
Don
Emily
Franklin
Gert
Harvey
Irene
Jose
Katia
Lee
Maria
Nate
Ophelia
Philippe
Rina
Sean
Tammy
Vince
Whitney

For more information, please contact the City of New Haven Office of Emergency
Management, 200 Orange Street, New Haven, CT 06510 203.946.8224 or
jmoore@newhavenct.net

