Hurricane

Hurricane
Produced by the
National Disaster
Education Coalition:
American Red Cross,
FEMA, IAEM, IBHS,
NFPA, NWS, USDA/
CSREES, and USGS

Why talk about hurricanes?

There are no other storms like hurricanes on Earth. Views of hurricanes
from satellites located thousands of miles above the Earth show how these
powerful, tightly coiled weather systems are unique. Each year, on average, 10 tropical storms (of which six become hurricanes) develop over the
Atlantic Ocean, Caribbean Sea, or Gulf of Mexico. Many of these storms
remain over the ocean. However, an
average of five hurricanes strike the
An average offive hurricanes k
stri
e the
United States coastline every three
United States coastline every
ree th
years. Of these five, two will be major
years. Of these five,
wotwill be major
hurricanes, which are storms of categohurricanes…
ry 3 or higher on the Saffir-Simpson
scale, which corresponds to hurricanes
with winds at or above 111 miles per hour.
Timely warnings have greatly diminished hurricane fatalities in the
United States. In spite of this, property damage continues to mount. There
is little we can do about the hurricanes themselves. However, the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration‘s (NOAA’s) Tropical Prediction
Center and National Weather Service (NWS) field offices team up with other
federal, state, and local agencies; rescue and relief organizations; the private sector; and the news media in a huge warning and preparedness effort.

What are hurricanes, and what causes them?
Hurricanes and tropical storms are cyclones with tropical origins (tropical
cyclones). When the winds of a tropical storm (winds 39 to 73 miles per
hour) reach a constant speed of 74 miles per hour or more, it is called a
hurricane. Hurricane winds blow in a large spiral around a relatively calm
center known as the “eye.” The “eye” is generally 20 to 30 miles wide, and
the storm may have a diameter of 400 miles across. As a hurricane
approaches, the skies will begin to darken and winds will grow in strength.
Talking About Disaster: Guide for Standard Messages

81

A hurricane can bring torrential rains, high winds, and storm surge as it
nears land. A single hurricane can last more than two weeks over open
waters and can run a path across the entire length of the eastern seaboard.
More dangerous than the high winds of a hurricane is the storm
surge — a dome of ocean water that can be 20 feet high at its peak and 50
to 100 miles wide. The surge can devastate coastal communities as it
sweeps ashore. In recent years, the fatalities associated with storm surge
have been greatly reduced as a result of better warning and preparedness
within coastal communities.
Most deaths due to tropical cyclones are flood-related. Inland flooding is
a common occurrence with hurricanes and tropical storms. Torrential rains
from decaying hurricanes and tropical storms can produce extensive urban
and river flooding. Winds from these storms located offshore can drive
ocean water up the mouth of rivers, compounding the severity of inland
flooding. Inland streams and rivers can flood and trigger landslides.
Mudslides can occur in mountainous regions. In addition, hurricanes can
spawn tornadoes, which add to the destructiveness of the storm.
Learn about hurricane risk in your community by contacting your local
emergency management office, National Weather Service office, or
American Red Cross chapter.

Awareness Information
•

A National Weather Service WATCH is a message indicating that conditions favor the occurrence of a certain type of hazardous weather. For
example, a severe thunderstorm watch means that a severe thunderstorm is expected in the next six hours or so within an area approximately 120 to 150 miles wide and 300 to 400 miles long (36,000 to
60,000 square miles). The NWS Storm Prediction Center issues such
watches. Local NWS forecast offices issue other watches (flash flood,
winter weather, etc.) 12 to 36 hours in advance of a possible hazardousweather or flooding event. Each local forecast office usually covers a
state or a portion of a state.

•

An NWS WARNING indicates that a hazardous event is occurring or is
imminent in about 30 minutes to an hour. Local NWS forecast offices
issue warnings on a county-by-county basis.

•

A hurricane WATCH is issued when there is a threat of hurricane conditions within 24 to 36 hours.

•

A hurricane WARNING is issued when hurricane conditions are expected in 24 hours or less.

Many people do not realize the threat of hurricanes as each one
is different. Over the past several years, U.S. hurricane warning systems
have provided adequate time for people on barrier islands and the immediate coastline to move inland when hurricanes threaten. However, due to

82 Hurricane

rapid population growth, it is becoming more difficult to evacuate people
from the barrier islands and other coastal areas because roads have not
kept pace with the expansion. The problem is further compounded by the
fact that 80 to 90 percent of the population now living in hurricane-prone
areas have never experienced the core of a “major” hurricane. Many of
these people have been through weaker storms. The result is a false
impression of a hurricane’s damage potential. This often leads to complacency and delayed actions, which could result in the loss of many lives.

Plan for a Hurricane
Develop a Family Disaster Plan. Please see the “Family Disaster Plan”
section for general family planning information. Hurricane-specific planning
should include the following:
•

Learn about your community’s risk from hurricanes. Contact your
local emergency management office, local National Weather Service
office, or local chapter of the American Red Cross for more information
on hurricanes and how to prepare for them.

•

If your community is at risk from hurricanes, contact the local
emergency management office or planning and zoning office to
find out if you live in an area that could flood during a hurricane
or heavy rains. If you live in a risk area, learn what types of supplies
should be stored to protect your home from flood waters. Knowing the
elevation of your property in relation to nearby streams and dams will
let you know if forecasted flood levels will affect your home.

If you are at risk from hurricanes:
•

Talk to your insurance agent. Homeowners’ policies do not cover
flooding from hurricanes. Ask about the National Flood Insurance
Program (NFIP).

•

Ask about your community’s hurricane preparedness plan. The
local emergency management office or local chapter of the American
Red Cross should be able to provide you with details of this plan, including information on the safest evacuation routes, nearby shelters, advice
on when schools would be closed and what conditions are necessary
for recommended evacuation of certain areas.

•

Develop an evacuation plan. (See “Evacuation” in the “Family
Disaster Plan” section.) Everyone in your family should know where to
go if they have to leave. Trying to make plans at the last minute can be
upsetting and create confusion.

•

Determine where to move your boat in an emergency. Marinas
and other storage facilities may fill up quickly. Some locations may have
less risk of damage than others. You may be required to secure your
boat well in advance of approaching hurricanes.
Talking About Disaster: Guide for Standard Messages

83

•

Discuss hurricanes with your family. Everyone should know what to
do in case all family members are not together. Discussing hurricanes
ahead of time will help reduce fear and anxiety, and lets everyone know
how to respond. Review flood safety and
Assemble a Disaster
preparedness measures with your family.

Supplies Kit

Please see the “Disaster Supplies Kit”
section for general supplies kit information.
Hurricane-specific supplies should include
the following:
• A week’s supply of food and water (to
be kept at home in addition to the recommended three-day supply for your
evacuation kit).
• Disaster Supply Kit basics.
• Evacuation Supplies Kit.

84 Hurricane

How to Protect Your Property
•

Make a list of items to bring inside in the
event of a storm. A list will help you remember
anything that can be broken or picked up by
strong winds. Hurricane winds, often in excess of
100 miles per hour, can turn unanchored items
into deadly missiles, causing damage or injury
when they hit.

•

Keep trees and shrubbery trimmed. Make trees more wind resistant
by removing diseased or damaged limbs, then strategically remove
branches so that wind can blow through. Hurricane winds frequently
break weak limbs and hurl them at great speed, causing great damage
when they hit property. Debris collection services may not be operating
just before a storm, so it is best to do this well in advance of approaching storms.

•

Remove any debris or loose items in your yard. Hurricane winds
can pick up anything unsecured, creating damage to property when the
debris hits.

•

Clear loose and clogged rain gutters and downspouts. Hurricanes
often bring long periods of heavy rain. Providing clear drainage will help
prevent misdirected flooding.

•

Install permanent hurricane shutters. Hurricane shutters provide
the best protection for your windows and doors. Taping windows could
take critical time from more effective preparedness measures. All tape
does is help prevent glass from broken windows from scattering all over
inside. Tape does not prevent windows from breaking. Cover the outside of windows with shutters or plywood.

•

If you do not have permanent hurricane shutters, install anchors
for plywood (marine plywood is best) and predrill holes in precut half-inch outdoor plywood boards so that you can cover the
windows of your home quickly. Mark which board fits which window. Note: Tape does not prevent windows from breaking, so taping
windows is not recommended. Most homes destroyed during recent
hurricanes had no window protection. When wind enters a home
through broken windows, the pressure builds against the walls and can
lift roofs, followed by collapsing walls.

•

Install protection to the outside areas of sliding glass doors.
Glass doors are as vulnerable as windows to breakage by wind-driven
objects.

•

Well ahead of time, buy any other items needed to board up
windows and protect your home. When a hurricane threatens, supplies are quickly sold out at many stores. Stock may not be replenished
until after the storm.

•

Strengthen garage doors. Many houses are destroyed by hurricane
winds that enter through damaged garage doors, lifting roofs, and
destroying the remainder of the house.

•

Have an engineer check your home and advise about ways to
make it more resistant to hurricane winds. There are a variety of
ways to protect your home. Professionals can advise you of engineering
requirements, building permits or requirements of local planning and
zoning departments to provide the most effective protection.

•

Elevate coastal homes. Raising houses to a certain height will make
them more resistant to hurricane-driven waters. There may be many
local codes affecting how and where homes can be elevated. Meet with
your emergency manager or planning and zoning official for a description of the process to have your home elevated. There may also be
community funds available for such measures.

•

If you live in a flood plain or are prone to flooding, also follow
flood preparedness precautions. Hurricanes can bring great
amounts of rain and frequently cause floods. Some hurricanes have
dropped more than 10 inches of rain in just a few hours.

Media and Community Education Ideas
•

Publish a special section in your local newspaper with emergency information on hurricanes. Localize the information by printing the phone
number of local emergency services offices, the American Red Cross
chapter, and the nearest hospitals.

•

Provide hurricane tracking charts to local schools.

•

Work with local emergency services and American Red Cross officials to
prepare special reports to people with mobility impairments on what to
do if an evacuation is ordered.

•

At the beginning of each hurricane season, encourage the emergency
response organizations to review community hurricane disaster plans.

•

Publicize and promote a hurricane awareness week.

•

Stage a simulated evacuation to show your community what
can happen.

•

Periodically inform your community of local public warning systems.
Talking About Disaster: Guide for Standard Messages

85

•

Publish emergency evacuation routes.

What to Do During a Hurricane WATCH

86 Hurricane

•

Continue listening regularly to a NOAA Weather Radio or local
radio or television stations for updated information. Hurricanes
can change direction, intensity, and speed very suddenly. What was a
minor threat several hours ago can quickly escalate to a major threat.

•

Listen to the advice of local officials, and evacuate if they tell
you to do so. Avoid flooded roads and watch for washed-out bridges.
Leaving an area that may be affected will help keep your family safe.
Local officials may call for evacuation in specific areas at greatest risk in
your community. Following the advice of local authorities is your safest
protection. Local officials may close down certain roads, especially near
the coast, when the outer effects of increasing wind and rain from a
hurricane reach the coast.

•

Prepare your property for high winds. Hurricane winds can blow
large, heavy objects and send them crashing into homes. Anything not
secured may become a deadly or damaging projectile.
■

Bring lawn furniture inside, as well as outdoor decorations or ornaments, trash cans, hanging plants, or anything else that can be
picked up by the wind.

■

Make trees more wind resistant by removing diseased and damaged
limbs, then strategically remove branches so that wind can blow
through.

■

Secure building by closing and boarding up each window of your
home. Remove outside antennas.

■

Moor boat securely or move it to a designated safe place. Use rope
or chain to secure boat to trailer. Use tie-downs to anchor trailer to
the ground or house.

•

Fill your car’s gas tank. If advised to evacuate, you may have to travel long distances or be caught in traffic, idling for long periods of time.
Gas stations along the route may be closed.

•

Stock up on prescription medications. Stores and pharmacies may
be closed after the storm.

•

Recheck manufactured home tie-downs. Manufactured homes may
not be as affected by strong winds if they are tied down according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. Properly tied down homes are more likely
to stay fixed to their foundations.

•

Check your Disaster Supplies Kit. Some supplies may need to be
replaced or restocked.

•

Turn refrigerator and freezer to coldest setting. Open only when
absolutely necessary and close quickly. Keeping the coldest air in
will help perishables last much longer in the event of a power failure.

•

Store valuables and personal papers in a safety deposit box in a
waterproof container on the highest level of your home.
Hurricanes leave much water damage inside homes. Historically, it is
shown that protecting valuables in this manner will provide the best
security.

•

Turn off utilities if told to do so by authorities. Authorities may ask
you to turn off water or electric utilities to prevent damage to your
home or within the community. Most of the time they will tell you to
leave the gas on because a professional is required to turn your gas
back on, and it may be several weeks before you receive service.

•

Turn off propane tanks. Propane tanks may be damaged or dislodged
by strong winds or water. Turning them off reduces the fire potential if
they are damaged by the storm.

•

Unplug small appliances. Small appliances may be affected by electrical power surges that may occur as the storm approaches. Unplugging
them reduces potential damage.

•

Review evacuation plan. Make sure your planned route is the same
as the currently recommended route. Sometimes roads may be closed
or blocked, requiring a different route.

•

Stay away from flood waters. If you come upon a flooded road, turn
around and go another way. When you are caught on a flooded road
and waters are rising rapidly around you, if you can do so safely, get out
of your vehicle and climb to higher ground. Most hurricane-related
deaths are caused by floods, and most flood fatalities are caused by
people attempting to drive through water. The depth of water is not
always obvious. The roadbed may be washed out under the water, and
you could be stranded or trapped. Rapidly rising water may stall the
engine, engulf the vehicle and its occupants, and sweep them away.
Two feet of water will carry away most automobiles.

What to Do During a Hurricane WARNING
•

Listen to a NOAA Weather Radio, or portable, battery-powered
radio or television for updated information and official instructions. Hurricanes can change direction, intensity, and speed very suddenly. Continue listening for local information.

•

If officials announce a hurricane warning, they may ask you to
leave your home as soon as possible to be safe. Take your
Disaster Supplies Kit and go to a shelter or your family contact’s
home. Call your check-in contact so someone will know where
Talking About Disaster: Guide for Standard Messages

87

you are going. Local officials advise leaving only if they truly believe
your location is in danger. It is important to follow their instructions as
soon as possible. Roads may become blocked and the storm can worsen, preventing safe escape. Having your disaster supplies will make you
more comfortable while you are away from home.

88 Hurricane

•

If you are not advised to evacuate, stay indoors, on the first
floor away from windows, skylights and glass doors, even if they
are covered. Stay on the floor least likely to be affected by strong
winds and flood waters. A small interior room without windows on the
first floor is usually the safest place. Have as many walls between you
and the outside winds as possible. Sometimes strong winds and projectiles may tear hurricane shutters off, so stay away from windows even if
they are covered. Lie on the floor under a table or other sturdy object.
Being under a sturdy object will offer greater protection from falling
objects.

•

Close all interior doors. Secure and brace external doors. Closed
doors will help prevent damaging hurricane winds from entering additional rooms.

•

Have a supply of flashlights and extra batteries handy. Avoid
using open flames (candles and kerosene lamps) as a source of light.
Flashlights provide the safest emergency lighting source. Between 1984
and 1998, candle-related deaths from home fires following hurricanes
were three times greater than the number of deaths related to the direct
impact of the hurricane. Kerosene lamps require a great deal of ventilation and are not designed for indoor use.

•

Store drinking water in clean bathtubs, sinks, plastic bottles,
and cooking utensils. Public water supplies and wells may become
contaminated, or electric pumps may be inoperative if power is lost.
Survivors of community-wide disasters have said the individual’s greatest need following the disaster is water.

•

If power is lost, turn off major appliances to reduce the power
“surge” when electricity is restored. When electricity is restored, the
surge from many major appliances starting at the same time may cause
damage or destroy the appliances. Turning off or unplugging major
appliances will allow you to decide when it is best to turn them back on.

•

If in a mobile home, check tie-downs and evacuate immediately.
Historically, manufactured homes suffer the greatest amount of damage
during hurricanes. Prior to 1994, most manufactured homes were not
designed to withstand even moderate winds.

•

Be aware that the calm “eye” is deceptive; the storm is not
over. The worst part of the storm will happen once the eye passes
over and the winds blow from the opposite direction. Trees, shrubs,

buildings, and other objects damaged by the first winds can be broken
or destroyed by the second winds. The opposing winds begin suddenly,
and have surprised and injured many people who ventured out
during the eye.
•

Watch out for flooding. Hurricanes and tropical storms often drop
large amounts of rainfall and cause severe flooding, even when they
are weakening or are no longer a named storm. “Weak” tropical storms
are just as capable of producing heavy rainfall and flooding as major
hurricanes.

•

Be alert for tornadoes. Tornadoes can happen during and after a
hurricane passes over. Remain indoors on a lower level, in the center
of your home, in a closet or bathroom without windows. Going below
ground, such as to a basement or storm cellar, increases your risk
from flood.

What to Do if Evacuation Is Necessary
•

Leave as soon as possible (if possible, in daylight). Avoid flooded
roads and watch for washed-out bridges. Roads and bridges frequently
become crowded and traffic moves slow. Evacuation will probably take
longer than expected. Give yourself plenty of time.

•

Secure your home by unplugging appliances and turning off
electricity and the main water valve. This will reduce potential
damage to your appliances (from power surges) and to your home.

•

Tell someone outside of the storm area where you are going.
Relatives and friends will be concerned about your safety. Letting someone know your travel plans will help relieve their fear and anxiety.

•

If time permits, and you live in an identified surge zone or area
prone to flooding, move furniture to a higher floor. Moving valuable furnishings helps reduce potential damage.

•

Bring preassembled emergency supplies and warm protective
clothing. People frequently arrive at shelters or hotels with nothing.
Having these items will make you more comfortable in other locations.

•

While shelters provide a safe place to stay and food, specialty items for
infants and individuals on restricted diets may not be available. It may
take several days until permission is given by local authorities to reenter an evacuated area. Bring these items with you to a shelter:
■

First aid kit, manual, and prescription medications.

■

Baby food and diapers.

■

Cards, games, books.

■

Toiletries.
Talking About Disaster: Guide for Standard Messages

89

•

■

Battery-powered radio and extra batteries.

■

Flashlight (one per person) and extra batteries.

■

Blankets or sleeping bags.

■

Identification.

■

Valuable papers (copies of insurance papers, passports, and other
essential documents).

Lock up your home and leave. There may be individuals evacuating
after you, or returning before you. Police may be busy with hurricanerelated emergencies and not able to patrol neighborhoods as usual.
Lock your property as you normally would when leaving home.

What to Do After a Hurricane

90 Hurricane

•

Continue listening to local radio or television stations or a
NOAA Weather Radio for information and instructions. Access
may be limited to some parts of the community, or roads may be
blocked.

•

If you evacuated, return home when local officials tell you it is
safe. Local officials on the scene are your best source of information on
accessible areas and passable roads.

•

Stay alert for extended rainfall and subsequent flooding, even
after the hurricane or tropical storm has weakened. Hurricanes
may stall or change direction when they make landfall, or they may
bring a lot of rain upriver, causing additional flood hazards for hours or
days after the storm.

•

Stay away from flood waters. Drive only if absolutely necessary and
avoid flooded roads and washed-out bridges. Continue to follow all
flood safety messages. Flood waters may last for days following a hurricane. If you come upon a flooded road, turn around and go another
way. When you are caught on a flooded road and waters are rising
rapidly around you, if you can safely get out of the car, do so immediately and climb to higher ground. Never try to walk, swim, or drive
through such swift water. Most flood fatalities are caused by people
attempting to drive through water or people playing in high water. If it is
moving swiftly, even water six inches deep can sweep you off your feet,
and two feet can carry away most automobiles.

•

If you come upon a barricade, follow detour signs or turn
around and go another way. Barricades are put up by local officials
to protect people from unsafe roads. Driving around them can be a serious risk.

•

Stay on firm ground. Moving water only six inches deep can sweep
you off your feet. Standing water may be electrically charged from

underground or downed power lines.
•

Help injured or trapped persons. Give first aid where appropriate.
Do not move seriously injured persons unless they are in immediate
danger of further injury. Call for help.

•

Help a neighbor who may require special assistance — infants,
elderly people and people with disabilities. Elderly people and people with disabilities may require additional assistance. People who care
for them or who have large families may need additional assistance in
emergency situations.

•

Avoid disaster areas. Your presence might hamper rescue and other
emergency operations, and put you at further risk from the residual
effects of floods, such as contaminated waters, crumbled roads, landslides, mudflows, and other hazards.

•

Avoid loose or dangling power lines; immediately report them to
the power company, police, or fire department. Reporting potential hazards will get the utilities turned off as quickly as possible, preventing further hazard and injury.

•

Electrical equipment should be checked and dried before being
returned to service. Call an electrician for advice before using electricity, which may have received water damage.

•

Stay out of the building if water remains around the building.
Flood waters often undermine foundations, causing buildings to sink,
floors to crack, or walls to collapse.

•

When entering buildings, use extreme caution. Hurricane-driven
flood waters may have damaged buildings where you least expect it.
Carefully watch every step you take.
■

Wear sturdy shoes. The most common injury following a disaster
is cut feet.

■

Use battery-powered lanterns or flashlights when examining
buildings. Battery-powered lighting is the safest and easiest, preventing fire hazard for the user, occupants, and building.

■

Examine walls, floors, doors, staircases, and windows to
make sure that the building is not in danger of collapsing.

■

Inspect foundations for cracks or other damage. Cracks and
damage to a foundation can render a building uninhabitable.

■

Look for fire hazards. There may be broken or leaking gas lines,
flooded electrical circuits, or submerged furnaces or electrical appliances. Flammable or explosive materials may come from upstream.
Fire is the most frequent hazard following floods.

■

Check for gas leaks. If you smell gas or hear a blowing or hissing
Talking About Disaster: Guide for Standard Messages

91

noise, open a window and quickly leave the building. Turn off the
gas, using the outside main valve if you can, and call the gas company from a neighbor’s home. If you turn off the gas for any reason, it
must be turned back on by a professional.

92 Hurricane

■

Look for electrical system damage. If you see sparks or broken
or frayed wires, or if you smell burning insulation, turn off the electricity at the main fuse box or circuit breaker. If you have to step in
water to get to the fuse box or circuit breaker, call an electrician first
for advice. Electrical equipment should be checked and dried before
being returned to service.

■

Check for sewage and water line damage. If you suspect
sewage lines are damaged, avoid using the toilets and call a
plumber. If water pipes are damaged, contact the water company,
and avoid using water from the tap. You can obtain safe water from
undamaged water heaters or by melting ice cubes.

■

Watch out for animals, especially poisonous snakes, that may
have come into buildings with the flood waters. Use a stick
to poke through debris. Flood waters flush many animals and
snakes out of their homes.

■

Watch for loose plaster, drywall, and ceilings that could fall.

■

Take pictures of the damage, both of the building and its
contents, for insurance claims.

•

Open windows and doors to ventilate and dry your home.

•

Check refrigerated food for spoilage. If power was lost, some foods
may be spoiled.

•

Avoid drinking or preparing food with tap water until you are
certain it is not contaminated. Hurricane-driven flood waters
may have contaminated public water supplies or wells. Local officials
should advise you on the safety of the drinking water. Undamaged
water heaters or melted ice cubes can provide good sources of fresh
drinking water.

•

Pump out flooded basements gradually (about one-third of the
water per day) to avoid structural damage. If the water is pumped
out completely in a short period of time, pressure from water on the
outside could cause basement walls to collapse.

•

Service damaged septic tanks, cesspools, pits, and leaching
systems as soon as possible. Damaged sewage systems are health
hazards.

•

Use the telephone only for emergency calls. Telephone lines are
frequently overwhelmed in disaster situations. They need to be clear for
emergency calls to get through.

