Mountains and  
Climate Change 

From Understanding to Action

 2012
3rd edition
First edition 2009
Second edition 2010

Published by the Centre for Development and Environment (CDE), Institute of Geography,   
University of Bern, with the support of the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC) 

Copyright: Geographica Bernensia and SDC 2010

Editors: Thomas Kohler (CDE), Daniel Maselli (SDC)

Concept: Daniel Maselli (SDC), Thomas Kohler (CDE) 
Design and Layout: Simone Kummer (CDE) 
Proofreading: Theodore Wachs (CDE)
Cartography / Statistics:  Ursula Gaemperli Krauer, Jurg Krauer, Sylvia Loercher (CDE) 

 

 

Alex Hermann (Institute of Geography, University of Bern)

Citation:
Kohler T. and Maselli D. (eds) 2009. Mountains and Climate Change - From Understanding to Action. 
Published by Geographica Bernensia with the support of the Swiss Agency for Development and 
Cooperation (SDC), and an international team of contributors. Bern.

This publication is available from:
Mountain Partnership Secretariat  FAO  
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00153 Rome - Italy 
www.mountainpartnership.org

Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC)
CH-3003 Bern, Switzerland
www.deza.admin.ch

Centre for Development and Environment (CDE)
University of Bern
CH-3012 Bern, Switzerland 
www.cde.unibe.ch 

Cover photo: Daniel Maselli

ISBN: 978-3-905835-16-8

Contents

Foreword 

1  Climate Change in Mountains 

2   Mountain Waters 
 
 

Key Issues, and Case Studies from the European Alps, 
Andes, and Rocky Mountains

3  Mountain Glaciers 
 
 

Key Issues, and Case Studies from Peru, New Zealand,  
the European Alps, and the Hindu Kush-Himalaya 

4  Mountain Hazards 
 
 

Key Issues, and Case Studies from Kyrgyzstan, Iceland,  
Switzerland, and Peru

5  Mountain Biodiversity 
Key Issues, and Case Studies from  
 
 
the Hindu Kush-Himalaya, and Mount Kilimanjaro

6  Food Security in Mountains 
 
 

Key Issues, and Case Studies from Peru, Nepal, 
India and Morocco

7  Migration and Mountains  
 

Key Issues, and Case Study from Central Asia

Mountains and Climate Change:  
  A Global Concern 

References 

3

5

11

21

31

41

49

59

67 

72 

Authors and Reviewers 

Inside Back Cover

2

Foreword

Mountains are among the regions most sensitive to cli-
mate change. Some of the most visible indicators of cli-
mate  change  come  from  mountain  areas,  such  as  the 
widespread  retreat  of  glaciers  that  has  been  observed 
from  polar  to  tropical  regions  in  recent  decades.  The 
sensitive  position  of  mountain  areas  has  been  clearly 
highlighted by the IPCC in its latest report in 2007.

Mountains  provide  freshwater  to  half  of  the  worlds 
population and are home to half of all global biodiver-
sity  hotspots.  Mountains  are  also  important  areas  for 
recreation in an increasingly urbanized world. This raises crucial questions: How will 
these vital services be affected by climate change? Will mountain areas continue 
to provide the same amount of freshwater as they have in the past? What will be 
the magnitude and the impact of climate change in mountains and their adjacent 
lowlands? Where will the changes take place and who will be most affected? 

The  present  publication  aims  to  create  awareness  about  potential  changes  and 
related challenges for global development. It shows that not all is doom and gloom 
by presenting nascent and promising initiatives at the local, national, and interna-
tional level. These endeavors attempt both to face the challenges presented by cli-
mate change and to take advantage of emerging opportunities wherever possible. 

Switzerland is often seen as a mountain country par excellence. The Swiss Agency 
for Development and Cooperation SDC has supported the development of moun-
tain regions worldwide since the early days of its involvement in international de-
velopment cooperation. Many of SDCs first programmes were anchored in moun-
tainous countries. Mountain regions and their development have thus retained an 
important position in our engagement with development up to the present day.

Together  with  its  partners,  SDC  has  supported  regional  and  global  initiatives  to 
strengthen the position of mountains on the international agenda. Prominent ex-
amples include the creation of Chapter 13 on mountains in Agenda 21, adopted 
at the Earth Summit in Rio in 1992; engagement within the UN Commission on 
Sustainable Development (CSD) and the related resolutions on mountains in 2007 
and 2009; support for the International Year of Mountains IYM 2002 and the es-
tablishment of the International Mountain Partnership initiative in the wake of the 
World Summit for Sustainable Development in Johannesburg 2002. 

Dear readers: The present publication, prepared on the occasion of the United Na-
tions Framework Convention on Climate Change UNFCCC 2009 in Copenhagen, 
underscores Switzerlands commitment to sustainable mountain development. It is 
my hope that it will help raise awareness about the key role played by mountain re-
gions in global development. May it also promote practical action in the face of the 
manifold challenges and the probable opportunities that climate change presents 
for mountain regions in an ever faster changing world. 

 
 

Martin Dahinden
Director General
Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation

3
3

Climate Change 
in Mountains

S. Kummer

Climate Change in Mountains

The global context 

Man-made greenhouse gas emissions are expected to lead 
to average global warming in the period 1990-2100 of be-
tween  1.1  and  6.4C,  depending  on  the  global  release  of 
greenhouse gas emissions.

Urs Neu 
ProClim 
Forum for Climate and Global Change  
Swiss Academy of Sciences, Bern, Switzerland

Pamir from the air (D. Maselli)

This  warming  will  not  be  uniform  but  will  vary  considerably  between  different 
regions. In general, it will be greater over land and in high northern latitudes. The 
most robust precipitation projections are for increases in the monsoon regions and 
in middle and high latitudes, and a decrease in the subtropics. The area of snow 
cover will decrease in general, while snowfall may increase in regions with very 
cold  temperatures  such  as  high  mountains.  Most  glaciers  and  ice  caps  will  lose 
mass or disappear in the long term.

Figures 1.2 and 1.3 show the regional distribution of temperature and precipita-
tion changes and the position of principal mountain regions. While most mountain 
areas are in regions of medium to high temperature change, changes in precipita-
tion vary considerably for different mountain areas.

Climate change: Mountain specificities

Climate change is a reality today, and some of the best evidence such as melting gla-
ciers comes from mountain areas. Many scientists believe that the changes occurring 
in mountain ecosystems may provide an early glimpse of what could come to pass in 
lowland environments, and that mountains thus act as early warning systems. 

Mountains  exist  in  many  regions  of  the  world.  They  occupy  very  different  posi-
tions on the globe and they differ in shape, extension, altitude, vegetation cover, 
and climate regime. They will therefore be affected differently by climate change. 
However, they share some common features relating to climate change:

Firstly, mountain areas have a marked and complex topography and so their cli-
mates vary considerably over short distances (Figure 1.1). Climate change projec-
tions are therefore difficult to make. Unfortunately, reliable long-term and high-
altitude records of mountain climate which allow verification of regional climate 
models exist for only a very few areas such as the European Alps.

6

Secondly, temperature changes with altitude. The impacts of a warmer climate are 
different for different elevations. Areas at the snow line or freezing line will be af-
fected particularly heavily, as they might undergo a shift from mainly snow-covered 
to mainly snow-free. For example, every degree Celsius increase in temperature will 
cause the snow line to rise on average by about 150 m, and even more at lower el-
evations. In such regions precipitation will change from snow to rain. The decrease 
in snow cover will lead to an above-average warming of mountains, because snow-
free surfaces absorb much more radiation than snow-covered surfaces. 

Thirdly, melting of glaciers and permafrost will trigger the release of loose rock and 
soil and exacerbate the danger of rockfall, debris flows, and mud flows. A specific 
risk is the build-up of glacial lakes and the threat of lake outbursts, which could 
result in destruction of property and death. 

Fourthly, mountains themselves play a major role in influencing regional and glo-
bal climates. They act as barriers for wind flow, which induces enhanced precipita-
tion on the windward side, and reduced precipitation and warmer temperatures 
on the leeward side. Changes in atmospheric wind flow patterns may induce large 
and  locally  varying  precipitation  responses  in  mountain  areas,  which  could  be 
much stronger than average regional climate change (IPCC 2007a). For example, 
model simulations show that in Scandinavian mountains, enhanced westerly wind 
flow might induce up to a 70% increase in precipitation, while average warming 
without changes in wind flows would lead to an increase in precipitation of up to 
only 20%.

Overall, model simulations of climate change in mountain areas are very difficult 
because existing climate models do not yet adequately represent complex topo-
graphy and its effects on climate. This lack of more precise, regional models con-
cerns the largest mountain massifs in the world including the Andes, the Hindu 
Kush-Himalaya, and Central Asia. As a result, the magnitude of projected changes 
in temperature and precipitation still differs greatly between models, for extremes 
as well as for mean values.

high

semi-arid
subtropical
mountains

humid
tropical
mountains

Figure 1.1: Altitudinal gradients of precipitation 
in different mountain regions of the world.

arid
mountains

e
d
u
t
i
t
l
A

humid
mountains
in temperate
zones

semi-humid
tropical
mountains

low

wol

Precipitation

hgih

Precipitation increases with altitude due to uplift of air masses and condensation - the main reason for 
the role of mountains as water towers of the world (see Chapter 2). Precipitation maxima vary and occur 
at  different altitudes in different mountain regions of the world (Richter 1996).
 

7

Projected patterns of temperature changes

Figure 1.2: Changes in temperature at the end 
of the 21st century compared to 1990 for a 
high greenhouse gas emission scenario. White 
contours depict important mountain regions. 
(adapted from IPCC 2007, Fig. WGI-SPM-6)

 IPCC 2007: WG1-AR4

0 0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5 3 3.5 4 4.5 5 5.5 6 6.5 7 7.5

Temperature C

Mountains and highlands > 1000 m (generalised; without Antarctica) 

Cartography, mountains: Ulla Gaemperli Krauer, CDE University of Bern 2009

Projected patterns of precipitation changes
Multi-model A1B
December/January/February

%

-20

-10
Multi-model A1B

-5

5

20

10
June/July/August

Figure 1.3: Relative changes in precipitation  
(in %) at the end of the 21st century relative  
to 1990 for a medium greenhouse gas 
 emission scenario in the Northern Hemisphere 
in winter (left) and  summer (bottom). Purple 
contours depict  important mountain regions.  
(adapted from IPCC 2007, Fig. WGI-SPM-7) 1

Mountains and highlands > 1000 m (generalised; without Antarctica) 
> 90% of the models agree
< 66% of the models agree
in the sign of the change
in the sign of the change

 IPCC 2007: WG1-AR4

Cartography, mountains: Ulla Gaemperli Krauer, CDE University of Bern 2009

8

Permission for reproduction 
by IPCC 02/11/09

Regional climate projections for mountain regions

Andes
Annual  precipitation  is  likely  to  decrease  in  the  southern  Andes,  with  relative 
changes being the greatest from June to August. For the rest of the Andes, future 
precipitation changes will depend heavily on changes in El Nino patterns, which 
are poorly understood at present. A recent regional climate model study for the 
tropical Andes shows more warming at higher elevations and an increase in inter-
annual temperature variability for scenarios with greater global warming (Urrutia 
and Vuille 2009). Glaciers in many parts of the tropical Andes may disappear over 
the  next  few  decades,  which  could  entail  severe  problems  in  water  supply    in 
Peru,  for  example,  10  million  residents  of  Lima  depend  on  freshwater  from  the 
Andes.

Rocky Mountains
Higher  elevation  sites  in  the  Rocky  Mountains  have  experienced  a  threefold  in-
crease in warming compared to the global average during the last few decades. 
Climate models show above-average warming with the greatest warming at high 
latitudes from December to February, and from June to August in the mid-latitudes. 
Annual mean precipitation will increase, except in the South, but precipitation is 
influenced by El Nino and the North Atlantic Oscillation, for which predictions are 
uncertain. There will be earlier snowmelt in spring and a shift from snowfall to 
rainfall, particularly at middle and lower altitudes. Moreover, the incidence of for-
est wildfires has increased significantly in recent decades; this is closely associated 
with increased spring and summer temperatures and with earlier spring snowmelt 
(Westerling et al 2006). 

Hindu Kush-Himalaya
As the largest high-elevation land mass in the world, the Himalaya-Tibet massif 
plays an important role in global climate and climate change. Warming is predict-
ed to be well above the global average, which can be seen even in global climate 
projections (see Fig. 1.2). Many climate models project that monsoonal flows will 
weaken, which would lead to a precipitation decrease. However, it seems probable 
that this effect is more than offset by enhanced water transport due to greater 
moisture  in  warmer  air.  Model  projections  show  an  increase  of  precipitation  in 
December, January and February. These projections are uncertain, as they depend 
on poorly known changes in the monsoon regime and El Nino patterns.

European Alps
In general, Europe has shown a greater warming trend since 1979 compared to 
the  global  mean,  and  the  trends  in  mountainous  regions  are  still  higher  (Bohm 
et  al  2001).  Regional  climate  projections  indicate  warming  of  about  1.5  times 
the global average, with greater warming in summer. Precipitation is projected to 
decrease in summer and on an annual average, and to increase in winter. General 
warming is expected to lead to an upward shift of the glacier equilibrium line by 
between 60 to 140 m per C temperature increase (Oerlemans 2003), along with 
a substantial glacier retreat during the 21st century. The duration of snow cover 
is expected to decrease by several weeks for each degree C of warming at middle 
elevations in the Alps region. 

9
9

Mountain 
Waters

Tarfala Valley, Lapland, Sweden (D. Viviroli)

Daniel Viviroli, Bruno Messerli,  
Bruno Schadler, Rolf Weingartner
Institute of Geography, University of Bern 
Switzerland

Water Towers in a Changing World

Lake Ladtjojaure, Sweden (D. Viviroli)

Mountain waters, a key resource for development 

Mountains are the water towers of the world. They provide 
freshwater  to  half  of  the  worlds  population  for  irrigation, 
industry, domestic use and hydropower. But mountains are 
also among the regions most sensitive to climate change.

Global assessments of mountain water resources are challenging owing to the lim-
ited data available. An initial comprehensive global overview was recently created 
based on a set of global maps at a resolution of 50  50 km2 (Figure 2.1;  Viviroli et 
al 2007). Analysis of this overview shows that even in temperate climates, which 
are relatively water-abundant, mountains deliver about twice as much runoff per 
unit area as lowlands. In arid zones, mountains provide as much as 7 times more 
runoff than lowlands; in these dry water-scarce zones, mountains frequently con-
tribute as much as 90% or more to the total runoff of a river basin (Figure 2.2, 
 Viviroli et al 2003). The importance of mountains is particularly pronounced in sub-
tropical regions with a high variability of precipitation, especially if they depend 
on a single rainy season. Cases in point are the countries of monsoon Asia, such 
as India and Pakistan, as well as Southeast Asia and southern China, where about 
1.3 billion people or close to 20% of the global population depend on mountain 
waters  from  the  Himalaya,  Karakoram,  and  Tien  Shan  massifs  and  from  Tibet. 
Other large mountain systems critically important for water supply are the Rocky 
Mountains, the Andes, the mountains of the Middle East, the Atlas Mountains, 
and the mountains of South Africa. In addition, a number of regional  water tow-
ers found on each continent play a key role. In East Africa, for example, Mount 
Kenya is the only source of freshwater for over 7 million people. 

Implications of climate change

Temperature and precipitation in the form of rainfall and snow largely determine 
the hydrological cycle, including runoff. Changes in these factors will thus impact 
freshwater  supplies  from  mountain  areas  and  have  implications  for  water  avail-
ability in the lowlands. Snow cover is particularly sensitive, as it reacts quickly to 
changes in temperature. In a warmer world, a smaller fraction of winter precipita-
tion will fall as snow, and the melting of winter snow will occur earlier in spring. 
This will lead to a shift of the seasonal runoff maximum to winter and early spring. 
At present, the seasonal maximum occurs in summer and autumn, when demand 

12

in the surrounding lowlands is highest. Where no sufficient storage capacities are 
available, much of the winter runoff will flow directly to the oceans. Such changes 
in  seasonal  maxima,  predicted  by  the  IPCC  with  high  confidence,  have  already 
been observed in some regions such as the Rocky Mountains and the European 
Alps. Their future impacts are likely to be severe, since more than one billion peo-
ple, or one-sixth of the earths population, rely on snow-melt dominated runoff 
for their water supply (Barnett et al 2005). To this the impact of shrinking glaciers 
will be added, which is more limited to mountain regions but has the potential to 
jeopardise large irrigation systems that rely on glacier melt runoff, such as those 
found  in  the  mountains  and  forelands  of  the  Andes.  Regions  where  the  water 
supply is dominated by snow and glacier melt, such as the Hindu Kush-Himalaya 
and the Rocky Mountains, will also be highly vulnerable, particularly where water 
systems are already over-allocated, as in the Western US (e.g. Columbia River) and 
Canada. Although adaptation of these systems appears to be possible by build-
ing up infrastructure such as dams, this will be expensive; moreover, it will have 
unknown impacts on societies and ecosystems downstream.

Changes  in  water  availability  due  to  climate  change  are  taking  place  at  a  time 
when  pressure  on  water  resources  for  irrigation  and  food  production,  industri-
alisation  and  urbanisation  is  increasing.  The  effect  will  be  the  greatest  in  semi-
arid regions and in the monsoon belts, especially during seasonal deficits which 
have been covered by water supply from mountains until now. These changes will 
give new impetus to the construction of dams and water transfer systems. India 
and  China,  for  example,  are  planning  or  already  implementing  large  interbasin 
schemes to transfer water to water-scarce regions, the effects of which are diffi-
cult to anticipate. If these two schemes are realised, more than two billion people 
will depend on water originating in the Hindu Kush-Himalaya.

80N

80N

60N

60N

Figure 2.1: Importance of mountains as  
Water Towers of the world (Viviroli et al 2007).

20N

0

20S

40N

40S

40N

40S

20N

0

20S

60S

Importance of mountain areas
for lowland water resources
Extremely important
Very important
Important
Less important

80S

80S

60S

Large river basin
Lowland area
Ice sheet
Map scale: approx. 1:200,000,000

Map sources
Daniel Viviroli et al. 2007, Institute of Geography, University of Bern 
Map projection: Mollweide
Map compilation 2009: Ulla Gaemperli Krauer, CDE University of Bern

13

The way forward

Projections of climate change and its impacts remain a challenge due to the highly 
non-linear interactions of the relevant factors. This is especially true for mountain 
regions with their marked topography, which is not well reflected in present cli-
mate models. Mountains can alter atmospheric circulation and hence rainfall pat-
terns and snow cover beyond current predictions and over large areas, for example 
in  the  Hindu  Kush-Himalaya  region,  where  the  interplay  of  the  Indian  summer 
monsoon and the winter westerlies over Tibet is little understood. In light of such 
knowledge gaps, global climate models and predictions of future freshwater sup-
plies are subject to great uncertainty.

In a world of growing water scarcity, it is urgent that we improve our knowledge of 
present and future mountain water resources and freshwater supplies. This neces-
sitates investment in long-term high-altitude observatories, especially in mountain 
areas in the developing world, where they are few and far between; the current 
trend of closing down monitoring networks due to high operating costs must thus 
be reversed. While monitoring is essential, it is not enough. Public access to data 

Mountain waters on the global agenda

The importance of mountains in their role as headwaters and sources of water 
for  the  often  densely  populated  surrounding  lowlands  has  long  been  recog-
nised by the scientific community. Since the 1992 Rio Earth Summit, this im-
portance has increasingly become the focus of political attention, even more 
so  during  the  International  Year  of  Mountains  in  2002  and  the  subsequent 
International Year of Freshwater in 2003. The Intergovernmental Panel on Cli-
mate Change (IPCC) stated in 2007 that mountain regions will be particularly 
affected by climate change, and that changes in the water cycle can already be 
observed in these regions. 

In 2008, the UN General Assembly adopted Resolution 62/196 on Sustainable 
Mountain  Development,  stating  that  The  UN  General  Assembly  notes  with 
appreciation  that  a  growing  network  of  governments,  organizations,  major 
groups and individuals around the world recognize the importance of the sus-
tainable development of mountain regions for poverty eradication, and recog-
nizes the global importance of mountains as the source of most of the Earths 
freshwater [...].

14

Figure 2.2: Contribution of mountain  
area to total discharge, and  
size of mountain area as compared 
to total basin area for selected rivers 
 world-wide (Viviroli et al 2003).

on water resources, where they exist, must be improved and current restrictions 
imposed for strategic reasons must be removed. Investment in infrastructure, tech-
nology, and international collaboration, as well as a shift in water management 
from the supply side to the demand side, will be necessary in order to share future 
water supplies from mountain areas equitably and sustainably. 

Vulnerability  of  snowmelt-dominated   regions  to  climate 
change

Geographic areas where snowmelt hydrology dominates the water cycle are 
expected  to  be  especially  vulnerable  to  climate  change  because  a  warming 
climate, which is projected with high certainty for the twenty-first century, di-
rectly affects the seasonality of runoff, generally shifting runoff from the warm 
season to the cool season. Adam et al 2009.

In the Hindu Kush-Himalaya (H. Rueff)

Left: This false colour infrared  satellite 
image shows the Indus Basin in  Pakistan. 
The irrigated area (in red) is one of 
the largest in the world. It ensures the 
 countrys food supply and generates 23% 
of its GDP. 80% of the waters that feed  
the basin are  provided by sea-
sonal snow and ice melt in the 
Hindu  Kush-Himalaya mountains (in 
white at the top of the image). 
Source: NASA/GSFC, MODIS 
rapid  response/1.10.2002

15

European Alps:  
A Water  Tower of Continental Europe

In the European Alps, melting of snow and ice produces 
high, reliable discharge in summer, supported by low evap-
oration due to high elevation. This discharge levels out the 
more variable runoff that forms at lower altitudes, where 
precipitation is more irregular. 

Daniel Viviroli, Bruno Messerli,  
Bruno Schadler, Rolf Weingartner
Institute of Geography, University of Bern 
Switzerland

Goescheneralp, Switzerland (D. Viviroli)

As a result, the mountainous sections of the four main rivers, the Rhine, Danube, Po 
and Rhone, contribute about twice as much runoff as would be expected on the basis 
of their surface area. In the summer months, their contribution to overall discharge is 
even greater, reaching 80% in the case of the Po (see Table 2.1). Where international 
cooperative  water  management  is  concerned,  the  Rhine  River  basin  is  exemplary: 
Since the 1950s, the International Commission for the Protection of the Rhine (ICRP) 
has successfully coordinated the actions of nine countries, as well as the European 
Commission, with respect to sustainable development, water quality, flood preven-
tion,  and  protection.  The  ICRP  has  served  as  a  model  for  other  large  river  basins, 
and similar approaches are urgently recommended for other transboundary rivers. 
With regard to climate change, the ICPR initiated a scenario study on future water 
resources and changing flow regimes in 2007. Based on the results, adjustment strat-
egies for integrated water management in the River Rhine basin will be proposed.

Mean annual contribution 
from mountain area to 
total discharge
26%

Maximum monthly con-
tribution from mountain 
area in summer (Jun-Aug)
36%

53%

34%

41%

80%

52%

69%

River

Danube 

Po 

Rhine

Rhone

16

Share of mountain area in 
total basin area

Table2.1: Freshwater contribution of 
the European Alps to total discharge 
of the four major Alpine rivers.

10%

35%

15%

23%

Water and Climate Change in the Tropical Andes

As glaciers are melting away in the tropical Andes, water 
regulation and storage capacity may shift to other areas 
such as mountain wetlands in the Paramos and Punas. 
These high-altitude landscapes with their moors and lakes 
are very vulnerable to human perturbation including land 
cover change, pollution, and destructive recreation. 

Wouter Buytaert  
Imperial College, London, UK
Francisco Cuesta, Miguel Saravia  
CIP-CONDESAN, Lima, Peru

Their  management  and  use  is  thus  increasingly  important,  but  also  delicate  as 
it  has  to  strike  a  balance  between  safeguarding  water  supply  for  downstream 
regions  while  securing  economic  benefits  for  local  communities.  The  Proyecto 
Paramo Andino has taken up this task with funds from the Global Environment 
Facility (GEF). Implementation was started in 2006 by CONDESAN with the sup-
port of governments, research institutions, local NGOs, and the population. The 
project has sites in Venezuela, Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru. An important com-
ponent  is  participatory  environmental  monitoring,  including  data  collection  on 
precipitation and river flow, which helps farmers improve irrigation schedules and 
water  supply  systems.  Such  data  are  also  essential  for  negotiating  compensa-
tion for environmental services, which can help diversify local incomes and make 
farmers more resilient to the anticipated effects of climate change. 

In other areas, farmers have become active on their own initiative. A striking ex-
ample can be found in the basin of the Laguna de Fuquene in Colombia, which is 
inhabited by about 115,000 people: The potential threats of climate change have 
prompted  farmer  communities  to  join  forces  to  make  current  water  resources 
more  resilient  to  potential  future  changes.  Without  government  support,  they 
have raised money to buy crucial wetlands, reforest degraded areas, and decrease 
water loss in canals and pipe systems. Awareness campaigns encourage house-
holds to reduce their water consumption.

Paramo near Cuenca, Ecuador (W. Buytaert)

17

Climate Change Action in the Columbia Basin 
in Canada

The Columbia River in western North America originates in 
British Columbia, Canada, and flows into the Pacific Ocean 
in Oregon, USA. The river is 2000 km long and has more 
than 40 major hydropower stations that produce most of 
the electricity for the Pacific North-West. 

Hans Schreier  
University of British Columbia, Vancouver
Kindy Gosal  
Columbia Basin Trust, Golden B. C. 
Canada

Waneta Dam (Columbia Basin Trust) 

The Canadian portion covers 15% of the total watershed but provides  approximately 40% 
of the total annual stream flow. In 1964 Canada and the USA ratified the Columbia River 
Treaty (CRT), a unique bi-lateral water management agreement that dealt with water storage 
for optimisation of power production and flood control on the entire Columbia River system. 
The centrepiece of the Treaty was the creation of three major water storage dams in Canada. 
In return, the US as the downstream nation agreed to compensate Canada as the upstream 
nation for the service of water storage for flood protection and hydropower generation. The 
Treaty provides that after 60 years either party may consider its termination or re-negotiation. 
Thus the agreement will come up for renewal in 2024, provided that 10 years prior notice is 
given by either party in 2014. 

No one was aware of climate change in 1964. In recent years, however, concerns have been 
expressed about the implications of global warming for the basins hydrology and the result-
ant vulnerabilities of the systems services. Given concerns about glacial recession, changes in 
snow cover, possible shifts in streamflow regimes and higher rainfall and runoff variability, the 
Columbia Basin Trust (CBT) has initiated an aggressive climate change-related research, adap-
tation and mitigation strategy with a specific focus on community involvement. Since 2006, the 
following major programmes have been put in place: 

18

100 km

Dams in the Columbia Basin (Northwest Power & Conservation Council)

Mica Dam (Columbia Basin Trust)

1.  Climate-related  research  to  understand  predicted  hydrologic  changes  in  the  Canadian 

 Columbia Basin; 

2.  Development of a community watershed network that focuses on water quality monitoring 
and stream rehabilitation. 12 community teams have been trained to produce scientifically 
sound datasets on stream flow, water quality and ecosystem health;

3.  A water-smart initiative to aggressively pursue water conservation practices for domestic, 
recreational and industrial use, with the aim of reducing water consumption within the basin 
by 20% by 2015; 

4.  Development of climate change adaptation strategies for mountain communities. This project 
started in 2007 with two mountain communities. The aim was to develop a methodology that 
can be used to identify the risks faced by increased climatic variability. A multi-stakeholder 
process was used to determine and prioritise the risks and to develop protective measures 
to minimize possible impacts. In 2009 two additional communities and one regional district 
were chosen to engage in a similar process, and it is anticipated that by 2014 all mountain 
communities in the basin will have Climate Change Adaptation Plans in place. 

5.  An innovative program was also initiated to monitor carbon emissions and reduce the lo-
cal government corporate carbon footprint in each of the 25 municipalities and 3 Regional 
Districts in the Basin. 

The Columbia Basin Trust has taken the lead in supporting community-based initiatives that 
have a large public education component, involve academic institutions and researchers, en-
gage community volunteers, and assist municipal governments in putting climate adaptation 
and mitigation efforts into action.

19

Mountain 
Glaciers

 Ellesmere Island (J. Noetzli)

Mountain Glaciers: On Thin Ice

Wilfried Haeberli, Michael Zemp 
World Glacier Monitoring Service (WGMS)
Geography Department, University of Zurich 
Switzerland

Chopicalqui, Peru (E. Hegglin)

Mountain glaciers as key indicators of climate change 

Mountain glaciers are the most visible sign of global climate 
change;  everybody  can  see  their  development  and  qualita-
tively understand the main processes involved: snowfall and 
melting as a result of weather conditions. 

Glaciers can be found in, and compared across, all latitudes  from the equator to 
the poles. Mountain glaciers are therefore key indicators in global climate observa-
tion systems.

Glaciers have been observed in an internationally coordinated way for more than a 
century (Haeberli 2006). The results from data collected around the world are not 
at all comforting and the perspectives for the near future even less so: Evidence 
of accelerated glacier shrinkage at a global scale is becoming stronger. The aver-
age  rate  of  thickness  loss  measured  on  30  reference  glaciers  worldwide  (Figure 
3.1) has doubled since the year 2000 (Zemp et al 2009) compared with the period 
1980-1999 (see Figure 3.2). The record loss in 1998 has already been exceeded 
three times in the 21st century, and the new record loss in 2006 was almost twice 
that of 1998. Satellite-based information confirms this trend and indicates even 
significantly higher losses in certain regions such as southern Alaska. Despite dec-
adal regional and individual exceptions of glacier advance  for example, in the 
wetter  parts  of  Norway,  in  New  Zealand,  and  in  the  western  Himalaya    rapid 
shrinkage dominates at a worldwide and centennial scale. 

Facts and figures on glacier retreat

Measurements of changes in the length of glaciers constitute the main data col-
lected during the initial phases of international glacier monitoring, which began in 
1894. Information from such simple observations is extremely robust, and it leaves 
no doubt that today the shrinking of mountain glaciers is taking place at a global 
scale and at a rapid rate. The strikingly synchronous retreat in many parts of the 
world since the late 20th century may be unique; in many regions, glaciers have 
now been reduced close to their minimum extent during the climate optimums in 
the Holocene, i.e. in the past 10,000 years (Solomina et al 2008)  and in some 
places even beyond this. 

22

Observations based on mass balance  i.e. the difference between income, which 
is  snowfall,  and  expenditure,  which  is  mostly  melting    show  that  loss  of  ice  is 
even taking place at a rate considerably faster than what could be expected from 
enhanced  greenhouse  effects  alone.  This  means  that  self-reinforcing  processes, 
especially due to decreasing reflectivity (albedo) from darkening glacier surfaces, 
retreating snowlines, and enhanced dust deposition from snow-free surrounding 
slopes have increasingly come into play (Oerlemans et al 2009, Paul et al 2005). 

In  recent  years,  glacier  inventories  based  on  satellite  images  and  digital  terrain 
information  have  opened  new  perspectives  for  documentation  of  the  distribu-
tion of glaciers and ice caps and the ongoing changes affecting them. Computer 
models combining data from observed time series with satellite information make 
it possible to look at changes in larger glacier ensembles which extend over entire 
mountain regions. They show very clearly that even if global warming is limited 
to 2C, small- to medium-size glaciers in many mountain ranges will most likely 
disappear already within the coming decades, with grave consequences for local 
hazard  potential  and  water  cycles.  Large  glaciers  may  develop  extreme  disequi-
libria and down waste or collapse rather than retreat, as is indeed being observed 
more and more frequently. 

Techniques have also been developed to model the topography that will be uncov-
ered by vanishing glaciers. This helps anticipate the formation of new lakes in local 
depressions of glacier beds that are becoming exposed. Such new lakes are fas-
cinating and constitute an interesting new potential for hydropower production. 
They also replace some of the landscape attractiveness lost with disappearing gla-
ciers. However, they constitute a growing hazard for flood waves and far-reaching 
debris flows caused by moraine breaching or by rock avalanches from de-glaciated 
slopes or slopes which contain degrading permafrost. 

Figure 3.1: Global distribution of glaciers,  
ice caps and ice sheets as well as the  locations 
of 30 reference glaciers with long-term 
continuous mass balance observations.

80N

80N

60N

60N

20N

0

20S

40N

40S

40N

40S

20N

0

20S

23

60S

60S

80S

80S

14

30 reference glaciers with long-term,
continuous mass balance observations 
Glaciers, ice caps (data 20 km buffered)
Ice sheets (original data)
Mountains and highlands > 1,000 m
Map scale: approx. 1:200,000,000

Map sources
Reference glacier data: World Glacier Monitoring Service (WGMS)
Glacier data: Digital Chart of the World by Environmental System Research Institute (ESRI) 
Terrain data: resampled from GTOPO30, produced by US Gelogical Survey (UGS)
Continental boundary: ESRI Data and Maps
Map projection: Mollweide
Author: Ulla Gaemperli Krauer 2009 (CDE, University of Bern)

The impacts of vanishing glaciers

The most serious impact of vanishing mountain glaciers undoubtedly concerns the 
water cycle from regional to global scales. Glacier melting will probably dominate 
sea level rise during our century (Meier et al 2007) and the seasonality of runoff 
will dramatically change due to the combined effects of less snow storage, earlier 
snowmelt, and decreasing glacier melt. An estimated one billion people mainly in 
Asia, North and South America and Central and Southern Europe currently depend 
on snow and glacier meltwater during the dry season and may be affected by such 
changes (UNEP 2007). The lack of water during extended future droughts caused 
by  changing  snow  and  ice  cover  in  high  mountain  ranges  has  the  potential  to 
seriously affect economies and livelihoods in general. Problems during the warm 

Global monitoring of glaciers

The  United  Nations  Environment  Programme  (UNEP)  and  the  World  Glacier 
Monitoring  Service  (WGMS)  recently  issued  a  compilation  and  assessment 
of  quantitative  information  on  glaciers  from  long-term  observations  (WGMS 
2008).  Measurements  include  change  in  length,  i.e.  advance  and  retreat  of 
glaciers; monitoring of mass balance; and observation based on spatial infor-
mation technology such as satellite imagery and digital terrain information. For 
more information see: 
http://www.grid.unep.ch/glaciers/

Additional links: 
- Global Terrestrial Network for Glaciers (GTN-G; www.gtn-g.org)
- World Glacier Monitoring Service (WGMS; www.wgms.ch)
- US National Snow and Ice Data Centre (NSIDC; www.nsidc.org)
- Global Land Ice Measurement from Space initiative (GLIMS; www.glims.org)
- GlobGlacier project of the European Space Agency (www.globglacier.ch) 

Figure 3.2: Evolution of annual glacier  
mass balance. Blue and red bars indicate ice  
gain and loss, respectively. The mass  balance  
unit is millimeter water equivalent.  
Data from the World Glacier Monitoring Service.

250

0

-250

-500

-750

-1000

-1250

-1500

1981 

1983 

1985 

1987 

1989 

1991 

1993 

1995 

1997 

1999 

2001 

2003 

2005 

2007

Time [years]

.

]
.
e
w
m
m

 

[
 

e
c
n
a

l

a
b
 
s
s
a
m

 
c
i
f
i
c
e
p
s
 
l

a
u
n
n
a
n
a
e
M

 

24

Eiger Glacier, Switzerland in about 1900 (Courtesy of S. Nussbaumer)

Eiger Glacier, Switzerland in 2009 (S. Nussbaumer)

or dry season include fewer resources on the supply side, with longer-lasting dis-
charge minima and low flow periods in rivers, lower lake and groundwater levels, 
higher water temperatures, perturbed aquatic systems and less power production, 
as well as increasing needs on the demand side for water for a growing popula-
tion, urbanisation, industrialisation, irrigation, power production and fire fighting. 
The combined effect of lower supplies and increasing demands holds a potential 
for  conflict.  Together  with  higher  air  temperatures,  increased  evaporation  and 
changing snow conditions, the vanishing of mountain glaciers could dramatically 
sharpen two fundamentally important questions: who owns the water and who 
will decide on the priorities for its use?

Glaciers and ice caps by main regions*

 
 
 
 

Arctic Islands (incl. Greenland) 
North America 
Antarctica 
Central Asia 
North Asia 
Hindu Kush-Himalaya 
South America  
Europe (incl. Caucasus)  
New Zealand 
Africa 
New Guinea 
Total 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
              
 
 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 

275,500 km2 
124,000 km2
  77,000 km2
  62,000 km2 
  59,600 km2
  52,800 km2
  25,500 km2
    6,725 km2 
    1,160 km2
           6 km2 
           3 km2
684,294 km2

If all these glaciers and ice caps melted away, sea levels would rise by roughly 
half a meter (IPCC 2007). In addition, the complete melting of the Antarctic and 
Greenland ice sheets would result in sea level rises of 57 and 7 m, respectively. 

* excluding the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets.
Sources: Dyurgerov and Meier 2005, WGMS 2008. 

25

Tropical Glaciers of the Andes: Peru 

While the largest glaciers in South America are found in 
Southern Chile and Argentina, the small glaciers in the dry 
tropical and subtropical Andes are critically important for 
freshwater storage and supply.

Marco Zapata  
Unidad de Glaciologia  
Audoridad Nacional del Agua (ANA)  
Huaraz, Peru

Laguna Llaca (E. Hegglin)

The meltwater of the glaciers in the Peruvian Andes, for example, is used for mul-
tiple purposes such as domestic consumption, irrigation, hydropower generation 
(80% of total electricity produced in Peru) and mining operations, which play a vital 
role in the development of the country, especially the arid Pacific coast and Andean 
front  ranges  which  contain  70%  of  the  population,  but  comprise  of  only  1.8% 
of  the  totally  available  water  resources  of  the  country.  About  70%  of  the  tropi-
cal glaciers in the Andes are found in Peru, while the rest are in Bolivia, Ecuador 
and  Colombia. Accelerated glacier retreat can be observed in all these countries. 
In 1970, the area covered by glaciers was 2041 km2 in Peru, but only 1595 km2 
in  1997,  a  loss  of  22%  in  only  27  years.  Small  glaciers  disappeared  completely. 
Moreover, glacier retreat has been accelerating. In Perus Cordillera Blanca, for ex-
ample, average retreat rates for six observed glacier fronts were 7 to 9 meters per 
year between 1948 and 1976, but have been about 20 meters per year since then. 
The vanishing of glaciers threatens regional water supply during the dry season in 
many large catchment areas, affecting thousands of people. A cooperative Swiss-
Peruvian  project  on  adaptation  to  climate  change  has  recently  been  initiated  in 
the Andes regions of Cusco and Apurimac. A remarkable collaboration between 
Peruvian and Swiss scientific institutions, non-governmental organizations focusing 
on practice and implementation, and the political level, is establishing the scientific 
basis of climate change impacts in this region and developing corresponding adap-
tation strategies with local communities. The project is active in the field of water 
resources, food security and disasters. 

26

Glaciers in the New Zealand Alps 

The most recent maximum extent of New Zealands 
 glaciers occurred at the end of the Little Ice Age, which 
terminated near the end of the 19th century. 

Trevor Chinn  
Alpine Processes Consultancy  
Lake Hawea  
New Zealand

 Proglacial lakes of Hooker and Mueller Glaciers, New Zealand (T. Chinn)

Since then, New Zealand experienced a modest warming of about 1C, from about 
1890 until the 1970s. A 61% volume loss in glaciers has been calculated for this 
period.  After  the  mid  1980s,  the  fast  response  alpine  glaciers  gained  mass  and 
advanced noticeably. Since the beginning of the 21st century, the number of re-
treating glaciers has increased again. A net loss of ice volume between 1977 and 
2005 of about 10% has been reported in recent studies, mostly from the largest 
glaciers. This loss will not have noticeable effects on water supplies, including hy-
dropower generation and irrigation, as the glaciers lie in a very high precipitation 
zone.  Locally, there may be dramatic changes to the tourist trade where some gla-
ciers retreat from easy access. 

27

Glaciers in the European Alps

Historical documentation is especially rich in the European 
Alps. Glaciers there lost about half their total volume, or 
0.5% per year, between 1850 and 1975. Another 25%, 
or 1% per year, of the remaining volume vanished between 
1975 and 2000, and an additional 15 to 25%, or 2 to  
3% per year, was lost in the first years of our century.

Wilfried Haeberli, Michael Zemp 
World Glacier Monitoring Service (WGMS) 
Geography Department  
University of Zurich 
Switzerland 

Morteratsch Glacier, Switzerland (J. Alean)

The emergence of the roughly 5000-year-old body of the Oetztal iceman in 1991 
clearly demonstrated to a worldwide public that conditions in the Alps had reached, 
if not exceeded in some places, the warm limits of climate variability since many 
millennia. 75% of the glacier area still existing in the period 19701990 is likely 
to disappear already with an increase in summer air temperature of 2.5 C (Zemp 
et al 2006). The modelling shows that this loss is virtually independent of the sce-
nario range in precipitation changes and might already become reality during the 
first half of our century (OcCC 2004). 

Together with earlier snowmelt, such a dramatic reduction in glacier area will reduce 
water  supplies  in  the  late-summer  seasons,  which  could  seriously  limit  economic 
activity and worsen living conditions far beyond the Alps. Hydropower production 
from Alpine reservoirs, with its growing importance for covering short-term peak 
demands in the expanding European network, will also have to be fundamentally 
re-thought, with a view to storing water in wintertime and releasing it in summer-
time  the opposite of current practice. A project on hydropower, climate change 
and glaciers funded by the Federal Office for the Environment and Forces Motrices 
Valaisannes, a regional association of hydropower suppliers, has been initiated in 
Switzerland to investigate such questions. Serious threats from new lakes at the sur-
faces and margins of glaciers have emerged since the turn of the millennium in Italy, 
at the Italian/French border, and in Switzerland, necessitating remedial action by the 
authorities. The International Working Group on Glacier and Permafrost Hazards in 
Mountain Regions provides recommendations and guidance for such action. 

28

Glaciers in the Hindu Kush-Himalaya 

The Hindu Kush-Himalaya region is among those with the 
least available data on glaciers. Glacier retreat from  Little 
Ice Age moraines is widespread. However, fluctuation 
 series are extremely sparse (WGMS 2008) and do not 
allow for sound quantitative comparison of rates of change 
with other regions. 

Pradeep Mool 
ICIMOD Kathmandu  
Nepal

Based on the few available mass balance measurements, a simplified model exper-
iment shows the vanishing of a small clean-ice glacier, called AX010 in the Everest 
Region in Nepal, as the consequence of a rise in summer air temperature by 3 C, 
neglecting variations in other climatic variables (Ageta and Kadota 1992). But the 
results for this glacier, with an elevation range from 4,950 to 5,360 m in 1978, 
cannot be applied to the entire Hindu Kush-Himalaya with its many debris-covered 
glacier tongues and accumulation areas reaching elevations above 8,000 m. The 
region is strongly underrepresented in terms of front variation and mass balance 
observations. There is thus an urgent need to improve the observational basis for 
glacier changes in the region, including climate records, so as to more safely assess 
the possible impacts of climate change. 

Glacial lakes form where glaciers retreat. The threat of glacial lake outburst floods 
(GLOFs)  with  damaging  effects  in  downstream  areas  is  increasing.  An  inventory 
compiled  by  ICIMOD  identified  about  200  potentially  dangerous  glacial  lakes  in 
the Hindu Kush-Himalaya. Field investigations now underway will help understand 
how these lakes are formed and what risks they pose. At Tsho Rolpa glacial lake in 
Nepal, considered a hazard that required immediate attention, the lake level was 
artificially lowered by three meters, at a cost of USD 3 million, and an early warning 
system installed with the participation of the local population. Exchange of knowl-
edge and experience with the Alpine countries to assess the evolution of glaciers 
and lakes and develop adaptation strategies has recently started.

Bhutans glaciers from space (ASTER satellite image)

29

Mountain  
Hazards

Mountain pastures, Central Asia (D. Maselli)

Natural Hazards and Risk in 
 Mountains: The Potential  
Impacts of Climate Change

Mountain  regions  are  high-risk  areas;  hazards  can  cause 
damage, destruction, injury and death at any time. Cases in 
point are the Kashmir earthquake in Pakistan in 2005 that 
killed about 80,000 people, and the 1985 Armero mudflow 
in Colombia, triggered by a volcanic eruption, which claimed 
about 21,000 lives.

Christoph Marty
WSL Institute for Snow and  
Avalanche Research SLF  
Davos, Switzerland

Mount Mayon, Philippines 2006 (M. N. Zimmermann)

Relief operations are often severely hampered because landslides and rockfall trig-
gered by the earthquakes destroy access roads and other important infrastructure. As 
mountains are often located in tectonically active zones, susceptibility to earthquakes 
is higher than in other areas (Hewitt, 1997). In the Andes, for example, as much as 
88% of the mountainous area is susceptible to destructive earthquakes (Table 4.1).

People have inhabited mountain regions for centuries, living with hazards and risks. 
Mountains  are  not  necessarily  more  inhospitable  than  other  environments,  even 
though they pose specific challenges to people who live in mountain regions. Well-
adapted mountain societies have often benefited from more diverse resources, great-
er security, and a healthier environment compared to surrounding lowland areas.

Table 4.1: Percent of mountain area 
 susceptible to destructive earthquakes.* 

Mountain areas in: 
South America 

Australasia and Southeast Asia

Eurasia

North and Central America

Africa

Greenland 

Global average, all mountain areas

Global average, non-mountain areas

%
88

71

61

45

27

2

55

36

*Level VIII or greater on the  modified Mercalli 
scale (UNEP-WCMC 2002, Mountain Watch)

32

 Earthquake in Kashmir, Pakistan (M. Schar)

Increasing susceptibility to disaster

However, there is growing scientific evidence that many mountain regions have 
become increasingly disaster-prone in recent decades, and that a disproportion-
ally  high  number  of  natural  disasters  occur  in  mountain  areas.  Mountains  are 
more  frequently  affected  than  other  environments  by  destructive  natural  proc-
esses  including  earthquakes,  volcanic  eruptions,  dam  bursts  or  glacial  lake  out-
bursts. Moreover, other hazards such as avalanches and landslides occur almost 
exclusively in mountains. 

Natural hazards and disaster

A natural hazard in itself does not necessarily cause a disaster; a disaster re-
sults when a natural hazard impacts on a vulnerable, exposed or ill-prepared 
community. Disasters are therefore not purely the result of natural events, but 
the product of such events within the social, political and economic context in 
which they occur. In the developing world, one in 20 people was affected by 
a climate disaster between 2000 and 2004. In the OECD countries, the corre-
sponding figure was one in 1500.
InfoResources 2/2009. Figures from International Disaster Database  
(www.cred.be)

In addition to relief and geology, human activity can also influence the impact of 
hazards. Destruction of mountain forests or inappropriate farming practices can 
accelerate erosion and expose land to the risk of landslides, floods and avalanches. 
Moreover,  dams,  roads  or  mining  enterprises  can  be  hazardous  if  not  properly 
constructed and managed. Current migration from rural to urban areas and from 
higher to lower areas is a significant factor that has led to greater concentrations 
of population in valleys, increasing environmental degradation and vulnerability to 
large-scale disasters. Often, migration is linked to poverty, which by itself exposes 
people to higher risk, especially where access to safe housing and safe land is left 
unconsidered (UN/ISDR, 2002).

Greater mountain hazards owing to climate change 

The two most deadly natural hazards (earthquakes and volcanic eruptions) are not 
directly affected by global warming, but most mountain areas are subject to multi-
ple other hazards and pressures. This is especially true for the northern and central 
Andes,  the  East  African  Rift,  the  Middle  East,  the  Pamir,  the  Himalaya  and  the 
mountains of northern China (Figure 4.1). Globally, climate change is very likely 
to increase the pressure exerted by non-seismic hazards. Higher temperatures will 
enhance the hydrological cycle and it is predicted that they will alter rainfall pat-
terns and intensity. In the mountain regions of South and Southeast Asia, for ex-
ample, changing monsoon patterns, including increased severity and frequency of 
storms as projected by climate models, may threaten agricultural production, food 
security and the livelihoods of millions of people, and damage vital infrastructure. 
Accelerated river erosion can destabilise valley slopes, with dramatic effects where 
these slopes are saturated with water after prolonged intense rains.

Effects  will  not  be  limited  to  changes  in  precipitation:  Global  warming  reduces 
snow cover, melts away glaciers, and degrades permafrost (Bavay et al 2009). As 
vegetation development on such sites is a slow process, they may remain unpro-
tected against erosion for decades or even centuries. As a result, slope failures, 
rockfall and debris flow will pose increasing threats to settlement and infrastruc-

33

ture in many places (Beniston 2005). Moreover, prolonged periods of higher tem-
peratures will transform areas already sensitive to fire, such as the coastal ranges 
of  California  or  the  Blue  Mountains  in  Australia,  into  regions  of  sustained  fire 
hazard and make others such as Tibet or Mongolia prone to desertification.  Finally, 
global warming is likely to increase the incidence of insect-borne diseases at high-
er altitudes that were previously not affected by such health risks. 

In conclusion, it can be said that casualties and damage due to hazards in moun-
tain regions will increase irrespective of global warming, especially where popula-
tions are growing and infrastructure is developed at exposed locations. But climate 
change will definitely increase risk due to the fact that expected increases of heavy 
rainfall,  heat  waves,  and  glacier  melt  will  amplify  hazards  in  many  mountains 
worldwide, and in areas where they have not been known in the past (Table 4.2). 
Adaptation strategies will need to adopt an integrative approach that covers the 
whole risk cycle from prevention to recovery. Possible entry points for factoring cli-
mate change into risk management include hazard mapping and spatial planning 
based on longer return periods of damaging events, coupled with risk monitoring 
and improved early warning systems (Lehning and Wilhelm 2006).

Landslides triggered by the Wenchuan earthquake and by 
rainfall dot the landscape of Longmen Shan, China (O. Korup)

Figure 4.1: Map of mountain regions 
affected by multiple hazards.

No. of hazards
5-6
4
3
2
1
mountain region

Most  mountain  areas  are  affected  by  multiple  hazards,  which  magnifies  overall  negative  impacts. The 
hazards considered are earthquakes, fire, human conflict, suitability for rain-fed crops (drought), the future 
impact  of   infrastructure,  and  climate  change  (Map:  Courtesy  of  UNEP-World  Conservation   Monitoring 
Centre, Mountain Watch 2002).

34
34

Hazard

Trend of  
expected 
change

Confidence 
in trend 
projection

Most affected regions

Economic 
importance

Table 4.2: Climate change and the  incidence 
of hazards in mountain regions. 

Desertification on grassland, Tibet (F.Graf)

Seismic hazard

Snow avalanches

Droughts

Landslides and mud 
flows

Glacier lake outburst 
flood

high 

medium

high

high

high

South America, Southeast 
Asia, North and Central 
America

Northern hemisphere, New 
Zealand

Africa, Caucasus, Eastern 
Himalaya

Southeast Asia, Central and 
South America

All regions with valley 
glaciers

Floods

medium

Asia, Africa, North America

Forest and bush fires

Insect-borne diseases

medium

medium

Africa, North and Central 
America, Eurasia

Africa, Southern Asia, 
 Central and South America

very high

low

high

medium

low

high

medium

medium

Ch.Marty 2009; based on IPCC (2007), Iyngararasan (2002), and UNEP-WCMC Mountain Watch (2002)

The table shows that climate change will increase the incidence of hazards in mountains with a medium to 
high level of confidence. This applies for 6 out of the 8 hazards identified, and in most mountain regions 
of the world. Economic impacts will be mostly medium to high, but may be disastrous in the regions con-
cerned, depending on the type and severity of the hazard. 

35

A Regional Hot Spot Catalogue for  
Slope  Stability Hazards in the Kyrgyz Tien Shan

Vulnerability to natural hazards in many developing 
 countries and countries in transition depends greatly on 
the capacity to understand, respond to, and mitigate  
these adverse processes.

Oliver Korup 
WSL Institute for Snow and  
Avalanche Research SLF 
Davos, Switzerland

River with deposits from landslides, Tien Shan (O. Korup)

Scientific  networking  and  capacity  building  have  been  the  focus  of  NATASHA,  an 
EU-funded  initiative  to  inaugurate  an  international  and  multidisciplinary  Working 
Group on Natural Hazards in the Tien Shan Mountains of Central Asia. This initiative 
responded to the need to efficiently link mainly landslide research, integral risk man-
agement, and environmental protection through active cooperation among experts 
from  Europe,  Russia,  and  the  Newly  Independent  States  (NIS)  of  Central  Asia.  To-
gether, they identified and ranked high-priority needs for research on slope instability 
threatening the regions population and infrastructure and compiled this vital infor-
mation in a regional Hot Spot catalogue. The initiative helped disseminate previ-
ously unavailable research results between European, Russian and NIS researchers, 
while fostering the training of young scientists from the Central Asian region during 
an International Field Workshop, a Summer School, and an international exhibition. 

Summer school participants (O. Korup)

36

Snow Avalanches and Landslides in Iceland

Snow avalanches and landslides have caused many cata-
strophic accidents and severe economic losses in Iceland 
since the country was settled in the ninth century. Alto-
gether more than 1000 people have been killed in ava-
lanche and landslide accidents since then. 

Christoph Marty and Stefan Margreth
WSL Institute for Snow and  
Avalanche Research SLF 
Davos, Switzerland

New avalanche defence, Siglufjordur, Iceland (St. Margreth)

Direct economic loss due to avalanches and landslides in Iceland in the 26-year pe-
riod between 1974 and 2000 was about USD 41 million. Catastrophic avalanches 
in 1995, which killed 34 people in two towns and caused extensive economic dam-
age, totally altered views of avalanche safety in Iceland. The Icelandic government 
has in the meantime decided to construct avalanche protection measures for hazard 
areas and/or to purchase endangered property in order to reduce the death toll and 
economic loss caused by avalanches. Future climate change could have an effect on 
the avalanche and landslide hazard situation in Iceland in the long run. Higher tem-
peratures in future can be expected to result in fewer hazards, but increased winter 
precipitation and possible changes in storminess could have the opposite effect.

s
e
i
t
i
l
a
t
a
f
 
f
o
 
s
r
e
b
m
u
N

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

45

39

40

Figure 4.2: Iceland: Fatal avalanche 
accidents in populated areas in the 
period 1801-2000 (adopted from 
Johannesson and Arnalds, 2001).

14

6

5

14

8

1801-1825

1826-1850

1851-1875

1876-1900

1901-1925

1926-1950

1951-1975

1976-2000

37

Swiss Alps:  
Climate Change and Permafrost

About 5 % of the land area of Switzerland consists of 
 permafrost, i.e. permanently frozen ground. As this per-
mafrost starts to melt due to warmer temperatures, the 
risk of debris flows from steep unfreezing slopes could 
increase considerably.

Christoph Marty and Marcia Phillips  
WSL Institute for Snow and  
Avalanche Research SLF 
Davos, Switzerland

Snow nets and standard defence structures  
(downslope), Randa, Switzerland (M. Phillips)

Pontresina with protection dam,  
Switzerland (M. Phillips)

M.Phillips

With a projected increase of more intense rainfall, such debris flows will affect areas 
further downslope. This new risk poses a threat to well-known tourist resorts in the 
European Alps and the Rocky Mountains. The Swiss alpine resort of Pontresina, for 
example, decided to respond to this hazard by building a large retention dam, 13 
metres  high  and  460  metres  long,  for  permanent  protection,  simultaneously  ad-
dressing the long-term threat of avalanches. The dam cost USD 6 million as against 
estimated potential damage of USD 90 million. Flexible snow-nets are used nowa-
days  to  protect  against  avalanches  instead  of  the  standard  more  rigid  avalanche 
defence structures, because they are better adapted to rockfall and creeping perma-
frost. They are also less costly to maintain than standard structures in such terrain.

38

Programme on Climate Change Adaptation  
in Peru

In response to the high vulnerability of Perus Andes region 
to climate change, the Peruvian Ministry of Environment, in 
collaboration with the Swiss Agency for Development and 
Cooperation (SDC), has initiated a programme on climate 
change adaptation (PACC  Programa de Adaptacion al 
Cambio Climatico) in the regions of Cusco and Apurimac.

Carmenza Robledo 
Intercooperation
 Bern, Switzerland
Christian Huggel 
Geography Department, University of Zurich 
Switzerland
Lenkiza Angulo
UC-PACC, Peru 

The PACC focuses on three main thematic lines: water resources, food security and 
hydro-meteorological disasters. The human dimension is integrated throughout the 
programme for a better view of vulnerabilities to climate change and their impacts 
on  poverty  alleviation  efforts.  This  strategy  allows  combining  scientific  and  tradi-
tional knowledge into the PACC. For example, the perceptions of local communities 
about climate change and their coping strategies are included in the analysis and 
complemented  by  climate  impact  analyses  that  include  a  number  of  downscaled 
climate scenarios as a basis for impact studies.

The  interdisciplinary  and  multi-actor  setting  of  the  PACC  facilitates  dialogue  be-
tween the scientific community, implementing agencies, and policy-makers at na-
tional and international levels in a bid to find sustainable mechanisms for climate 
change adaptation.

Implementation of the PACC is facilitated and advised by a consortium of Swiss and 
Peruvian  Non-Governmental  Organisations,  led  by  the  provincial  governments  of 
Cusco and Apurimac. The programme is supported by scientific institutions in Peru 
and a Swiss scientific consortium.

The programme began its activities in February 2009. Up to now PACC has focused 
on creating a dialogue space for all stakeholders at different levels, increasing sen-
sitivity  and  capacities  among  local  stakeholders,  initiating  downscaling  of  climate 
modeling and identifying peoples perceptions and coping strategies with regard to 
climate change. 

Understanding the perceptions and coping  strategies 
of women in Yanahuaylla, Cusco (C. Robledo)

39

Mountain  
Biodiversity

Eucalyptus forest, Australia (Ch. Koerner)

Biodiversity in Mountains:  
A Natural Heritage Threatened by 
Climate Change 

Eva Spehn 
Christian Koerner 
Global Mountain Biodiversity Assessment 
Basel, Switzerland

In the forests of Mount Kilimanjaro (Ch. Koerner)

The worlds mountains are focal points of global biodiversity, 
hosting about half of the worlds biodiversity hotspots. This is 
due to the great diversity of habitats within short distances, 
which is a result of altitudinal gradients, changes in exposi-
tion, and varying geology and soils.

Mountains are also characterized by a high level of endemism, i.e. of plants and 
animals that occur nowhere else. Major centres of plant species diversity are in, or 
include, tropical and subtropical mountains: Costa Rica and Panama, the tropical 
eastern  Andes,  the  subtropical  Andes,  the  Atlantic  forests  in  Brazil,  the  eastern 
Himalaya-Yunnan region, northern Borneo, New Guinea, and East Africa. For ex-
ample,  the  mountains  of  tropical  and  subtropical  America  harbour  over  90,000 
species of flowering plants (Figure 5.1). Epiphytes such as mosses and ferns are 
an important component of this richness: Total moss diversity in the five tropical 
Andean  mountain  countries  is  estimated  to  be  more  than  7  times  higher  than 
diversity in the entire Amazon basin. Secondary centres of biodiversity are found 
in the Mediterranean mountains, the Rocky Mountains, the Alps, the Caucasus, 
and Central Asia. Mountains are also important centres of agro-biodiversity, with a 
great variety of locally adapted crops and livestock  an important genetic resource 
and an asset for assuring food security for a growing global population. Mountain 
biodiversity  also  supports  the  livelihoods  of  mountain  and  lowland  populations 
by  providing  basic  environmental  services  such  as  freshwater,  timber,  medicinal 
plants, and recreation for an increasingly urbanized world. 

Mount Kinabalu (4101 m) in Sabah, Malaysia, is estimated to harbour over 
4000 plant species, more than one-quarter of all the plant species in the 
United States of America. 

42

Climate change: a threat to mountain biodiversity

Mountain areas have been increasingly affected by loss of biodiversity due to ex-
pansion  and  intensification  of  land  use.  In  recent  decades,  climate  change  has 
emerged as another threat to diversity. With higher temperatures predicted, habi-
tats for organisms adapted to the cold will be curtailed. Species already inhabiting 
summit regions will be in a very difficult situation, because they can go nowhere 
else. Longer summers with a greater incidence of drought are expected in many 
mountain regions worldwide. The main issue is the speed of change: ongoing and 
expected climatic changes are much faster than what evolution and migration are 
commonly able to cope with, even though the pace of plant species moving uphill 
is quite rapid; in the Alps, for example, it has been about 10 m on average per 
decade during the past century. An acceleration has been reported recently. Uphill 
movement increases the total number of species in the upper belts. Rare species 
or those adapted to the cold may be outcompeted in the long term. Mountain 
ecosystems are also likely to be exposed to more extreme events such as intensive 
rainstorms,  severe  insect  and  disease  outbreaks,  longer  fire  seasons  and  more 
severe fires. 

Figure 5.1: Global biodiversity and mountain 
regions: Number of species of vascular plants 
in a regional perspective (100x100 km). 

80N

80N

60N

60N

20N

0

20S

40N

40S

40N

40S

20N

0

20S

60S

60S

80S

80S

 W. Barthlott 1996, 2005

Diversity Zones (DZ): Number of species per 10,000 km2

DZ  1 (<100)

DZ  2 (100  200)

DZ  3 (200  500)

DZ  4 (500  1000)

DZ  7 (2000  3000)

DZ 10 (> 5000)

DZ  5 (1000  1500)

DZ  8 (3000  4000)

DZ  6 (1500  2000)

DZ   9 (4000  5000)

Mountains and highlands > 1,000 m

Map scale: approx. 1:200,000,000

Map Source
W. Barthlott, G. Kier, H. Kreft, W. Kuper, D. Rafiqpoor,
& J. Mutke 2005, Nees Institute for Biodiversity of Plants, University of Bonn

Terrain data: resampled from GTOPO30, produced by US Gelogical Survey (UGS)
Continental boundary: ESRI Data and Maps

Map projection: Mollweide
Cartography, mountains: Ulla Gaemperli Krauer 
2009 (CDE University of Bern)

43

Mount Sajama, Bolivia (Ch. Koerner)

The need to reconcile conservation and development

Managing mountain biodiversity has increasingly been recognised as a global re-
sponsibility in recent decades. Globally, protected areas have increased sixfold to 
eightfold in the last 40 years, largely in mountain areas. Many of these are inhab-
ited by local people. Climate change may further increase the pressure for more 
conservation as well as for more intensive resource use in mountains. Innovative 
concepts and approaches are thus required to reconcile biodiversity conservation 
with  development.  Not  much  time  is  left  to  reach  the  UN  Millennium  Develop-
ment goal of reducing poverty and hunger by half by 2015, and even less time 
is left to reach the 2010 target to reduce the loss of biodiversity. Both are global 
commitments, but they are often conflicting goals in a concrete local and regional 
setting. One way of reconciling them is by engaging local people in the steward-
ship of their natural heritage, for example within the framework of conservation 
landscapes which include biodiversity sanctuaries within a pattern of agricultural 
land use. Conservation landscapes are increasingly recognized for their potential 
to maintain high levels of biodiversity in combination with intensive but diversi-
fied small-scale farming, where high population density inhibits the establishment 
or extension of protected areas. The Kigezi Highlands in Southwestern Uganda is 
such a conservation landscape. Despite intensive use and a population density of 
over 250 people per km2, the agricultural production system supports biodiversity 
management based on a wide variety of crops and trees deliberately planted on 
farms. Many small-scale farming areas in Africa and in other parts of the world 
have the potential to become conservation landscapes owing to their diversified 
land use. Highly developed regions such as the Alps and, by contrast, mountain 
regions which are still in a natural or even pristine state  for example the Pat-
agonian Andes  require different strategies such as creating protected areas or 
maintaining wilderness areas.

44

Mountain forests

Between  1990  and  2000,  the  area  of  natural  forest  decreased  by  6.8%  in  the 
tropics, while in temperate areas it expanded by 1.2%, mainly due to an increase 
in forest cover in the mountainous countries of Europe (FAO 2001). Natural moun-
tain forests are important reservoirs of species and they are essential for the pro-
vision  of  key  environmental  services  such  as  freshwater.  They  can  reduce  peak 
runoff and local flooding, although this effect decreases as the size of the water-
shed and its distance from a headwater area increase. Many of the worlds largest 
cities, including New York, Jakarta, Tokyo, Mumbai, Rio de Janeiro, Los Angeles, 
Barcelona, Nairobi, Melbourne, Bogota, La Paz, and Mexico City rely on protected 
forests in their watershed for much of their freshwater supply. 

Evergreen tropical cloud forests are the most fragile and most diminished parts of 
mountain forests, but they are very rich in endemic species, i.e. species that occur 
nowhere  else.  In  Peru,  for  example,  30%  of  the  272  species  of  endemic  mam-
mals, birds and frogs are found in cloud forests. In Ecuador, 17,000 km2 of tropical 
cloud forest contain 3400 vascular plant species  300 more than in 70,000 km2 of 
lowland Amazon forest. Cloud forests also harbour the wild relatives and sources 
of genetic diversity of important staple crops such as beans, potatoes and coffee. 
Moreover, montane cloud forests capture moisture from fog or clouds and thus 
add  substantial  amounts  of  water  to  the  hydrological  system.  This  is  especially 
important in dry areas with frequent fog or cloud formation.

45

Cloud forest, Bolivia (E. Spehn)

Conservation Corridors in the Hindu Kush-  
Himalaya 

Conservation biology has demonstrated the usefulness of 
large habitats for maintaining larger populations with high 
genetic diversity. Such habitats provide connectivity, which 
assures the flow and movement of organisms across 
larger landscapes. These movements may be altered by 
climate change.

Nakul Chettri 
Bandana Shakya and  
Eklabya Sharma 
ICIMOD Kathmandu 
Nepal 

Kanchenjunga from Darjeeling, India (N. Chettri)

In  mountains,  connectivity  across  altitudinal  gradients  will  be  important  for  the 
movement  of  organisms.  The  International  Centre  for  Integrated  Mountain  De-
velopment (ICIMOD) is therefore promoting the idea of establishing seven trans-
boundary landscapes and four trans-Himalayan transects across the Hindu Kush-
Himalaya  region,  which  will  extend  from  low-  to  high-altitude  areas  and  from 
dry  to  wet  areas,  with  the  aim  of  improving  connectivity  within  the  landscapes 
and systematic environmental monitoring in the region. The transboundary land-
scapes  are  nested  within  the  transects.  One  of  these  transboundary  landscape 
projects  is  the  Kanchenjunga  Landscape,  which  is  shared  by  India,  Bhutan  and 
Nepal. The regional cooperative framework for Kanchenjunga addresses the root 
causes of biodiversity loss in the landscape  habitat loss, fragmentation of the 
landscape, over-extraction of resources, uncontrolled tourism  in order to exploit 
complementarities  between  and  coordination  among  the  many  actors  engaged 
in  biodiversity  conservation.  Community-based  conservation  projects  are  being 
implemented with a view to improving local livelihoods. The present framework 
enables the countries to develop an implementation plan in line with the national 
conservation agendas.

46

Mountains, Climate Change, and Fire Hazard 

Kilimanjaro is an icon of climate change due to its melt-
ing ice cap: Over the last century, rainfall has decreased 
by 30%, while temperatures have been rising since the 
1970s. Another issue is the incidence of fire.

Eva Spehn 
Christian Koerner 
Global Mountain Biodiversity Assessment 
Basel, Switzerland

The incidence of fire has increased, especially on the upper slopes, as the com-
bined effect of climate change and human activities such as honey gathering and 
illicit logging. This has led to the destruction of 50 km2 of montane cloud forest 
during the last three decades and a lowering of the tree line by 800 m. With the 
loss  of  the  forest  went  one  of  its  major  environmental  services,  trapping  water 
from clouds. The forest destroyed was by far more important for water supply to 
the densely populated lower slopes than the melting ice cap (Hemp 2005). A spe-
cial fund was set up for fire fighting, to which various donors including environ-
mental institutions and the private sector made contributions. A comprehensive 
development approach is now needed which includes effective patrolling of the 
endangered zones and an effective early warning system, and which considers the 
needs of a growing population (OECD 2003). 

In dryer areas of the world, mountain regions are sensitive to fire. Increased fre-
quency  and  intensity  of  fire  has  already  been  observed  around  the  globe.  Cas-
es in point include the Bale Mountains in Ethiopia, the Blue Mountains of New 
South Wales in Australia, the Western Rocky Mountains, and the mountains on 
the fringes of the Mediterranean, which are likely to become regions of sustained 
fire  hazard  in  future.  As  natural  fires  are  quite  rare  at  higher  elevations,  most 
natural highland vegetation is not specifically resistant to this hazard and is easily 
transformed when fires become more frequent as a result of climate change and 
human action, including arson. Burned areas are then normally poorer in species, 
particularly in forested areas, and are usually characterised by more widespread 
and common species. 

 View of Mount Kilimanjaro, Tanzania (Ch. Koerner)

47

Food Security
in Mountains  

Irrigated terraces, Nepal (T. Hofer)

Mountains, Climate Change and 
Food Security

Food security in mountains

For millions of mountain people, hunger and the threat of hun-
ger are nothing new. Harsh climates and difficult, often inac-
cessible terrain combined with political and social marginality 
make many mountain people vulnerable to food shortages.

Thomas Hofer and Paolo Ceci
Sustainable Mountain Development  
Forestry Department, FAO Rome 
Italy

Mountain agriculture, Central Asia (D. Maselli

A 2003 FAO study indicated that of the 720 million people living in rural mountain 
areas worldwide, as many as 245 million, or one-third, are at risk of, or actually 
experiencing, hunger (Table 6.1). Today, this figure may be much higher, given the 
global economic situation and the recent crisis in soaring food prices. 

The livelihood systems of rural mountain people are quite diversified. FAO has esti-
mated that 78% of the worlds mountain area is not suitable or is only marginally 
suitable for growing crops. Grazing and forestry are more adapted to mountain 
ecologies. In the recent past, many mountain communities have altered their agri-
cultural practices to meet the demands of a wider market economy, often relying 
on a single cash crop for their livelihoods. As a result, indigenous knowledge about 
local foods and traditional agricultural practices has been eroded and agricultural 
diversity has declined. This has contributed to food insecurity and malnutrition in 
mountain areas. 

Nutrition studies indicate that mountain populations suffer from high rates of mi-
cronutrient deficiencies. For example, inhabitants of the Andes, the Himalayas and 
mountain ranges in China are considered to be at highest risk of iodine deficien-
cies. In addition, data from the Himalaya and the Andes indicate a high prevalence 
of  vitamin  A  deficiency.  Hunger  and  micronutrient  deficiencies  are  contributing 
factors to the significantly higher infant mortality rates in mountain regions.

The threat posed by climate change
 
Until  recently,  economic,  political  and  social  changes  such  as  globalisation  and 
migration were taken to be the main drivers of change in mountains. Today, it is 
increasingly acknowledged that climate change and its consequences are likely to 
have similar or even greater impacts.

50

People living in mountain areas are used to the fact that the climate varies con-
siderably from year to year, season to season and day to day at different altitudes, 
and  even  on  slopes  with  different  exposure.  Traditional  land-use  systems  have 
adapted to this variability, for instance, by growing sun-loving plants on the warm-
est slopes and moving livestock to graze on high summer pastures after the snow 
has melted. In the future, however, climate change may increase climate variabil-
ity beyond the limits of past experience. For example, as glaciers disappear and 
snowlines move upwards, river flows are likely to change, and lack of water may 
become an increasing problem. Higher temperatures may also affect the health 
of  both  people  and  livestock;  for  instance,  malaria  is  likely  to  continue  moving 
to higher altitudes, as already reported from East Africa and the Andes. For wild 
plants and animals, a warmer climate may mean extinction as their habitat disap-
pears. In summary, climate change will worsen the living conditions of mountain 
farmers who are already vulnerable and food insecure. Rural mountain commu-
nities dependent on agriculture in a fragile environment will face an immediate 
risk of increased crop failure and loss of livestock. As a result of all these trends, 
hunger and malnutrition will increase. 

At the same time, climate change may bring regional and local benefits. In the 
mountains, higher temperatures could mean that trees produce higher yields of 
timber and that crops can be grown at higher altitudes, if water and soils are ad-
equate. An extended growing season and accelerated soil decomposition, leading 
to better nutrient intake by trees and other plants as well as to increased growth 
and productivity, may be additional positive impacts of climate change. Notwith-
standing, for many mountain areas in the South, present models predict that wa-
ter availability will be lower and rainfall more erratic. 

51

 Farmers at work, Bolivia (S. L. Mathez-Stiefel)

Anti-Atlas, Morocco (T. Hofer)

Table 6.1: Rural mountain populations 
vulnerable to food insecurity (developing and 
transition countries) by region and altitude.

Regions

Vulnerable mountain population 

< 2500 m 

(million people)
2500- 
4500 m

4500 m  
and above

126.1

23.8

25.3

28.5

10.7

214.4

10.8

8.9

4.4

2.3

0.5

26.9

3.1

0.2

0.03

0

0.02

3.3

total

140.0

32.9

29.7

30.8

11.2

244.6

Asia and the Pacific

Latin America and the Caribbean

Near East and North Africa

Sub-Saharan Africa

Countries in transition

Total developing and transition countries

FAO 2003

The way forward
 
There is a growing body of adaptive action relating to climate change in moun-
tains. In terms of climate change and food security, examples include:
(cid:81)   Review of land use plans and zoning, a crucial measure for both mountains and 
surrounding lowlands, as floods, landslides and avalanches are likely to become 
more severe and affect livelihood systems in areas so far considered safe; 

(cid:81)   Adoption of a conservation-by-use philosophy and better integration of agriculture, 
livestock, forestry, aquaculture and local processing in order to help diversify income 
sources and make mountain food systems more resilient to climate change;

(cid:81)   Promotion of multifunctional, biodiverse and organic farming systems as well as 
localised,  diversified  food  systems  to  improve  food  security  in  mountain  areas 
facing climate change. Ecological and organic farming also reduce the demand 
for intensive irrigation while enhancing soil capacity in order to retain water and 
improve  water  quality.  Finally,  ecological  and  organic  farming  mitigate  climate 
change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions and increasing carbon sequestra-
tion in plants and soils;

52

(cid:81)    Maintaining  and  enhancing  the  particularly  high  agro-biodiversity  and  cultural 
diversity  in  mountain  areas  which  offer  significant  adaptation  potential  to  re-
spond to the challenges of climate change; 

(cid:81)   Providing  education  and  training  in  the  nutritional  value  of  locally  grown  and 
gathered food to mountain families and the providers of health and education 
services in mountain communities. This helps to ensure that mountain people re-
main healthy and are able to participate in the economic and social development 
of their communities and to find appropriate solutions to face the challenges of 
climate change; 

(cid:81)   Promoting a supportive environment for the development of high-quality prod-
ucts  and  services  from  mountain  areas  as  a  means  to  improve  livelihoods  and 
protect mountain environments and encourage more active involvement by the 
private sector in all parts of the value chain for high-quality mountain products;
(cid:81)   Integrating local and indigenous environmental knowledge and practices in cli-
mate change adaptation and food security strategies. The diversity of cultures 
and knowledge systems in mountain areas must be taken account of in adapting 
to climate change, and be recognized and enhanced through public policy and 
investment; 

(cid:81)     Fostering capacity building for all stakeholders in climate change processes and 
trends, mitigation and adaptation measures, and food security options in moun-
tain regions, along with the establishment of appropriate extension services;

(cid:81)     Improving economic conditions and facilitating access to resources for mountain 
communities through mechanisms such as payment for environmental services. 

53

Women group in action, Nepal (T. Hofer)

Adapting Potatoes to Climate Change in  
the Andes

In Peru, the International Potato Center, the Ministry of 
Agriculture, local and indigenous producers, retailers, 
processors and supermarkets have worked together to 
develop and market a line of native potatoes in Lima, under 
the brand name Tikapapa. 

Thomas Hofer and Paolo Ceci
Sustainable Mountain Development  
Forestry Department, FAO Rome 
Italy

Market in Peru (S. L. Mathez-Stiefel)

As pest diseases and temperature increase owing to climate change, farmers are 
forced to move higher and higher up the mountains to avoid them. Peru is home 
to  more  than  2000  varieties  of  native  potatoes,  the  vast  majority  of  which  are 
cultivated above 3800 metres, where other crops cannot grow. However, potato 
consumption has decreased in Peru, as consumer preferences have shifted to im-
ported  rice  and  noodles,  and  this  has  hurt  the  incomes  of  potato  producers  in 
food-insecure communities. Tikapapa was established to boost income for Peru-
vian potato farmers and raise consumer awareness about the nutritional value of 
native potatoes. Also, the government has acted to reduce costly wheat imports 
by encouraging people to eat bread that includes potato flour, as potato cultiva-
tion can promote food security and alleviate poverty.

54

Climate Risk Management in Nepal

In Nepal, climate change constitutes an additional threat to 
the already deprived rural population heavily engaged in ag-
riculture. Increasing trends of extreme climate events and 
natural disasters due to climate change could undermine 
future food security.

Thomas Hofer and Paolo Ceci
Sustainable Mountain Development  
Forestry Department, FAO Rome 
Italy

Although the government of Nepal has constantly responded to climate risk im-
pacts, a shift from reactive emergency response to proactive disaster risk manage-
ment initiative is crucial in order to save agricultural livelihoods. In response to a 
request from the government of Nepal, FAO is implementing a Technical Coop-
eration Project to promote national and local capacities for disaster preparedness 
and climate risk management in the agricultural sector with the long-term goal of 
making the food system in Nepal more resilient to the impacts of climate change. 
The main project outputs include a) strengthening of technical and institutional 
capacity within the Department of Agriculture for disaster preparedness and cli-
mate risk management, and b) identification and demonstration of location-spe-
cific technologies for climate change adaptation and disaster risk management at 
community levels. 

Terraced landscape, Nepal (T. Hofer)

55

Diversifying Incomes in India and Morocco

Diversifying income opportunities through the promotion of 
high-quality niche products is a key element in the develop-
ment of strategies for improving food security in mountain 
areas in the context of climate change. 

Thomas Hofer and Paolo Ceci
Sustainable Mountain Development  
Forestry Department, FAO Rome 
Italy

Saffron plant (T. Hofer)

Diversification of crops and livelihoods makes socio-economic systems more adap-
tive and responsive to environmental change, thus enhancing the resilience of ru-
ral mountain communities and their capacity to cope with climate change impacts. 
Through  the  Rawain  Womens  Cooperative  Federation,  2800  women  in  Indias 
Central Himalayan Region are employed by agricultural micro-enterprises. Knowl-
edgeable in traditional agricultural practices, which use no chemical inputs, the 
women have been able to capitalize on the growing demand for organic produce. 
The federation is marketing 18 different types of traditional crops in Indian cities, 
including buckwheat, horse gram and foxtail millet. 

In the Anti-Atlas region of Morocco, saffron, also known as red gold, is a unique 
high-value mountain product. It is a key source of income for approximately 3000 
smallholder  farmers  who  harvest  the  saffron  at  the  end  of  October,  store  it  in 
safety  boxes,  and  sell  it  on  the  market  during  the  course  of  the  year  as  family 
cash needs arise. An FAO/Mountain Partnership project was launched to support 
improved production, processing and marketing of saffron. 

56

Village scene in Central Asia (D. Maselli)

Migration and 
Mountains 

On the move, Nepal (D. Maselli)

Migration, Household Resource 
 Allocation, and Climate Change 

Kathryn H. Anderson 
Vanderbilt University  
Nashville, USA

Azam Qiyobekov
University of Central Asia
Khorog, Tajikistan

Approach to Naryn, Kyrgyzstan (K. Anderson)

Human  migration  occurs  for  many  reasons.  Some  people 
move to marry or to continue their education; others move 
for political security or religious freedom. However, the single 
most important reason for migration is economic  labor mi-
gration. 

Labor migration has important effects on labor markets and household decision-
making. It also has the potential to influence community development and alleviate 
pressure on local natural resources. Climate change can be a catalyst for migration; 
in primarily agricultural areas, it can impact the productivity of land and the viability 
of pastures, motivate migration, and alter consumption at home and abroad.

People pushed and pulled
 
Economists  use  two  theoretical  approaches  to  explain  labor  migration.  The  first 
economic  explanation  for  migration  is  often  called  the  push-pull  hypothesis. 
Economic  factors  in  the  origin  country  push  workers  into  other  markets,  while 
economic  factors  in  destination  countries  pull  workers  in.  In  this  context,  labor 
migration acts as a market-clearing mechanism. Suppose for example that global 
demand for energy is high, and energy-producing countries need more labor than 
is  locally  available.  Wages  in  the  energy  sector  are  high  and  pull  workers  from 
other regions into these countries. In contrast, suppose the productivity of land 
in  a  mountain  agricultural  region  is  low,  partly  due  to  rising  temperatures  and 
inadequate rainfall. Income is low in this region relative to income in energy-pro-
ducing regions; low wages push workers out of the mountain region into higher 
wage countries. In the global market over time, the movement of workers from 
low-wage to high-wage areas reduces regional disparities in wages, income, and 
employment; the labor market clears in the long run. 

60

Migration as a form of insurance

A second economic approach to migration is to view it as a form of insurance. 
Suppose that in one country income is volatile during the year or over time. In ag-
ricultural areas, income may be high during the harvest season and low during the 
winter; consumption patterns reflect this volatility in income. A family can smooth 
its consumption over time by saving or storing goods during the summer months 
and spending down savings in the winter, but without developed and safe institu-
tions for saving, savings will not be adequate to compensate families during the 
difficult times. As an alternative, a family can use migration to protect itself from 
negative  shocks  to  income  and  wealth.  If  the  family  sends  someone  to  a  more 
stable market for work, then during the downturn in the local economy, the family 
receives income support from abroad. In this way, consumption is smoothed over 
time, and the family gains the peace of mind of a stable, constant flow of income. 
Remittance  flows  from  migrants  do  stabilize  income  over  time  in  lower-income 
countries.  Income  stability  encourages  investment  and  planning  for  the  future 
(Chami, Hakura, and Monteil 2009).

A migrants view

 There is not enough demand for skilled labor here. The government knows 
the problem but offers no support. There are opportunities for business here 
but we do not have starting capital. I need credit to buy new equipment, but 
I cannot get credit. Goods brought from China are cheaper and the compe-
tition is tough. I am looking for alternatives to make money but migration 
seems to be the best choice. So most likely I will have to migrate again; there 
is no opportunity here. I will have to go to Russia and earn money there. The 
wage rate here is not enough to repay the debt. 

Skilled young craftsman from Badakshan, Tajikistan, working in construction 
in Russia. 

Labor migrants in rural Badakshan, Tajikistan (K. Anderson)

61

New homes in migrant suburb of Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan (K. Anderson)

Changes in climate and changes in the environment contribute both to labor mi-
gration as a market-clearing mechanism and labor migration as insurance. People 
often  move  for  environmental  reasons.  A  natural  disaster  such  as  a  hurricane, 
earthquake  or  tsunami  destroys  local  capital,  both  physical  and  human;  people 
leave  for  safer  markets,  but  most  eventually  return  to  the  same  place.  Climate 
change also contributes to labor migration. It has been cited as a cause of de-
sertification,  soil  erosion,  deforestation,  rising  sea  levels  and  the  salinization  of 
water  resources  (Boncour,  2009).  All  of  these  factors  contribute  negatively  to 
local productivity and income; migration is one way local populations can adjust 
to economic damage precipitated by climate change. 

Remittances and household resource allocation

In addition to the direct effects of labor migration on productivity, employment, 
and income in sending and receiving countries, migration has an important sec-
ondary  effect  on  markets  through  remittances.  Figure  7.1  shows  the  increasing 
importance of remittances in low-income countries. Between 1999 and 2008, offi-
cial remittances increased from 3% to almost 7% of GDP. Worldwide, remittances 
have become an increasingly important source of foreign exchange. 

The impact of remittance income on economic development depends on how the 
transfers are used in the short run and the long run. Remittance income can be 
used to support current consumption, reduce labor supply of family members, or 
finance investment. Remittance income can be invested in physical capital, live-
stock and land or in human capital through education, training and health. Invest-
ments  in  agriculture  are  directly  linked  to  environmental  concerns  and  may  im-
prove or exacerbate existing environmental problems. Community investments in 
infrastructure, if carefully developed, can lower the costs of energy and transport. 
Household and community human capital investments are generally expected to 
improve  skill  and  knowledge  and  lead  to  more  efficient  allocation  of  resources 
within households, businesses, and communities.

62

In general, remittances to lower income countries increase household income and 
reduce poverty; these effects are larger in the poorest households. A recent World 
Bank study estimated that between 1995 and 2004, one-fifth of the poverty re-
duction in Nepal was due to labor migration and remittances (Lokshin, Bontch-Os-
molovski, and Glinskaya, 2007). Remittances are mostly spent on living expenses 
and  often  allow  women,  children  and  the  elderly  to  reduce  their  hours  of  paid 
work. For children and younger women this means that remittances can motivate 
them to remain in school or to enter job training programs. 

On the negative side, remittances cannot fully compensate for the lack of young 
workers  in  migrant  communities.  In  some  communities  children  are  raised  by 
grandparents because parents migrate for work; these children often exhibit more 
behavioral problems than other children and do worse in school. Remittance in-
come is also frequently used for large celebrations such as funerals and weddings; 
while  the  payment  may  improve  ones  status  in  the  community,  it  does  little  to 
develop skills, create jobs, or make the household more secure. Finally, remittance 
income has been used to purchase livestock in communities with inadequate pas-
ture management and dwindling supplies of water. Short-run gains motivate the 
purchase of large animals; long-run planning is secondary. 

The relevance of climate change for migration

There are many ways in which climate change can affect economic performance. 
Climate change is the mother of all externalities: larger, more complex, and more 
uncertain than any other environmental problem (Tol 2009). Greenhouse gases 
are produced from many different sources  homes, farms, businesses, transport  
and their effects are pervasive  agriculture, energy, health, labor productivity. Re-
source scarcity precipitated by climate change can motivate inter-regional conflict. 
The literature suggests that climate change has a negative impact on economic 
performance in the long run if temperatures continue to rise; estimates are in the 
range of 1-4% of GDP, the equivalent of over one year of economic growth. In 
low-income developing countries, the cost of climate change is more than dou-
ble the world average. While the impact of climate change on labor productivity 
is not clearly documented in the literature, some argue that the impact may be 
substantial. Low productivity precipitated by climate change keeps wages low 
in low-income, primarily agricultural countries, and encourages the most skilled 
workers to move to less affected markets. Income is remitted to sending commu-
nities and can help households adjust their consumption to better fit a changing 
environment. 

P
D
G
 
f
o
 
)

%

(
 
e
r
a
h
s
 
e
c
n
a
t
t
i

m
e
R

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

Figure 7.1: Remittances into low 
 income countries, 1999-2008
(World Development Indicators  
Database 2009).

63

Migration from the Mountains of Central Asia

Remittances from migrants provide an important share of 
the income of the countries in Central Asia. For Tajikistan, 
official remittances and other external transfers accounted 
for 39 % of GDP in 2006, one of the highest figures in the 
world. 40% of households received remittances in cash or 
kind, with over 70% of the poorest households receiving 
transfers (Brown, Olimova, and Boboev, 2008).

Kathryn H. Anderson 
Vanderbilt University  
Nashville, USA

Azam Qiyobekov
University of Central Asia
Khorog, Tajikistan

School built with remittances from village 
diaspora,Badakshan, Tajikistan (K. Anderson)

Migration  significantly  alters  income,  expenditure  and  investment  patterns  of 
households. A survey done in Kyrgyzstan in 2008 (Anderson and Qiyobekov, 2009) 
on monthly earnings abroad (primarily in Russia) found that education paid off in 
the labor market abroad. Monthly income was 20% lower for secondary school 
dropouts and 20% higher for the most highly educated workers in comparison 
to all other migrants in the sample. Legal registration was also important; income 
was 22% lower for workers without legal registration. Workers in the retail trade 
earned over 50% more than workers in other occupations. The average month-
ly  income  earned  abroad  was  $635;  the  wealthiest  migrant  received  $12,000  a 
month and was engaged in trade.

The survey also found that remittances significantly increased the proportion of 
family income that was allocated to living expenses. Remittances also led to more 
consumption of communication equipment such as TVs, radios, and cell phones 
and had no effect on entertainment, education, or other durables. However, mi-
gration history mattered. Expenditures on entertainment and savings fell with the 
duration of migration, but expenditures on education increased. Expenditures on 
all durable goods increased with the number of migration spells from the house-
hold. There was no negative effect of migration and remittances on relationships 
within the family or community.

64

The  effect  of  migration  on  the  local  environment  is  difficult  to  assess,  and  the 
available  data  do  not  offer  a  clear  answer.  The  literature  suggests  that  climate 
change has had a significant negative impact on productivity, particularly in low-
income countries. Emigration can offset this negative effect of climate change by 
giving households more occupational and location choice; individuals can move 
from  low  productivity  agricultural  areas  to  higher  productivity  urban  areas  and 
improve the economic well-being of their households at home and their commu-
nities. In addition, remittance income can also be an effective tool to combat the 
negative impact of climate change. Remittances increase household income and 
lower poverty; if remittances are used to purchase more efficient durable goods 
and housing, then migrant households better adapt to resource scarcity and cli-
mate  change  in  their  own  communities.  However,  there  are  costs  to  long-term 
migration. Rural households are highly likely to invest in livestock with remittance 
income, and the combination of increasing livestock numbers and unsustainable 
pasture management can lead to pasture degradation (Schoch 2009). In addition, 
as  the  most  able  workers  and  their  families  leave  the  community,  communities 
may be less willing and able to effect changes that would streamline community 
response to the pressures of climate change. Policy initiatives can help mitigate the 
negative effects of migration on communities by encouraging sustainable invest-
ment, education, good management, and support from a diverse diaspora. 

Migrant family in Bishkek, Kyrgyzstan (K. Anderson)

65

Mountains and  
Climate Change
A Global Concern

Mountains in Mongolia (E. Gabathuler)

Mountains and Climate Change:  
A Global Concern

Mountains are among the regions most affected by climate 
change,  and  some  of  the  clearest  evidence,  such  as  the 
shrinkage of glaciers, comes from mountain areas. As the 
present publication shows, the implications of climate change 
in mountains will reach far beyond mountain areas: Climate 
change in mountains is a global concern.   

Mountains: a key concern on the global climate change agenda

Mountains provide freshwater to half of the worlds population. Climate change 
will affect the availability of water. In many cases, this will mean less water when 
it is most needed (Chapters 2 and 3 in the present publication). Regions with the 
most mountain land are also the regions where mountain water for surrounding 
lowlands is most important  including the countries across the Eurasian continent 
from the Middle East to China, the Andean countries, the Nile Basin, and western 
North America (Map page 69). Also, many countries with less mountain land criti-
cally depend on mountain waters for specific regions or uses. Climate change in 
mountains will thus have important implications for irrigation, urbanization and 
industrialization, and hydropower generation. This will mean using water more ef-
ficiently, increasing storage capacities, and establishing, or re-visiting, institutional 
arrangements for sharing water equitably within and between nations. 

Mountain areas are typically exposed to multiple hazards. Climate change is likely 
to increase this exposure, as extreme events such as storms, landslides, avalanch-
es, and rockfalls are likely to become more common and more intense in mountain 
areas (Chapter 4), threatening both livelihoods and infrastructure. Hazards cannot 
be prevented, but mountain regions can be supported in managing the risks ema-
nating from these hazards. This support begins with preparedness and ends with 
recovery; key ideas include effective early warning systems, land use zoning, and 
strategies for intervention. 

Half of the global biodiversity hotspots are in mountain regions. They are an im-
portant  global  heritage  that  is  being  threatened  by  climate  change  and  human 
action (Chapter 5). Impressive achievements have been made in safeguarding this 
heritage; protected areas have been the fastest growing land use category in re-
cent decades, especially in mountains. While mountain biodiversity is thus increas-
ingly  seen  as  a  global  common  good  by  many,  local  communities  who  directly 
depend on its services must be included in stewardship of this valuable resource. 
Mountain communities should see more tangible benefits from conservation ef-
forts than has been the case in the past. Payment for Environmental Services is a 
way to achieve this aim. 

Mountains are home to about 10% of the global population. The large majority 
of mountain people live in developing countries. One third of them are food-inse-
cure, a high proportion in global comparison (Chapters 6 and 7). Mountains are 
often limited-choice environments due to harsh living conditions and a marginal 
position in terms of economic integration and political decision-making. External 
support is needed in order to reduce poverty levels. As temperatures rise, however, 
climate change might hold prospects for mountain agriculture  for crops previ-
ously not grown or limited to lower altitudes  provided that water, land, labour 
and capital through credit schemes or remittances from migrants are available to 
exploit such opportunities, and that access to markets is assured.        

68

The importance of moving beyond climate change 

Much recent and current debate on adaptive capacity and vulnerability has been 
driven  by  the  climate  change  agenda,  but  understanding  the  multidimensional 
nature of drivers of change, responses and feedback mechanisms is essential. This 
also applies to mountain regions, which are exposed to a wide range of mainly 
external drivers of change, including political, economic, and socio-cultural forces. 
Climate change action must therefore be embedded into a more general frame-
work as provided, for example, by the concept of sustainable development. Any 
such framework will have to take note of the great diversity of mountain devel-
opment contexts relating to environment, people, economies and cultures (Map 
below). Specific and tailored strategies will therefore be needed when it comes to 
climate change action. Human factors such as governance need to be considered 
in order to avoid simplistic projections about the impacts of climate change.

Managing climate change in mountains: a huge externality 

Many  mountain  countries,  especially  those  with  a  high  percentage  of  mountain 
territory, are developing countries with lower levels of industrialization, and many 
are smaller nations (Map below). For these countries, adaptation is the main an-
swer; they are far less the cause of the problem than they are the victims when 
it comes to climate change. For them, this change is a huge externality that will 
mean substantial additional costs in future. As adaptive measures are designed and 
implemented,  the  involvement  of  mountain  populations  is  a  must,  as  they  have 
important knowledge and will be among those most directly affected by climate 
change and remedial action. As the case studies collected in the present publication 
show, the involvement of local people is increasingly becoming a reality.

Adaptation will have to be supported by mitigating measures that address the root 
causes of climate change: the emission of greenhouse gases and other substances 
that cause global warming. The involvement of economic and population centres 

Map of the countries of the world 
and their mountain areas.

80N

80N

60N

60N

20N

0

20S

40N

40S

40N

40S

20N

0

20S

60S

80S

80S

60S

 CDE, University of Bern 2002, 2009

Percentage of mountainous area per country

0  10 %
10  25 %

25  50 %
50  100 %

Map scale: approx. 1:200,000,000

Map Source
Terrain data: resampled from GTOPO30, produced by US Gelogical Survey (UGS)
Administrative: ESRI Data and Maps
Map projection: Mollweide
Map authors: Sebastian Eugster, Hans Hurni, Albrecht Ehrensperger, Thomas Kohler and Kristina Imbach 2002 (CDE, University of Bern) 
Map compilation 2009: Ulla Gaemperli Krauer (CDE, University of Bern)

69

outside mountain regions in industrialized, emerging and developing economies 
will be critical for achieving a tangible reduction of these emissions, as a major 
share  of  the  greenhouse  gases  are  released  in  these  areas.  Some  of  the  largest 
emissions of greenhouse gases come from countries with a significant proportion 
of mountain areas, such as China, the US, and Russia (Map page 69).   

The way forward

At the global level: Chapter 13 of Agenda 21, with its focus on mountain areas, 
as well as the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change and its Clean De-
velopment Mechanism (CDM), provide frameworks for concrete action to tackle 
the drivers of climate change and to mitigate its impact. It is hoped that the UN 
Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen in 2009 will be a starting point for 
strengthening these mechanisms. As many mountain countries are smaller devel-
oping nations, they have not benefited much from the CDM programme and the 
carbon  market,  due  to  institutional  constraints  and  the  complexity  of  accessing 
funds. This requires urgent re-examination. Mountains and money do not easily 
come together. Technological, financial, and institutional support for development 
in mountain countries thus need be strengthened. Mechanisms for coordinating 
and extending such support include the Global Environment Facility (GEF), the Na-
tional Adaptation Programmes for Action (NAPA), and the Global Climate Change 
Alliance of the EU, to mention but a few mechanisms already in place.  

At the national and regional levels: Many countries have established national 
focal points and regional bodies for managing climate change and have carried 
out impact assessments to determine how climate change is likely to affect them. 
However, progress on mainstreaming climate change adaptation has been limited, 
especially in relation to key development concepts such as poverty reduction poli-
cies, land use planning and zoning, and national development strategies. There is 
a growing number of Payment for Environmental Services (PES) programmes with 
proven  track  records  in  industrialized  and  developing  countries.  PES  relating  to 
watershed management, water regulation for hydropower and irrigation, biodi-
versity conservation, and hazard prevention are a means for ensuring that moun-
tain communities can benefit from the implementation of measures to maintain 
environmental services that are important for lowland areas and their large popu-
lation centres. Many of the efforts made to date in climate change adaptation are 
generic. Proven practices that could be upscaled are as yet lacking. Documentation 
and lessons learnt will thus be crucial for establishing a body of sound experience 
tailored to the specific needs of mountain regions.  

The  importance  of  research:  The  research  community  has  a  responsibility  to 
sensitize  policy-makers  and  the  public  about  climate  change  in  mountains  and 
its implications in wider highland-lowland interactive development contexts. Re-
search should also focus on designing integrated mitigation and adaptation meas-
ures. Given the paucity of reliable and long-term data on mountain climates and 
resources, especially in countries of the South and East, there is a need to establish 
long-term observatories and monitoring mechanisms that will allow more accurate 
projections  of  climate  change,  more  precise  assessment  of  impacts,  and    docu-
mentation of existing adaptation strategies in and beyond mountain regions. For 
the research and education communities, capacity development and transdiscipli-
nary approaches will be important components of all these activities. 

Now  is  the  time  for  action  in  addressing  climate  change  issues  in  mountains.  
This  could  help  transform  currently  perceived  problems  into  opportunities  for  a 
better future in mountain regions and in the many lowland areas that depend on 
their services.

70

References

1 Climate Change in Mountains 
Beniston M, Keller F, Koffi B, and Goyette S. 2003. Estimates of snow accumulation and volume 

in the Swiss Alps under changing climatic conditions. Theor. Appl. Climatol., 76, 125140.

Bohm R, Auer I, Brunetti M, Maugeri M, Nanni T, Schoner W. 2001. Regional temperature vari-
ability in the European Alps: 1760-1998 from homogenized instrumental time series. Int. J. 
Climatol. 21, 1779-1801.

Fowler HJ, Archer DR. 2006. Conflicting Signals of Climatic Change in the Upper Indus Basin. 

J. Climate, 19, 42764293.

Giorgi  F,  Hurrell  JW,  Marinucci  MR,  Beniston  M.  1997.  Elevation  signal  in  surface  climate 

change: A model study. J. Clim., 10, 288296.

Graham LP, Hagemann S, Jaun S, Beniston M. 2007. On interpreting hydrological change from 

regional climate models. Clim. Change, doi:10.1007/s10584-006-9217-0.

IPCC, 2007: Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group 
I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Solo-
mon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K.B. Averyt, M.Tignor and H.L. Miller 
(eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U.K. and New York, USA.

Myrna H, Hall P, Fagre DB. 2003. Modeled Climate-Induced Glacier Change in Glacier National 

Park, 1850- 2100. BioScience, 53, 131-140.

OcCC, 2007: Climate change and Switzerland 2050. Bern, ProClim-/OcCC.

Oerlemans, J. 2003: Climate sensitivity of glaciers in southern Norway: application of an energy-

balance model to Nigardsbreen, Hellstugubreen and Alfotbreen. J. Glaciol., 38, 223-232.

Richter M. 1996. Klimatologische und pflanzenmorphologische Vertikalgradienten in Hochge-

birgen. Erdkunde 50: 205-238. 

Schneeberger C, Blatter H, Abe-Ouchi A, Wild M. 2003. Modelling change in the mass bal-
ance of glaciers of the northern hemisphere for a transient 2xCO2 scenario. J. Hydrol., 274, 
62-79.

Urrutia R, Vuille M. 2009. Climate change projections for the tropical Andes using a regional 
climate model: Temperature and precipitation simulations for the end of the 21st century. J. 
Geophys. Res., 114, D02108.

Vuille M, Bradley RS. 2000. Mean annual temperature trends and their vertical structure in the 

tropical Andes. Geophys. Res. Lett., 27, 38853888.

Westerling AL, Hidalgo HG, Cayan DR, Swetnam TW. 2006. Warming and Earlier Spring In-

creases Western U.S. Forest Wildfire Activity. Science, 313, 940-943.

2 Mountain Waters
Adam JC, Hamlet AF, Lettenmaier DP. 2009. Implications of global climate change for snowmelt 

hydrology in the twenty-first century. Hydrological Processes 23:962972.

Barnaby W. 2009. Do nations go to war over water? Nature 458:282283.

Barnett TP, Adam JC, Lettenmaier DP. 2005. Potential impacts of a warming climate on water 

availability in snow-dominated regions. Nature 438:303309.

Buytaert W, Celleri R, De Bievre B, Hofstede R, Cisneros F, Wyseure G, Deckers J. 2006. Human 

impact on the hydrology of the Andean paramos. Earth Science Reviews 79, 53-72.

Gorecki K, Walsh M, Zukiwsky J. 2009. District of Elkford Climate Change Adaptation Strategy. 
Columbia  Basin  Trust.  http://www.cbt.org/uploads/pdf/Elkford_Climate_Change_Adapta-
tion_Final_Report_reduced.pdf

Hamlet AF, Mote PW, Clark MP, Lettenmaier DP. 2005. Effects of temperature and precipitation 

variability on snowpack trends in the western U.S., J. of Climate, 18(21): 4545-4561.

IPCC, 2007. Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. 
Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental 
Panel on Climate Change [Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K.B. 
Averyt,  M.Tignor  and  H.L.  Miller  (eds.)].  Cambridge  University  Press,  Cambridge,  United 
Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

Lee SY, Hamlet AF, Fitzgerald JC, Burges SJ, Lettenmaier PD. 2006. Optimized flood control in 
the Columbia River Basin for a global warming scenario. In D. Zimbelman and W.C. Loehlein 
(eds.), Operating Reservoirs in Changing Conditions, ASCE conference proceedings, Sac-
ramento, CA, August 14-16, 2006, Reston, Virginia: American Society of Civil Engineers.

72

Liepa I. 2009. Adapting to Climate Change in Kimberley, B.C. Report and Recommendations. 

Columbia Basin Trust. http://www.cbt.org/uploads/pdf/June17Final-LowRes.pdf

Murtinho F. In prep. Adaptacion frente a la degradacion de fuentes de agua: Experiencias de 

Acueductos Comunitarios en los Andes Colombianos. Proyecto Paramo Andino.

Viviroli D, Weingartner R. 2004. The Hydrological Significance of the European Alps. Hydrologi-
cal Atlas of Switzerland, Plate 6.4. Federal Office for the Environment (FOEN), Bern, CH, 
ISBN 978 3 9520262 0 5.

Viviroli  D,  Weingartner  R,  Messerli  B.  2003.  Assessing  the  hydrological  significance  of  the 

worlds mountains. Mountain Research and Development, 23(1):3240.

Viviroli D, Durr HH, Messerli B, Meybeck M, Weingartner R. 2007. Mountains of the world, 
water towers for humanity: typology, mapping, and global significance. Water Resources 
Research, 43(7): W07447.

3 Mountain Glaciers
Ageta Y, Kadota T. 1992.Predictions of changes of glacier mass balance in the Nepal Himalaya 
and Tibetan Plateau: a case study of air temperature increase for three glaciers. Annals of 
Glaciology, 16: 89-94.

Chinn T, Salinger J, Fitzharris B, Willsman A. 2008. Glaciers and Climate. FMC Bulletin, The Bul-

letin of the Federated Mountain Clubs of New Zealand. 171; March 2008: 20-29.

Cruz RV, Harasawa H, Lal M, Wu S, Anokhin Y, Punsalmaa B, Honda Y, Jafari M, Li C, Huu Ninh 
N. 2007. Asia. Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability. Contribution 
of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Cli-
mate Change, M.L. Parry, O.F. Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden and C.E. Hanson, 
Eds., Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 469-506.

Dyurgerov M, Meier MF. 2005. Glaciers and the Changing Earth System: A 2004 Snapshot. Oc-
casional Paper 58, Institute of Arctic and Alpine Research, University of Colorado, Boulder, 
CO: 118 pp.

Haeberli W. 2006. Integrated perception of glacier changes: a challenge of historical dimen-
sions. In: Knight, P. G. (ed): Glacier Science and Environmental Change. Blackwell, Oxford, 
423-430.

Haeberli  W,  Hoelzle  M,  Paul  F,  Zemp  M.  2007.  Integrated  monitoring  of  mountain  glaciers 
as key indicators of global climate change: the European Alps. Annals of Glaciology, 46, 
150-160.

Hoelzle M, Chinn T, Stumm D, Paul F, Zemp M, Haeberli W. 2007. The application of glacier in-
ventory data for estimating past climate-change effects on mountain glaciers: a comparison 
between the European Alps and the Southern Alps of New Zealand. Global and Planetary 
Change, 56, 6982.

IPCC.  2007.  The  Physical  Science  Basis.  Contribution  of  Working  Group  I  to  the  Fourth  As-
sessment  Report  of  the  Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change  (IPCC).  Cambridge 
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

Meier MF, Dyurgerov MB, Rick UK, ONeel S, Pfeffer WT, Anderson RS, Anderson SP, Glazovsky 
AF. 2007. Glaciers dominate eustatic sea-level rise in the 21st century. Science, 317 (5841): 
1064-1067.

OcCC. 2004. Klimaentwicklung in der Schweiz bis 2050. Ein kurzer Uberblick. Studie im Rah-
men des Forschungsprogramms Energiewirtschaftliche Grundlagen des Bundesamts fur 
Energie BFE, durchgefuhrt durch das Organe consultatif pour le Changement Climatique 
(OcCC), Bern: 7 pp.

Oerlemans J, Giessen RH, van den Broeke MR. 2009. Retreating alpine glaciers: increased melt 
rates due to accumulatiuon of dust (Vadret da Morteratsch, Switzerland). Journal of Glaciol-
ogy (in press).

Paul F, Machguth H, Kaab A. 2005. On the impact of glacier albedo under conditions of ex-
treme glacier melt: the summer of 2003 in the Alps. EARSeL Workshop on Remote Sensing 
of Land Ice and Snow, Berne, 21.-23.2. 2005. EARSeL eProceedings, 4 (2), 139-149.

Solomina O, Haeberli W, Kull C, Wiles G. 2008. Historical and Holocene glacier-climate rela-

tions: general concepts and overview. Global and Planetary Change 60, 1-9.

UNEP. 2007. Global outlook for ice and snow. United Nations Environment Programme, Earth-

Print: 235 pp.

WGMS. 2008. Global Glacier Changes: facts and figures. Zemp, M., Roer, I., Kaab, A., Hoelzle, 
M., Paul, F. and Haeberli, W. (eds.), UNEP, World Glacier Monitoring Service, Zurich, Swit-
zerland: 88 pp.

Zemp M, Haeberli W, Hoelzle M, Paul F. 2006. Alpine glaciers to disappear within decades? 

Geophysical Research Letters, 33, L13504 (doi: 10.1029/2006 GL026319).

73

Zemp  M,  Haeberli  W,  Bajracharya  S,  Chinn  TJ,  Fountain  AG,  Hagen  JO,  Huggel  C,  Kaab  A, 
Kaltenborn BP, Karki M, Kaser G, Kotlyakov VM, Lambrechts C, Li ZQ, Molnia BF, Mool P, 
Nellemann C, Novikov V, Osipova GB, Rivera A, Shrestha B, Svoboda F, Tsvetkov DG, Yao 
TD. 2007. Glaciers and ice caps. Part I: Global overview and outlook. Part II: Glacier changes 
around the world. In: UNEP: Global outlook for ice & snow. UNEP/GRID-Arendal, Norway: 
p. 115152.

Zemp M, Hoelzle M, Haeberli W. 2009. Six decades of glacier mass balance observations  a 

review of the worldwide monitoring network. Annals of Glaciology, 50, 101-111.

4 Mountain Hazards
Bavay  M,  Lehning  M,  Jonas  T,  and  Lowe  H.  2009.  Simulations  of  future  snow  cover  and 
discharge  in  Alpine  headwater  catchments.  Hydrological  Processes  23(1):  95-108. 
DOI:10.1002/hyp.7195.

Beniston M. 2005. The risks associated with climatic change in mountain regions. In: Huber U., 
Bugmann H. and Reasoner M. (eds) Global change and mountain regions: an overview of 
current knowledge. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 511-520.

Hewitt K. 1997. Risks and disasters in mountain lands. In: Messerli B, Ives JD (eds) Mountains of 

the world: a global priority. Parthenon Publishing, New York, pp 371408.

IPCC.  2007.  Climate  Change  2007:  Impacts,  Adaptation  and  Vulnerability.  M.L.  Parry,  O.F. 
Canziani, J.P. Palutikof, P.J. van der Linden and C.E. Hanson (eds). Contribution of Work-
ing Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK, 976 pp.

Iyngararasan M, Tianchi L, Shrestha S, and Mool P. 2002. The challenges of mountain environ-
ments:  Water,  natural  resources,  hazards,  desertification  and  the  implications  of  climate 
change. Thematic Paper E1, Bishkek Global Mountain Summit.

Johannesson  T,  and  Arnalds  Th.  2001.  Accidents  and  economic  damage  due  to  snow  ava-

lanches and landslides in Iceland. Jokull 50, 8194.

Lehning M, Wilhelm C. 2006. Risk Management and Physical Modelling for Mountainous Natu-
ral  Hazards.  In:  Albeverio,  S.;  Jentsch,  V.;  Kantz,  H.  (eds.)  Extreme  Events  in  Nature  and 
Society. Springer, Dordrecht, pp 277-292. 

Phillips M. 2006. Avalanche defense strategies and monitoring of two sites in mountain perma-

frost terrain. Pontresina, eastern Swiss Alps. Natural Hazards: 39: 353-379.

UN/ISDR. 2002. Newsletter Issue 5, ISDR Informs - Latin America and the Caribbean Disaster 
Reduction for Sustainable Mountain Development. United Nations -International Strategy 
for Disaster Reduction.

UNEP-WCMC. 2002. Mountain Watch. Environmental Change & Sustainable Development in 

Mountains. UNEP-WCMC, Cambridge, UK.

5 Mountain Biodiversity
Baron JS, Herrod Julius S, West JM, Joyce LA, Blate G, Peterson CH, Palmer M, Keller BD, Ka-
reiva P, Scott JM and Griffith B. 2009. Some Guidelines for Helping Natural Resources Adapt 
to Climate Change. IHDP Update 2: 46-52.

Hemp A. 2005. Climate change-driven forest fires marginalize the impact of ice cap wasting on 

Kilimanjaro. Global Change Biology 11: 1013-1023.

Koerner C, Spehn E. 2002. Mountain biodiversity: a global assessment. The Parthenon Publish-

ing Group, London.

Koerner C. 2004. Mountain biodiversity, its causes and function. Ambio 7, Sp. Rep. 13, 11-17.

Koerner C et al. 2005. Mountain Systems. In: Hassan R, Scholes R, Ash N (eds) Current State 
and Trends: Findings of the Condition and Trends Working Group. Millennium Ecosystem 
Assessment, vol 1. Island Press, Washington D.C., pp 681-716.

Koerner  C.  2009.  Climate  Change  in  the  Mountains  -  Who  Wins  and  Who  Loses?  ICIMOD 
Newsletter No. 55, ICIMOD, Kathmandu, Nepal. http://books.icimod.org/index.php/down-
loads/publication/601 (accessed on 23 Oct. 2009).

OECD.  2003.  Development  and  Climate  Change  in  Tanzania:  Focus  on  Mount  Kilimanjaro. 
Report of Working Party on Global and Structural Policies. Organisation for Economic De-
velopment (OECD), Paris.

Spehn EM, Liberman M, Koerner C. 2006. Land use change and mountain biodiversity. CRC 

Press, Boca Raton.

Theurillat JP, Guisan A. 2001. Potential impact of climate change on vegetation in the European 

Alps: A review. Climatic Change 50:77-109.

74

Worboys GL. 2009. IUCN WCPA Workshop report Mountain Transboundary Protected Area 
and Connectivity Conservation 2008, ICIMOD, Kathmandu, Nepal. pp 47-64: http://books.
icimod.org/index.php/downloads/publication/588 (accessed on 23 Oct. 2009).

6 Food Security in Mountains
FAO. 2003. Towards a GIS-based analysis of mountain environments and populations. Environ-

ment and Natural Resources Working Paper No.10. Rome, 26 pp.

The  International  Commission  on  the  Future  of  Food  and  Agriculture.  2008.  Manifesto  on 

climate change and the future of food security. Regione Toscana, 51 pp.

FAO.  2007.  Facing  change    climate  change  in  mountain  areas.  Brochure  prepared  for  the 

celebration of the International Mountain Day 2007.

FAO. 2008. High time for action  food security in mountains. Brochure prepared for the cel-

ebration of the International Mountain Day 2008.

7 Migration and Mountains 
Anderson KH, Qiyobekov A. 2009. Migration in Central Asia: Wages abroad and consumption 
at  home.  Paper  presented  at  the  Central  Asian  Mountain  Partnership  (CAMP)  Forum  on 
Labor Migration: Challenges and Opportunities. October 8-9, 2009, Dushanbe, Tajikistan.

Boncour P. 2009. The moment of truth  adapting to climate change. Migration (August):3-4.

Brown  R,  Olimova  S,  Boboev  M.  2008.  Remittances  of  international  migrants  in  Tajikistan. 

Manila: Asian Development Bank.

Chami R, Hakura D, Montiel P. 2009. Remittances: an automatic stabilizer? IMF Working Paper 

No.WP/09/91. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.

El-Pikir Public Opinion Research Center and the Eurasia Foundation of Central Asia. 2009. As-
sessment of the social and economic situation of Kyrgyz labor migrants returning to their 
home land. Final Report, Project supported through Civic Advocacy for Reform and Stability 
(CARS) implemented by PACT and funded by USAID.

International Organization of Migration. 2008. World Migration 2008: Managing Labour Mo-

bility in the Evolving Global Economy. Geneva: International Organization of Migration.

Lokshin M, Bontch-Osmolovski M, Glinskaya E. 2007. Work-related migration and poverty re-
duction in Nepal. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. WPS4231. Washington, 
DC: The World Bank.

Pandya J. 2009. Water, water, not a drop to spare: rural-urban migration highlights Tanzanias 

environmental challenges. Migration (August):9-11.

Schoch N. 2009. Migration and livestock farming  competing or complementary livelihood 
strategies. A case study of Ylaitalaa, Kyrgyzstan. Poster Presentation, National Center for 
Competence in Research North-South, Bern, Switzerland.

Tol  RSJ.  2009.  The  economic  effects  of  climate  change.  Journal  of  Economic  Perspectives 

v.23(2, Spring):29-51.

World Bank. 2005. Global Development Finance. Washington, DC: The World Bank. [cited in 

Global Economic Prospects, 2006.]

75

By three methods we may learn wisdom: 
first, by reflection, which is noblest; 
second, by imitation, which is easiest; 
and third, by experience, which is the most bitter.

Confucius

The editors would like to thank the follow-
ing  experts  for  their  contributions  to  this 
publication as authors or reviewers: 

Authors

1 Climate Change in Mountains

4 Mountain Hazards

7 Migration and Mountains

Urs Neu 
Forum for Climate and Global Change 
Swiss Academy of Sciences, Bern, 
 Switzerland 
Corresponding author: 
urs.neu@scnat.ch

2 Mountain Waters

Daniel Viviroli, Bruno Messerli,  
Bruno Schadler, Rolf Weingartner 
Institute of Geography, University of Bern, 
Switzerland 
Corresponding author:  
viviroli@giub.unibe.ch

Wouter Buytaert
Imperial College, London
Francesco Cuesta and Miguel Saravia
CIP-CONDESAN, Lima, Peru
Corresponding author:  
w.buytaert@imperial.ac.uk

Hans Schreier
University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
Canada
Kindy Gosal
Columbia Basin Trust, Golden BC, Canada
Corresponding author: (Hans Schreier)  
star@interchange.ubc.ca

3 Mountain Glaciers

Wilfried Haeberli and Michael Zemp
World Glacier Monitoring Service 
University of Zurich, Switzerland

Marco Zapata
Unidad de Glaciologia,  
Autoridad Nacional del Agua
Huaraz, Peru

Trevor Chinn
Alpine Processes Consultancy
Lake Hawea, New Zealand

Pradeep Mool
International Centre for Integrated Moun-
tain Development
Kathmandu, Nepal
Corresponding author:  
wilfried.haeberli@gmail.com

Christoph Marty, Marcia Phillips, Stephan 
Margreth, Oliver Korup
WSL Institute for Snow and Avalanche 
Research SLF
Davos, Switzerland
Corresponding author:  
marty@slf.ch

Carmenza Robledo
Intercooperation, Bern, Switzerland

Christian Huggel
Geography Department,  
University of Zurich, Switzerland

Lenkiza Angulo
UC-Programa de Adaptacion al Cambio 
Climatico, Peru
Corresponding author: 
carmenza.robledo@intercooperation.ch

5 Mountain Biodiversity

Eva Spehn and Christian Koerner
Global Mountain Biodiversity Assessment
University of Basel, Switzerland
Corresponding Author: (Eva Spehn) 
gmba@unibas.ch

Nakul Chettri, Bandana Shakya, and 
 Eklabya Sharma
International Centre for Integrated 
 Mountain Development (ICIMOD)
Kathmandu, Nepal
Corresponding Author: (Eklabya Sharma) 
esharma@icimod.org

6 Food Security in Mountains  

Thomas Hofer and PaoloCeci
Sustainable Mountain Development
Forestry Department, FAO, Rome, Italy
Corresponding author:  
thomas.hofer@fao.org

Kathryn H. Anderson
Vanderbilt University, Nashville,  
Tennessee, USA

AzamQiyobekov
University of Central Asia, Khorog, 
Tajikistan
Corresponding author:  
kathryn.anderson@Vanderbilt.Edu

Mountains and Climate Change:   
A Global Concern

Mountain Focus Group, CDE, University of 
Bern; Switzerland 
written by Thomas Kohler  

Reviewers 

Henry F. Diaz, NOAA/ESRL/CIRES, Boulder, 
Colorado, USA
Georg Grabherr, Department of Conserva-
tion Biology, University of Vienna, Austria
Christian Huggel, Geography Department, 
University of Zurich, Switzerland
Hans Hurni, NCCR North-South, University 
of Bern, Switzerland
Bruno Messerli, former chair Programme 
Advisory Committee of ICIMOD (Inter-
national Centre for Integrated Mountain 
Development), Kathmandu, Nepal
Michel Meybeck, CNRS, Universite Pierre 
et Marie Curie, Paris, France
Matthias Vuille, Dept. of Earth and Atmos-
pheric Science, University of Albany, USA 

Editors

Daniel Maselli, Swiss Agency for Develop-
ment and Cooperation, Bern, Switzerland 
daniel.maselli@deza.admin.ch 
 
Thomas Kohler, Centre for Development 
and Environment, Bern, Switzerland 
thomas.kohler@cde.unibe.ch

Mountains are among the regions most affected by 
climate  change.  The  implications  of  climate  change 
will  reach  far  beyond  mountain  areas,  as  the  con-
tributions  in  the  present  publication  prepared  for 
the UN Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen 
in  2009  show.  Themes  discussed  are  water,  glaciers 
and permafrost, hazards, biodiversity, food security, 
and migration. The case studies included show that 
concrete  adaptive  action  has  been  taken  in  many 
mountain  areas  of  the  world.  The  publication  con-
cludes with a series of recommendations for sustain-
able  mountain  development  in  the  face  of  climate 
change.  

ISBN: 978-3-905835-16-8

