Greenhouse gas 
emissions from 
ruminant 
supply chains
A global life cycle assessment 

Greenhouse gas 
emissions from 
ruminant 
supply chains
A global life cycle assessment 

A report prepared by:

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS
Animal Production and Health Division

Recommended Citation
Opio, C., Gerber, P., Mottet, A., Falcucci, A., Tempio, G., MacLeod, M., Vellinga, T., Henderson, B. 
& Steinfeld, H. 2013. Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chains  A global life cycle 
assessment. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), Rome.

The designations employed and the presentation of material in this information product do 
not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture 
Organization of the United Nations (FAO) concerning the legal or development status of any 
country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its 
frontiers or boundaries. The mention of speci(cid:31)c companies or products of manufacturers, 
whether or not these have been patented, does not imply that these have been endorsed or 
recommended by FAO in preference to others of a similar nature that are not mentioned.

The views expressed in this information product are those of the author(s) and do not 
necessarily re(cid:30)ect the views or policies of FAO.

E-ISBN 978-92-5-107945-4 (PDF)

 FAO 2013

FAO encourages the use, reproduction and dissemination of material in this information 
product. Except where otherwise indicated, material may be copied, downloaded and printed 
for private study, research and teaching purposes, or for use in non-commercial products or 
services, provided that appropriate acknowledgement of FAO as the source and copyright 
holder is given and that FAOs endorsement of users views, products or services is not 
implied in any way.

All requests for translation and adaptation rights, and for resale and other commercial use 
rights should be made via www.fao.org/contact-us/licence-request or addressed to 
copyright@fao.org.

FAO information products are available on the FAO website (www.fao.org/publications) 
and can be purchased through publications-sales@fao.org.

Greenhouse gas emissions from 
ruminant supply chains 
A global life cycle assessment

This report presents results from a broad assessment carried out to improve the 
understanding of greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions along livestock supply chains. 
The analysis was conducted at the Animal Production and Health Division of FAO 
and  co-financed  by  the  Mitigation  of  Climate  Change  in  Agriculture  (MICCA) 
programme. The following persons and institutions contributed to this work:

Study team: 

	Pierre Gerber (Team Leader  FAO)
	Carolyn Opio (Principal investigator  FAO)
	Theun Vellinga (Livestock modeller  Wageningen University)
	Alessandra Falcucci and Giuseppe Tempio (GIS Modeler  FAO)
	Guya Gianni, Benjamin Henderson, Michael MacLeod, Harinder Makkar, 
Anne Mottet , Tim Robinson and Viola Weiler (Data collection and analysis 
 FAO)

The following provided comments, views and information that contributed to 

the analysis:

	Nico van Belzen (for the International Dairy Federation)
	Imke de Boer (Wageningen University)
	Christel  Cederberg  (Swedish  Institute  for  Food  and  Biotechnology  and 

Chalmers University of Technology, Gothenburg) 

	Jeroen Dijkman (FAO)
	M.R. Garg (National Dairy Development Board, India)
	Vincent Gitz (FAO)
	 Mario Herrero (Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation)
	Muhammad  Ibrahim  (Centro  Agronomico  Tropical  de  Investigacion  y 

Ensenanza, Costa Rica)

	Hsin Huang (for the International Meat Secretariat)
	Stewart Ledgard (AgResearch  New Zealand)
	Adrian Leip (Joint Research Centre of the European Commission  Ispra)
	Brian Lindsay (for the Sustainable Agriculture Initiative)
	Tim McAllister (Agriculture and Agri-Food  Canada)
	Alexandre Meybeck (FAO)
	 Jean-Francois Soussana (Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique, France)
	Marja Liisa TapioBistrom (FAO, for the MICCA Programme)
	Greg Thoma (University of Arkansas, United States)
	Tom Wassenaar (Centre de cooperation internationale en recherche 

agronomique pour le developpement, France)

Report writing: Carolyn Opio, Pierre Gerber, Anne Mottet, Alessandra Falcucci, 
Giuseppe Tempio, Michael MacLeod, Theun Vellinga, Benjamin Henderson, and 
Henning Steinfeld.

iii

Table of contents

List of tables 
List of figures 
Abbreviations 
Definitions of commonly-used terms 
Executive Summary  

1. InTroduc TIon 
1.1 background 
1.2 Scope of this report 
1.3 The Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model 
1.4 Outline of this report 

2. overvIew of The Global rumInanT  secTor 

3. meThods  

3.1 Choice of Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) 
3.2 General principles of LCA 
3.3 Use of LCA in this assessment 

3.3.1 Functional unit 
3.3.2 System boundary 
3.3.3 Sources of GHG emissions 

3.4 Overview of calculation method 

3.4.1 Spatial variation and the use of Geographic Information System 
3.4.2 Emission factors 
3.4.3 Land use and land-use change 

3.5 Data sources and management 
3.6 Allocation of emissions between products, by-products and services 
3.7 Production system typology 

4. resulTs  
4.1 Cattle 

4.1.1 Total production, absolute emissions and emission intensities 
4.1.2 Emissions by production system and agro-ecological zone 
4.1.3 Regional emissions, production and emission intensities  

4.2 buffalo 

4.2.1 Total production, absolute emissions, and emission intensities 
4.2.2 Emissions by production system and agro-ecological zone 
4.2.3 Regional production emissions and emission intensities 

4.3 Small Ruminants 

4.3.1 Total production, absolute emissions, and emission intensities 
4.3.2 Emissions by production system and agro-ecological zone 
4.3.3 Regional production, emissions and emission intensities 

v

vii
viii
x
xii
xv

1
1
1
2
3

5

9
9
9
10
10
11
13
14
14
15
15
16
17
19

21
21
21
24
24
31
31
33
33
37
37
39
42

4.4 Summary of results 

4.4.1 Comparison between ruminant species 
4.4.2 Emission intensity gap within systems, climatic zones and regions 

5. dIscussIon  

5.1 Methane emissions from enteric fermentation  
5.2 Emissions from feed production 

5.2.1 Nitrous oxide from feed production 
5.2.2 Carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuel use in feed production 
5.2.3 Carbon dioxide emissions from land-use change 

5.3 Emissions from manure management 

5.3.1 Methane from manure management 
5.3.2 Nitrous oxide from manure management 

5.4 Comparison with other studies  
5.5 Analysis of uncertainty  

5.5.1 The approach 
5.5.2 Results from the uncertainty analysis  

6. conclusIon 

references 

APPENDIx A  
overvIew of The Global lIvesTock envIronmenTal assessmenT model 
(GLEAM)	

APPENDIx B  
daTa and daTa sources  

45
45
47

51
51
59
60
64
64
68
68
69
70
74
75
77

83

85

95

111

APPENDIx C  
ChAnGE s	in	CArbon	stoCks	rELAtEd	to	LAnd	usE	And	LAnd-usE	ChAnGE 	 127

APPENDIx D  
PosTfarm emIssIons  

APPENDIx E  
emIssIons rela Ted To enerGy use  

APPENDIx F  
rELAtivE	vALuE	of	sLAuGhtEr 	by-produCts	And	EffEC t	on	ALLoCAtion	 
of	EMissions	

APPENDIx G  
MAps	

APPENDIx H  
counTry lIs T 

vi

153

161

171

175

189

list of tables

1. 

2. 

Sources of GHG emissions included and excluded in this assessment 

Description of emission categories used in this assessment 

3.  Overview of the data sourced for the preparation of this assessment 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7.	

8. 

9. 

Global production, absolute GHG emissions and emission intensities  
for milk and beef  

Global production, emissions and emission intensity for buffalo milk and meat 

Global production, emissions and emission intensity for small ruminants 

Variation of cattle emission intensities within regions, systems and  
agro-ecological zone 

Variation of buffalo milk emission intensities within regions, systems and  
agro-ecological zone 

Variation of small ruminants emissions intensities within regions, system and  
agro-ecological zone 

10.  Regional sources of soybean and soybean cakes in 2005 

11.  Main exporters of soybean and soybean cakes in 2005 

12.  Regional comparison of land-use change emissions associated with soybean 

production  

13.  Annual carbon stock changes and emissions from pasture expansion  

in Latin America 

14.  Comparison of emission intensities for beef cattle 

15.  Comparison of emission intensities for small ruminants 

16.  Summary of parameters and uncertainty distributions used in the  

Monte Carlo simulation runs for dairy and beef in France 

17.	 Summary of parameters and uncertainty distributions used in the  

Monte Carlo simulation runs for beef in Paraguay 

18.  Emission intensity for imported soybean and soybean cake used in France  

12

13

17

21

32

37

48

49

50

66

66

67

68

71

72

74

75

76

19.   Default carbon stock values for Paraguay and uncertainty values of carbon pools   76

20.   Summary of results from Monte Carlo analysis for mixed dairy and beef  

production in France 

21.  

Impact of alternative soybean scenarios on emission intensity for 
dairy and beef in France 

22.   Effects of alternative LUC uncertainty estimates on average emission intensity  

for beef production in Paraguay 

23.   Percent Contribution to Variance (CoV) and Rank Correlation Coefficient (RCC)  

in mixed dairy and beef systems in France 

24.  Percent Contribution to Variance (CoV) and Rank Correlation Coefficient (RCC)  

for grazing beef systems in Paraguay 

78

79

80

81

81

vii

List	of	figures

1. 

System boundary as defined for this assessment 

2.  Overview of the GLEAM modules and computation flows  

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7.	

8. 

9. 

An illustration of production activities and partitioning of total emissions to  
products and services from cattle 

Classification of ruminant production systems used in the assessment 

Relative contribution of different processes to total GHG emissions from the  
global cattle sector 

Contribution to total milk and beef production by production system and  
agro-ecological zone 

Emission intensities for milk by production system and agro-ecological zone 

Emission intensities for beef by production system and agro-ecological zone 

Regional contribution to milk and meat protein 

10.  Emissions per kg meat and milk protein, comparing allocation of emissions to 

different outputs 

11a.  Regional variation in GHG emission intensities for cow milk  

11b.  Regional variation in GHG emission intensities for beef 

12.  Regional comparison of emission intensity per kilogram of carcass 

13.  Relative contribution of different processes to GHG emission profile of  

buffalo milk and meat 

14.  Emission intensities for buffalo milk by production system and  

agro-ecological zone 

15.  Emission intensities for buffalo meat by production system and  

agro-ecological zone 

16a.  Regional variation in GHG emission intensities for buffalo milk 
16b.  Regional variation in GHG emission intensities for buffalo meat 

17.	 Relative contribution of different processes to GHG emission profile of small 

ruminant milk and meat 

18.  Emission intensities for small ruminant milk by production system and  

agro-ecological zone 

19.  Emission intensities for small ruminant meat by production system and  

agro-ecological zone 

20a.  Regional contribution to global small ruminant milk production 
20b.  Regional contribution to global small ruminant meat production 

21.  Emissions per kg meat and milk protein, comparing allocation of emissions to 

different outputs 

22a.  Regional variation in GHG emission intensities for small ruminant milk 
22b.  Regional variation in GHG emission intensities for small ruminant meat 

23a.  Average emission intensity for milk from cattle, buffalo and small ruminants 

viii

11

14

18

19

22

23

25

26

27

27

28

29

30

32

34

35

36

36

38

40

41

42

43

43

44

44

46

23b.  Average emission intensity for meat from cattle, buffalo and small ruminants 

24.  Schematic representation of emission intensity gap, for a given commodity,  

within a region, climate zone and farming system 

25a.  Regional variation in productivity and CH4 emissions from enteric fermentation  

for beef herds 

25b.  Regional variation in productivity and CH4 emissions from enteric fermentation  

for dairy goats 

26.  Regional variation in digestibility of the feed ration and CH4 emissions from  

enteric fermentation for beef cattle 

27a.	 Regional variation in the relative contribution of animal cohorts to enteric  

CH4  dairy herds 

27b.	 Regional variation in the relative contribution of animal cohorts to enteric  

CH4  beef herds 

28a.  Regional comparison of energy partitioning across the different functions 

in milking cows 

28b.  Regional comparison of energy partitioning across the different functions 

in milking ewes 

28c.  Regional comparison of energy partitioning across the different functions 

in adult female goats 

29a.  Regional comparison of energy partitioning across the different functions 

in dairy cattle herds 

29b.  Regional comparison of energy partitioning across the different functions 

in beef cattle herds 

30.  Regional variation in feed conversion ratio for the cattle sector 

31a.  Regional difference in N2O and CO2 emission intensity of feed  cattle 
31b.  Regional difference in N2O and CO2 emission intensity of feed  small ruminants 
32a.  Regional difference in N2O emission intensity of feed  cattle 
32b.  Regional difference in N2O emission intensity of feed  small ruminants 
33a.  Regional variation in CO2 (fossil fuel-related) emission intensity of feed  cattle 
33b.  Regional variation in CO2 (fossil fuel-related) emission intensity of feed  small 

ruminants 

34.  Nitrogen excretion per kg milk protein versus average regional milk yield  dairy 

cattle 

35.  Probability distribution for milk emission intensity in France 

36.  Probability distribution for beef emission intensity in France 

37.	 Probability distribution for beef emission intensity in Paraguay 

46

47

52

52

53

54

54

56

56

57

57

58

60

61

61

63

63

65

65

70

78

78

80

ix

Abbreviations

ABP 
 
AEZ 
 
BFM 
 
Bo  
 
CF  
 
CGIAR 
CH4 
 
CO2 
 
CO2-eq  
CW 
 
DM  
 
DMI 
 
DOM 
 
FCR 
 
EF 
 
EI 
 
FPCM   
GHG 
 
GLEAM 
GIS 
 
GPP 
 
GWP 
 
HCFC   
IFPRI   
IPCC    
ISO 
 
kg CO2-eq 
LAC 
LCA 
LCI  
LPS  
LUC 
LULUCF 
LW  
 
MC 
 
MCF 
 
MMS 
 
N 
 
NENA  
NH3 
 
NIR  
 
NOX 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

animal products and by-products
agro-ecological zone
bone-free meat
manure maximum CH4 producing capacity
carbon footprint
Consortium of International Agricultural Research Centers
methane
carbon dioxide
carbon dioxide equivalent
carcass weight
dry matter
dry matter intake
dead organic matter
feed conversion ratio
emission factor
emission intensity
fat and protein corrected milk
greenhouse gas
Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model
Geographical Information System
gross primary production
global warming potential
hydrochlorofluoro carbon
International Food Policy Research Institute
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
International Organization for Standardization
kilograms of CO2 equivalent 
Latin America and the Caribbean
life cycle assessment
life cycle inventory
livestock production system
land-use change
land use, land-use change and forestry
live weight
Monte Carlo Simulation
methane conversion factor 
manure management system
nitrogen
Near East & North Africa
ammonia
national inventory report
nitrogen oxide air pollutants NO and NO2 (nitric oxide and nitro 
gen dioxide)

x

N2O 
 
OECD  
PDF 
 
RCC 
 
SD 
 
SSA 
 
SOC 
 
SPAM   
SRM 
 
t CO2-eq 
UNFCCC 
USDA   

nitrous oxide
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development
probability distribution frequency
Rank Correlation Coefficient
standard deviation
Sub-Saharan Africa
soil organic carbon
Spatial Production Allocation Model 
specified risk material
tonnes of CO2 equivalent
United Nations Framework Convention for Climate Change 
United States Department of Agriculture

xi

definitions	of	commonly-used	terms

Anaerobic

In the absence of oxygen, i.e. conditions conducive to 
the conversion of organic carbon into methane (CH4) 
rather than carbon dioxide (CO2).

Breeding overhead

Animals that are kept to maintain the herd/flock size, 
rather than to produce food.

By-product

Carbon footprint

Material  produced  during  the  processing  including 
slaughtering of a crop or livestock product that is not 
the  primary  objective  of  production  (e.g.  meals  and 
brans, offal or skins). 

The total amount of GHG emissions associated with 
a product along its supply-chain, and sometimes in-
cludes  emissions  from  consumption,  end-of-life  re-
covery and disposal. Usually expressed in kg or t of 
carbon dioxide equivalent (CO2-eq).

CO2-equivalent emission The amount of CO2 emissions that would cause the 
same time-integrated irradiative forcing, over a given 
time horizon, as an emitted amount of a mixture of 
GHGs. It is obtained by multiplying the emission of 
a GHG by its Global Warming Potential (GWP) for 
the given time horizon. The CO2 equivalent emission 
is a standard metric for comparing emissions of differ-
ent GHGs (IPCC, 4 AR 2007).

Coefficient of variation

The standard deviation expressed as a percentage of 
the mean.

Cohort

Co-product

Class  of  animals  within  a  herd  defined  by  their  age 
and sex (e.g. adult females, replacement females, males 
for fattening, etc.).

Material generated by a production activity that 
generates more than one output (e.g. meat, eggs and 
manure are co-products of chicken production).

Crop residue

Materials left in an agricultural field after the crop has 
been harvested (e.g. straw or stover).

xii

Dairy herd 

For the purposes of this assessment, includes milking 
animals, replacement stock and surplus calves that are 
fattened for meat production.

Direct energy

Energy  used  on-farm  for  livestock  production,  e.g. 
for lighting, heating and cooling.

Embedded energy

Energy or emissions arising during the manufacture 
of farm inputs, such as fertiliser or steel.

Emission factor

Factor  that  defines  that  rate  at  which  a  greenhouse 
gas is emitted, e.g. kg CH4 per animal per year or kg 
N2O-N/kg manure N.

Emissions intensity

Mass of emissions per unit of product, e.g. kg CO2/kg 
of meat/milk.

Fat and protein  
corrected milk (FPCM)

Feed conversion ratio

Milk corrected for its fat and protein content to a stan-
dard of 4.0 percent fat and 3.3 percent protein. This is 
a standard used for comparing milk with different fat 
and protein contents. It is a means of evaluating milk 
production of different dairy animals and breeds on a 
common basis. 

Measure of the efficiency with which an animal con-
verts feed into tissue, usually expressed in terms of kg 
of feed per kg of output (e.g. CW, milk or protein).

Feed material

Individual feed type (e.g. maize grain or wheat straw).

Fieldwork

General term for the field operations undertaken during 
crop cultivation, e.g. ploughing, drilling, spreading, etc.

Geographical  
Information System

A computerized system organizing data sets through 
the geographical referencing of all data included in its 
collections.

Globalwarming  
potential

Grassland-based  
livestock systems

Defined by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate 
Change (IPCC) as an indicator that reflects the rela-
tive effect of a GHG in terms of climate change con-
sidering a fixed time period, such as 100 years, com-
pared with the same mass of carbon dioxide.

Livestock production systems in which more than 10 
percent of the dry matter fed to animals is farm-pro-
duced and in which annual average stocking rates are 
less than ten livestock units per hectare of agricultural 
land (FAO, 1996).

xiii

Manure N

Nitrogen in manure.

Methane conversion  
factor

The  percentage  of  the  manures  maximum  methane 
producing capacity (Bo) that is achieved during ma-
nure management

Mixed farming systems 

Livestock  production  systems  in  which  more  than 
10  percent  of  the  dry  matter  fed  to  livestock  comes 
from crop by-products and/or stubble or more than 
10  percent  of  the  value  of  production  comes  from 
non-livestock farming activities (FAO, 1996).

Monte Carlo analysis

Method that uses repeated random sampling for esti-
mating uncertainty in results.

Pixel

Ration

Synthetic N

Tier levels

The smallest unit of information in GIS raster data, 
usually  square  in  shape.  In  GIS  dataset,  each  pixel 
represents a portion of the earth, and usually has an 
attribute value associated with it, such as soil type or 
vegetation  class.  Pixel  is  often  used  synonymously 
with cell.

The  combination  of  feed  materials  constituting  the 
animals diet.

Nitrogen in the form of manufactured fertilisers, such 
as ammonium nitrate.

Defined in IPCC (2006), these correspond to a pro-
gression from the use of simple equations with default 
data (Tier 1 emission factors), to country-specific data 
in more complex national systems (Tier 2 & 3 emission 
factors). Tiers implicitly progress from least to great-
est levels of certainty as a function of methodological 
complexity, regional specificity of model parameters, 
spatial resolution and the availability of activity data.

xiv

Executive	summary	

backGround and PurPose
In decades to come, the global demand for livestock products will continue to in-
crease driven by growing populations, incomes and urbanization. As a consequence 
the sector needs to produce more but in a context of increasing natural resource 
scarcity and challenges posed by climate change. 

In 2010, the ruminant sector contributed about 29 percent to global meat pro-
duction (equivalent to 81 million tonnes) of which 79 percent is from the cattle sec-
tor and the remaining from buffalo and small ruminants. Global milk production in 
2010 was 717 million tonnes with milk production from the cattle sector contribut-
ing the bulk, about 83 percent of global production.

While ruminants play an important role in providing high quality protein es-
sential for human diets, they are an important source of greenhouse gas (GHG) 
emissions. The demand for bovine meat, mutton and milk is forecasted to grow 
at a rate of 1.2 percent, 1.5 percent and 1.1 percent, respectively, during the period 
2006-2050. To avoid significant increases in total GHG emissions from the sector, a 
reduction of the intensity of emissions is required. 

This  report  presents  a  life  cycle  analysis  of  the  GHG  emissions  arising  from 
ruminant supply chains around the year 2005. This first comprehensive and dis-
aggregated global assessment of emissions enables the understanding of emission 
pathways and hotspots. This is a fundamental and initial step to identify mitigation 
strategies and inform public debate. 

Two similar reports on the emissions from pig and chicken supply chains and on 
the emissions from the dairy sector are also available. An overall report providing an 
overview of results and exploring mitigation potential and options is also available.1

meThodoloG y
This assessment is based on a life cycle assessment (LCA) and includes all main 
sources of emissions along the supply chain starting from land use and the produc-
tion  of  feed,  through  emissions  from  animal  production  to  emissions  related  to 
processing and transportation of products to the retail distribution point. 

GHG emissions arising from land-use change (LUC) associated with livestock 
production were also assessed. Land-use change emissions considered include the 
transformation of forest to cropland and of forest to pasture in Latin America and 
the Caribbean. Given the year of reference (2005), latest trends could not be fully 
reflected (e.g. reduction of deforestation rates in LUC). A sensitivity analysis was 
conducted, showing that the period of the analysis has an important influence on 
results. 

1  FAO. 2010. Greenhouse gas emissions from the dairy sector  A life cycle assessment. FAO, Rome.  
FAO. 2013a. Tackling climate change through livestock  A global assessment of emissions and mitigation 
opportunities. FAO, Rome.  
FAO. 2013b. Greenhouse gas emissions from pig and chicken supply chains  A global life cycle assessment. FAO, 
Rome. 

xv

Due  to  the  lack  of  globally  validated  model  and  databases,  sequestration  and 
losses of soil C arising from pasture management could not be included in the as-
sessment but can be significant. The effect of this was tested in the case of West-
ern Europe; carbon sequestration could mitigate about 5 percent of total ruminant 
emissions in the region, but with a high degree of uncertainty.

This analysis covers emissions from the three major GHGs in agriculture, name-
ly methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O) and carbon dioxide (CO2), omitting gases 
of minor importance.

The analysis was undertaken using the Global Livestock Environmental Assess-
ment Model (GLEAM). This model quantifies GHG emissions arising from pro-
duction of the main livestock commodities: meat and milk from cattle, sheep, goats 
and buffalo; meat from pigs; and meat and eggs from chickens. 

The model calculates total emissions and (commodity) production for a given 
farming  system  within  a  defined  area.  The  emissions  per  unit  of  product  can  be 
calculated for combinations of different commodities/farming systems/locations at 
different spatial scales.

In a complex analysis such as this, results are not definitive, but rather the best 
assessment that could be made and subject to improvement in subsequent revisions. 
Methodological developments are being developed within the context of the LEAP 
Partnership (Livestock Environmental Assessment and Performance),2 to harmo-
nize metrics and approaches used in the assessment of environmental performance 
of livestock supply chains, including future updates of this report. 

key fIndInGs
overall	sectoral	contribution	to	global	GhG	emissions
Globally, ruminant supply chains are estimated to produce 5.7 gigatonnes CO2-eq 
per annum representing about 80 percent of the livestock sector emissions. Emis-
sions from beef and milk production represent respectively 35 and 30 percent of 
the livestock sector emissions (equivalent to 4.6 gigatonnes CO2-eq). Buffalos and 
small ruminants supply chains have a much lower contribution, representing re-
spectively 8.7 percent and 6.7 percent of sector emissions. 

main emission sources
The largest source of GHG emissions in ruminant production is methane (CH4) 
from enteric fermentation, which accounts for about 47 percent of the sectors emis-
sions and more than 90 percent of the total CH4 emissions. Nitrous oxide (N2O) 
emissions originating mainly from feed production and N deposited during grazing 
represent 24 percent of the sectors GHG emissions. 

Emissions from land-use change associated with the expansion of grassland into 

forest account for 14.8 percent of total emissions related to beef production. 

While LUC contributes a significant amount to total emissions; and particularly 
so in certain regions, these estimates vary greatly depending on the assumptions 
made, data and approach applied. 

2  http://www.fao.org/ag/againfo/livestock-benchmarking/en/.

xvi

Emission	intensities	(emission	of	GhG	per	unit	of	product)	per	commodity
Average emission intensity for products from ruminants were estimated at 2.8, 3.4 
and 6.5 kg CO2-eq/kg fat and protein corrected milk (FPCM) for cow milk, buf-
falo and small ruminant milk, respectively, and 46.2, 53.4, and 23.8 kg CO2-eq/kg 
carcass weight (CW) for beef, buffalo and small ruminant meat, respectively. 

emIssIon InTensITIes  Per Produc TIon sysTems and reGIons
There are variations in emission intensities across regions and production systems 
for each commodity. These variations are largely driven by differences in produc-
tion goals (specialized versus non-specialized production) and management prac-
tices, including animal husbandry methods, animal health and genetics which influ-
ence levels of productivity. 

In addition, there is a wide divergence in emission intensity for different com-
modities produced within the same region under comparable conditions (produc-
tion systems and climatic zones) pointing to the existence of a considerable emis-
sion intensity gap (Section 4.4). 

variation	by	production	systems	
Globally, mixed systems provide the bulk of the meat and milk output: about 79 
percent of the beef, 85 percent of cows milk and 70 and 68 percent of small rumi-
nant milk and meat is produced in this system. In addition, mixed systems also sup-
ply about 97 and 96 percent of buffaloes milk and meat, respectively. 

On average, mixed systems have slightly lower emission intensities than grass-
land-based systems. This difference is explained by several factors such as repro-
ductive efficiency (higher fertility rates, lower age at calving,) animal health (lower 
mortality rates), management (higher slaughter weights, reduced time to slaughter), 
and better feed quality in mixed farming systems. All these factors combine to re-
sult in higher productivity and lower emission intensity. 

variation	by	region
World regions show highly diverse emission intensities which are to large extent 
explained by their contribution to production, their production systems and man-
agement practices. 

Cattle
Regional emission intensity of milk ranges from 1.6 kg CO2-eq/kg FPCM to 9.0 
kg CO2-eq/kg FPCM. Generally, milk production in low productive systems has 
higher emission intensities than in high production systems of most affluent coun-
ties where better animal feeding and nutrition results in lower enteric and manure 
emissions  and  emission  intensity  at  animal  level.  Improved  genetics  and  animal 
health care and animal husbandry combine with better feeding to reduce the breed-
ing overhead (i.e. animals kept to maintain the herd) thus further reducing emis-
sion intensity at herd level. In North America, manure management emissions are 
relatively high due to the use of liquid manure management systems that produce 
greater quantities of methane emissions.

Emission intensity of beef at regional level show a great deal of diversity; ranging 
from 14 kg CO2-eq/kg CW in Eastern Europe and the Russian Federation to 76 kg 
CO2-eq/kg CW in South Asia. Beef production has the highest emission intensi-

xvii

ties in South Asia, sub-Saharan Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean, and East 
and Southeast Asia. The quality and type of feed, low reproduction efficiency, poor 
herd management practices, genetics and animal health (high mortality) explain the 
higher emission intensities in these regions. In addition, in Latin America and the 
Caribbean, almost one third of the emissions from beef production are related to 
pasture expansion into forested areas. This figure is however associated with a high 
level of uncertainty as a result of methodological uncertainty and data gaps.

Regions with the lowest emission intensity such as Europe, North America and 
Oceania are not necessarily characterized by similar production systems. For ex-
ample, in Europe about 80 percent of the beef is produced from dairy surplus calves 
and  culled  cows  which  explains  the  relatively  low  emission  intensity  of  beef.  In 
North America and Oceania, production is generally characterized by a high level 
of specialization and higher productivity, which results in lower emission intensi-
ties. However, in these two regions, beef cattle may be reared either intensively or 
extensively (on grain or grass). 

buffalos
Global buffalo milk and meat production is concentrated in three major world re-
gions: South Asia, Near East & North Africa and East & Southeast Asia. South 
Asia alone produces as much as 90 percent and 70 percent of the global buffalo milk 
and meat, respectively. Milk produced in South Asia has lower emission intensity, 
explained by high milk yields compared to Near East & North Africa and East & 
Southeast Asia. Emission intensity of buffalo meat production is particularly high 
in East & Southeast Asia as productivity of the animals is low due to poor feed 
resources (largely based on low quality feed resources such as crop residues and 
pasture) and low reproductive efficiency. With the exception of a few countries in 
the Mediterranean region, buffalo production in industrialized world regions plays 
a very minor role. 

small ruminants 
With the exception of small ruminant milk production in Western Europe and lamb 
and mutton production in Oceania and Western Europe, meat and milk from small 
ruminants is generally more important in developing world regions. Emission in-
tensity for small ruminant milk is however highest in developing regions such as 
NENA and East & Southeast Asia, SSA and South Asia due to poorer production 
conditions in which animals are for the most part reared for subsistence purposes. 
In contrast, in industrialized countries where small ruminant milk production is 
important, emission intensity is low due to the specialization of production.

The contribution to global small ruminant meat production is characterized by a 
dichotomy between regions; global lamb and mutton production is largely concen-
trated in Western Europe and Oceania while production of meat from goats takes 
place in developing regions. Emission intensity for small ruminant meat is lowest in 
Oceania and Western Europe and highest in developing regions. 

This difference in emission intensity of small ruminant meat and milk is due to 
variations in reproductive efficiency (resulting in a smaller breeding overhead), feed 
quality, and management practices that are generally poorer in developing regions. 

xviii

facTors drIvInG  emIssIon InTensITy levels
Differences in emission intensities are driven by a combination of factors.

	At animal level emission intensity is influenced by: (i) digestibility, quality and 
composition of the feed ration which influence the level of enteric methane 
emissions and manure emissions (lower release of nitrogen and volatile solids) 
per unit of product produced (milk or weight gain); and (ii) improved genet-
ics  and  animal  health  contribute  to  better  conversion  of  feed  into  animal 
products further reducing emission intensity at animal level. 

	At animal level, emission intensity is influenced by feed quality combined 
with  genetics,  animal  health,  reproduction  strategies  (replacement,  age  at 
first calving) reducing the relative number of unproductive animals in the 
herd and thus emissions per unit of product generated at herd level. 

	Land-use change, i.e. pasture and feed crop expansion, is a major driver of 
emissions. Feed originating from areas where LUC takes place has higher 
emission intensities.

	Manure management practices influence the release of methane and nitrous 

oxide.

conclusIons
The range of emission intensity within supply chains suggests that there is room for 
improvement. The areas with mitigation potential are the following: 

	Improving feeding practices and digestibility of diets;
	Improving yields through genetics, feeding practices and animal health, and 

overall management;

	Reducing  land-use  change  arising  from  feed  crop  cultivation  and  pasture 

expansion;

	Improving  manure  management    reducing  the  use  of  uncovered  liquid 

manure management systems (MMSs), particularly in dairy systems;

	Improving  the  efficiency  of  feed  crop  production,  particularly  improving 

fertilization management. 

 This report focuses on one measure of environmental performance: kg CO2-eq/
kg commodity. When evaluating GHG mitigation measures, attention should also 
be paid to their potential impacts on other environmental dimensions, for example 
on water quality, as well as on broader development objectives, such as food secu-
rity and poverty reduction. 

xix

1. Introduction

1.1 background
The global livestock sector is faced with a three-fold challenge: the need to increase 
production to meet demand, adapt to a changing and increasingly variable econom-
ic and natural environment and, at the same time, improve its environmental perfor-
mance. While positive effects of grazing systems are locally verified on biodiversity 
and landscapes, major concerns have been raised about the potential consequences 
associated with livestock sector growth, including increasing natural resource use 
and degradation, contribution to global warming, water resource depletion, biodi-
versity erosion and habitat change. These concerns have resulted in a widespread 
interest from governments, consumers and industry in the assessment of the envi-
ronmental performance of livestock production. 

The evidence of human-induced climate change (IPCC, 2006) and the important 
contribution of the livestock sector to total anthropogenic emissions highlight the 
urgent need to better understand the sources of the livestock sectors greenhouse 
gas (GHG) emissions and related mitigation options. Starting in 2009, the Animal 
Production and Health Division of FAO has been engaged in a comprehensive as-
sessment  of  livestock-related  GHG  emissions  aimed  at  identifying  low-emission 
development pathways for the livestock sector. The undertaking follows two broad 
objectives: first, to improve and break down the initial estimates of livestock sec-
tors overall emissions provided in Livestocks long shadow  Environmental issues 
and options (FAO, 2006) and, second, to identify the major available mitigation op-
tions along livestock supply chains. 

This report presents an update of the Livestocks long shadow assessment of GHG 
emissions from ruminant supply chains. It should be understood as a step in a series 
of assessments to measure and guide progress regarding the sectors GHG emissions. 

1.2 Scope of thiS report
Livestock commodities differ in resource use and emission profile. These variations 
reflect fundamental differences in the underlying biology and modes of produc-
tion. The reporting structure reflects this by bringing together species with impor-
tant  shared  features  concerning  their  emission  profile.  This  report  quantifies  the 
main sources of GHG emissions, and estimates GHG emissions for major rumi-
nant products, predominant ruminant production systems, main world regions and 
agro-ecological zones (AEZs), and major stages in the supply chains.

The assessment takes a supply chain approach in estimating emissions generated 
during: (a) the production of inputs for the production process; (b) crop and animal 
production; and (c) subsequent transport and processing of the outputs into basic 
products. Given the global scope of the assessment and the complexity of livestock 
supply chains, several hypotheses and generalizations had to be made to keep data 
requirements of the assessment manageable. They are documented in the report and 
their impact on results is analysed. Emissions related to the consumer (the purchase, 
storage and preparation of food) and food losses that take place at retail and con-
sumer level are not included. 

1

This report addresses a technical audience in private and public organizations, 
academia and LCA practitioners. Policy-makers and the informed general public 
will find a comprehensive review of results, methods and the mitigation potential in 
the livestock sector in an overview report published in parallel to this report (FAO, 
2013a).

By providing the most accurate information available on a global scale, this as-
sessment helps to identify priority areas for mitigation and technical options that 
can reduce GHG emissions from the ruminant sector. It also provides a benchmark 
against which future trends can be measured.

This report focuses on GHG emissions only; other environmental dimensions, 
such as water resources, land, biodiversity and nutrients, have not been considered. 
GHG emissions from the livestock sector cannot be taken as an indicator of envi-
ronmental sustainability in general. There are important synergies and trade-offs 
among competing environmental criteria that require fuller assessment. 

The base year selected for assessment is 2005. This year was chosen because at 
the start of the assessment, the available spatial data, and in particular information 
on the predicted livestock densities, were based on 2005 data. 

1.3 the global live Stock environmental aSSe SSment model
This assessment is based on a newly-developed analytical framework: the Global 
Livestock Environmental Assessment Model (GLEAM). GLEAM intends to pull 
together the existing knowledge on production practices and emissions pathways 
and  create  a  framework  for  disaggregation  and  comparison  of  emissions  on  a 
global scale. The model is developed for six animal species (cattle, buffalo, sheep, 
goats, pigs and chicken) and related edible products. It recognizes two farming 
systems for ruminant species (mixed and grazing), three for pigs (backyard, in-
termediate  and  industrial)  and  three  for  chicken  (backyard,  industrial  egg  and 
industrial meat). Overall, this amounts to over 14 000 theoretical supply chains, 
defined here as unique sets of commodity, farming system, country and climatic 
zone. The physical area corresponding to each of these sets is further decomposed 
in cells on a map.

Four publications present the results of this work:

	This technical report addressing the worlds cattle, buffalo and small rumi-

nant (sheep and goat) sectors.

	A  report  addressing  the  worlds  pig  and  chicken  (meat  and  eggs)  sectors, 

published in parallel to this report (FAO, 2013b).

	An earlier technical report published in 2010, addressing the worlds dairy 

sector (FAO, 2010).

	An overview report, summarizing the above at the sector level and provid-
ing additional cross-cutting analysis of emissions and mitigation potential, 
published in parallel to this report (FAO, 2013a). 

Since the publication of the FAO report on GHG emissions from the dairy sec-
tor (FAO, 2010), GLEAM has been improved to include additional GHG emis-
sions sources such as direct on-farm energy use and indirect energy embodied in 
farm buildings and equipment. In addition, new data (herd parameters, feed rations) 
has also been made available, so this report presents an update of the results on 
dairy production presented in 2010. 

2

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chains1.4 outline of thiS  report
This report consists of six sections (including this introductory section). Section 
two starts with a brief introduction to the global ruminant sector describing pro-
duction systems and their contribution to global ruminant milk and meat produc-
tion. 

Section 3 gives an overview of the approach used in the estimation of GHG emis-
sions in this assessment, providing basic information on the LCA approach. The 
section presents a description of the functional units used, system boundary, alloca-
tion to co-products and sources of GHG emissions. The section also provides an 
overview of ruminant production system typology applied, the tool (GLEAM) and 
methods as well as broad information on data sources and management. Detailed 
description of the approach and methods can be found in the appendices.

The results (total emissions and emission intensities) of this assessment are pre-
sented in Section 4 followed by a discussion on the main important sources and 
drivers of emissions from ruminant species as well as a discussion on uncertainty 
and assumptions likely to influence the results (Section 5). It also presents the re-
sults of a Monte Carlo uncertainty analysis performed in this study. 

Section 6 presents the conclusions and recommendations that can be drawn from 

this work as well as provides direction on areas for improvement. 

The  appendices  in  this  report  provide  a  detailed  description  of  the  GLEAM 
model, methods applied (on quantifying carbon losses from land-use change, on-
farm direct and indirect energy use and post farmgate emissions) and data. The ap-
pendices also explore different computation approaches (e.g. for estimating LUC 
emissions  and  allocation  of  emissions  to  slaughter  by-products)  presenting  their 
impact on emission intensity.

3

Introduction2. Overview of the global ruminant 
sector

In this report, the ruminant sector comprises cattle, sheep and goat, and buffalo. The 
global ruminant population in 2010 was estimated to be 3 612 million (FAOSTAT, 
2012),  with  cattle  making  up  nearly  40  percent,  sheep  and  goat  55  percent,  and 
buffalo the remaining 5 percent. Within the ruminant sector, the cattle sector is by-
far the most important: contributing about 64 and 600 million tonnes of meat and 
milk, respectively; about 79 and 83 percent of total meat and milk production from 
ruminants. Small ruminant products constitute a relatively small share of globally-
produced ruminant meat and milk, about 17 percent and 4 percent, respectively. 

Ruminants are mainly reared in either grazing or mixed systems and the relative 
global importance of mixed systems compared with grazing systems is reflected by 
the fact that about 73 percent of all ruminants are reared in mixed farming systems. 
This study estimates that globally about 79 percent of the beef and 85 percent of 
cattle  milk  and  70  percent  and  68  percent  of  the  small  ruminant  milk  and  meat, 
respectively,  is  produced  in  mixed  systems.  Mixed  systems  also  supply  the  bulk 
of products from buffalo; about 97 and 96 percent of milk and meat, respectively. 
Within these two systems, there is a wide variation in farming practices of which is 
subject to several factors such as climatic conditions, availability of fodders, market 
demand, etc. 

Agro-ecological conditions are important determinants of the characteristics of 
ruminant  production  and  estimates  of  the  relative  importance  of  ruminant  meat 
and milk production within the AEZs varies between cattle, buffalo, and small ru-
minants (see Maps 1, 2, 3, 4 and 5 in Appendix G). In cattle production, temperate 
zones contribute 50 percent and 38 percent of the milk and beef compared with 21 
percent and 33 percent from humid zones and 29 percent and 29 percent from arid 
zones. 

On the other hand, arid zones contribute the bulk of milk and meat production 
from small ruminants and buffalo; 69 percent and 52 percent of small ruminant milk 
and meat, and 84 percent and 70 percent of buffalo milk and meat. The humid and 
temperate zones contribute 12 percent and 18 percent of small ruminant milk and 
18 and 29 percent of the meat. 

The relative importance of the different species varies enormously  while eco-
nomic conditions play a key role, factors such as biophysical conditions and cul-
tural values are also important. 

Beef production is the most diverse form of all ruminant meat production. It is 
produced in extremely diverse production systems, ranging from grazing to mixed 
livestock-crop systems. Beef is either produced in dedicated beef herds, where 
beef is the only main product, or as a co-product from dairy production, i.e. surplus 
calves from dairy herds are raised for beef and culled cows are used for meat. 

Specialized  beef  production  units  may  take  many  forms:  breeding  and  grow-
ing beef enterprises, breeding and finishing, growing and finishing on pasture or 
in feedlots, etc. Such forms of production are usually located in the industrialized 

5

world regions and Latin America. However, in many parts of the world, particu-
larly in the developing regions, this distinction between dairy and specialized beef 
production is subtle especially where cattle are considered multifunctional produc-
ing both milk and meat as well as other valuable non-edible products and services 
such as manure, hides and skin, and are used for draught power. 

Despite their small contribution to global milk and meat output, sheep and goat 
farming plays a larger role in some specific economies. In many marginal rural areas, 
it plays a significant socio-economic role. An important attribute of small ruminants 
is that they are able to thrive and produce on unfavourable land and are generally 
suited to harsh climatic conditions where cattle would perform poorly. Sheep and 
goats are better converters of low-quality fibrous feed into meat and milk due to 
their better digestive ability to utilize poor quality roughages. In this regard, about 
56 percent of the worlds small ruminants are located in arid zones and 27 percent 
and 21 percent in the temperate and humid zones, respectively. However, these ani-
mals also adapt very easily to intensive production systems and can produce meat 
and milk efficiently. 

Milk and meat products from sheep and goats have two purposes: they are used 
for subsistence at household level or are sold as niche products. Meat and milk from 
sheep is usually obtained from high yielding animals kept under intensive condi-
tions e.g. dairy intensive systems in the Mediterranean region, lamb production in 
New Zealand and Australia. In Northern Europe and Oceania (particularly New 
Zealand), sheep are kept mainly for meat production while in the Mediterranean 
region almost all sheep and goats belong to dairy breeds where milk is the main 
output of production and meat considered as a by-product. 

Similar  to  other  ruminant  species,  systems  of  buffalo  production  vary  widely 
through the different regions of the world and are determined by several interacting 
factors that include climate (tropical or temperate, humid or arid), location (rural, 
peri-urban or urban), cropping systems (rain-fed or irrigated, annual or perenni-
al crops), type of operation (small or large farm, subsistence or commercial), and 
primary purpose for buffalo production and/or management (milk, meat, draught 
power or mixed). 

In South Asia, North Africa and the Near East, buffalo are mainly kept for milk 
and meat production. In East & Southeast Asia, draught power and meat are im-
portant, while in Europe, buffalo are kept on large commercial farms under modern 
intensive systems for milk and meat production (Perera, 2011). 

Buffalo provide milk, meat, hides and draught power. Among the different prod-
ucts obtained from buffalo, meat and hides are more important, although buffalo 
play an important role in milk production in Asian countries and few countries in 
the Mediterranean region. Global milk production is concentrated in two countries, 
India and Pakistan, which together account for 92 percent of the worlds total milk 
production. Buffalo have an inherent ability to produce milk of high fat contents 
(ranging from 6 to 8.5 percent) and, because of this, buffalo milk is preferred over 
cow milk in some regions of the world such as South Asia. In 2010, about 98 percent 
of the global buffalo meat production was produced in South, East and Southeast 
Asia with the bulk contributed by India and Pakistan. This is easily explained by 
the fact that the two countries have 73 percent of the global buffalo population. 
Besides edible products, ruminants also produce a host of non-edible products such 

6

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsas manure, hides and skin, and natural fibre (wool, cashmere and mohair). While 
farm mechanization has resulted in significant reduction in the use of animals for 
draught power, farmers in many parts of the world still rely on cattle and buffalo as 
a source of draught power.

7

Overview of the global ruminant sector3. Methods

3.1 ChoiCe of Life CyCLe Assessment (LCA)
The use of Life Cycle Assessment (LCA) to assess food production is becoming 
increasingly common. This trend is driven by the need of policy-makers, produc-
ers and consumers for reliable and comprehensive environmental information to 
identify  environmentally  and  economically  sustainable  agricultural  products  and 
practices. 

The LCA approach, which is defined in ISO standards 14040 and 14044 (ISO, 
2006), is now widely accepted in agriculture and other industries as a method for 
evaluating the environmental impact of production, and for identifying the resource 
and emission-intensive processes within a products life cycle. The main strength 
of LCA lies in its ability to provide a holistic assessment of production processes 
in terms of resource use and environmental impacts, as well as to consider multiple 
parameters (ISO, 2006).

LCA also provides a framework to broadly identify effective approaches to re-
duce environmental burdens and is recognized for its capacity to evaluate the effect 
that changes within a production process may have on the overall life-cycle balance 
of  environmental  burdens.  This  enables  the  identification  and  exclusion  of  mea-
sures that simply shift environmental problems from one phase of the life cycle to 
another. 

However, LCA also presents significant challenges, particularly when applied to 
agriculture. First, the data-intensive nature of the method places limitations on the 
comprehensive assessment of complex food chains and biological processes. Lim-
ited data availability can force the practitioner to make simplifications, which can 
lead to losses of accuracy. 

A second difficulty lies in the fact that methodological choices and assumptions 
such as system boundary delineation, functional units, and allocation techniques 
may be subjective and affect the results. These complications call for a thorough 
sensitivity analysis. 

3.2 General principles of lca
The LCA method was originally applied to analyse industrial process chains, but 
is increasingly being used to assess the environmental impacts of agriculture. It in-
volves the systemic analysis of production systems to account for all inputs and 
outputs associated with a specific product within a defined system boundary. The 
system boundary largely depends on the goal of the study. 

The reference unit that denotes the useful output of the production system is 
known as the functional unit, and it has a defined quantity and quality. The func-
tional unit can be based on a defined quantity, such as 1 kg of product, or it may be 
based on an attribute of a product or process, such as 1 kg of fat and protein cor-
rected milk (FPCM) or 1 kg of carcass weight (CW). 

The application of LCA to agricultural systems is often complicated by the mul-
tiple-output nature of production, because major products are usually accompanied 
by the joint production of by-products. This requires appropriate partitioning of 

9

environmental impacts to each product from the system according to an allocation 
rule, which may be based on different criteria such as economic value, mass bal-
ances, product properties, etc.

3.3 Use of lca in this assessMent
In the last five years, an increasing number of LCA studies have been carried out for 
livestock production, mostly in Organisation for Economic Cooperation and De-
velopment (OECD) countries (Leip et al., 2010; Ledgard et al., 2011; Beauchemin 
et al., 2010; de Vries and de Boer, 2010; Verge et al., 2008; Foley et al., 2011). Al-
though LCA methods are well defined, the studies vary considerably in their level 
of detail, their definition of system boundaries, the emission factors (EFs) they use, 
and other technical aspects such as the allocation techniques and functional units 
they employ.

This  assessment  sets  out  to  perform  a  complete  LCA  for  the  global  livestock 
sector, using consistent calculation methods, modelling approaches, data and pa-
rameters for each production system within the sector. In contrast to previous LCA 
studies carried out for the livestock sector, which have primarily concentrated on 
either farm level or the national level emissions in OECD countries, this study is 
global in scope and includes both developed and developing countries. 

As a consequence of its global scope, the approach developed for this study has 
had to overcome onerous data requirements by relying on some simplifications that 
result in a loss of accuracy, particularly for systems at lower levels of aggregation. 
This  assessment  follows  the  attributional  approach,  which  estimates  the  envi-
ronmental burden of the existing situation under current production and market 
conditions, and allocates impacts to the various co-products of the production sys-
tem. This differs from the consequential LCA approach, which considers potential 
consequences of changes in production, and relies on a system expansion analysis 
to allocate impacts of co-products (Thomassen et al., 2008).

The current assessment is based on the methodology for LCA, as specified in the 

following documents:

	ISO, 2006. Environmental management  Life Cycle Assessment- Require-

ments and guidelines - BS EN ISO 14044.

	British Standards Institute PAS 2050; 2008. Specification for the assessment 
of the life cycle greenhouse gas emissions of goods and services (BSI, 2008). 

3.3.1 functional unit
Ruminant production systems produce a mix of goods and services:

	Edible products: meat and milk.
	Non-edible products and services including natural fibre (wool, cashmere, 

mohair), draught power, hides and skin, manure and capital.

In this assessment, the functional units used to report GHG emissions for meat 
are  expressed  as  a  kg  of  carbon  dioxide  equivalents  (CO2-eq)  per  kg  of  carcass 
weight (CW) and emissions from milk are reported in CO2-eq per kg of FPCM. 
FPCM is a method used to standardize milk produced in different systems with 
varying qualities. Appendix A provides details of the equations used in the stan-
dardization of milk from ruminants. 

10

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chains3.3.2 system boundary
The assessment encompassed the entire livestock production chain, from feed pro-
duction through to the final processing of product, including transport to the retail 
distribution point (see Figure 1).

The cradle to retail system boundary is split into two subsystems: 

	Cradle to farmgate includes all upstream processes in livestock production 
up to the farmgate where the animals or products leave the farm, i.e. produc-
tion of farm inputs and on-farm production activities.

	Farmgate to retail includes transport of animals and product (milk) to pro-
cessing plants (dairies and slaughter plants) or directly to market, processing 
into primary products, refrigeration during transport and processing, pro-
duction of packaging material, and transport to the retail distributor. 

All aspects related to the final consumption of milk and meat products (i.e. con-
sumer transport to purchase product, food storage and preparation, food waste and 
waste handling of packaging) lie outside the defined system, and are thus excluded 
from this assessment. 

To calculate GHG emissions from cradle to farmgate, a simplified description of 
livestock production systems (derived from Oenema et al., 2005; Schils et al., 2007; 
Del Prado and Scholefield, 2008) was developed (Figure 1). 

Livestock production is complex, with a number of interacting processes that 
include crop and pasture production, manure handling, feed processing and trans-
port, animal raising and management, etc. This requires modelling the flow of all 

Figure 1. 
System boundary as defined for this assessment

Other 
external 
inputs

External 

feed

Animal

Services

Edible & 
Non-edible 

products

Feed
basket

Manure

Transport

Processing

Transport

Land for 

feed

Retail

distribuon

point

CRADLE TO FARMGATE

FARMGATE TO RETAIL

On-farm flows
Flows generally involving different stakeholders

External inputs to farm
Posarm flows

Source: Authors.

11

MethodsTable 1. Sources of GHG emissions included and excluded in this assessment

Activity

GhG

included

excluded

N2O

Direct and indirect N2O from:
	Application of synthetic N
	Application of manure
	Deposition of manure on pasture, ranges
	Crop residue management

	N2O losses related to  

changes in C stocks

	Biomass burning
	Biological fixation 
	Emissions from non-N 

fertilizers and lime 

food 
chain

m
a
e
r
t
s
p
U

 
 
l
a
m
n
A

i

 

t
i
n
u
n
o
i
t
c
u
d
o
r
p

Feed production

CO2

Non-feed 
production

Livestock 
production

CO2

CH4

N2O

CO2

CO2; 
CH4; 
HFCs

	Energy use in field operations
	Energy use feed transport and processing
	Fertilizer manufacture 
	Feed blending
	Land-use change related to deforestation  

soybean and pasture expansion 

	Changes in carbon stocks 

from land use under 
constant management 
practices

	Indirect (embedded) energy related to the 

manufacture of on-farm buildings and 
equipment 

	Production of cleaning 
agents, antibiotics and  
pharmaceuticals

	Enteric fermentation 
	Manure management 
	Direct and indirect N2O from manure  

management

	Direct on-farm energy use for milking,  

cooling, ventilation and heating

	Transport of live animals and product to 

slaughter and processing plant

	Transport of processed product to retail point
	Refrigeration during transport and processing
	Primary processing of meat into carcasses or 

meat cuts and raw milk and dairy products

	GHGs related to leakage of refrigerants 

during transportation

	Manufacture of packaging

	On-site waste water treatment
	Emissions from animal 

waste or avoided emissions 
from on-site energy  
generation from waste

	Emissions related to 

slaughter by-products e.g. 
rendering material, offal, 
hides and skin

	Retail and post-retail energy use
	Waste disposal at retail and 

post-retail stages

 

m
a
e
r
t
s
n
w
o
D

Post farmgate

Source: Authors.

products through internal chains on the farm and also allowing for imports and ex-
ports from the farm. The model therefore provides a means of integrating all these 
processes and linking all components in a manner that adequately captures major 
interactions among biological and physical processes. The flows are represented as 
directional lines between compartments in the system. 

	Land for feed is the land used for feed production, on the farm itself or 
within the vicinity of production site (with negligible emissions related to 
the transport of feed to the animal rearing site). 

	External  feed  originates  from  off-site  production  and  includes  by-
products from the food industry and feed crops produced and transported 
over longer distances, e.g. soybeans; in most situations, the external feed is 
concentrate feed. 

	Manure is shown partly outside the cradle-to-farmgate system bound-
ary in order to illustrate situations where manure is used as a fertilizer on 
food crops, either on- or off-farm, or where manure is used as fuel.

	Other external inputs refers to the inputs into production such as energy, 

fertilizer, pesticides, on-farm machinery, etc.

The connection of the four compartments shown in Figure 1 requires the devel-

12

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsopment of specific models (see Appendix A) and attribution techniques (see Section 
3.6 and Appendix A) for the allocation of emissions among different processes, uses 
and outputs. These compartments not only represent different activities in the pro-
duction process such as animal production, feed production, manure management, 
etc., but also define the inter-linkages among production processes such as the link 
between  animal  performance  (genetics,  management),  animal  feed  requirements 
(energy  and  protein  requirements)  and  the  production  of  outputs  such  as  edible 
and non-edible products and services, and emissions. 

3.3.3 sources of GhG emissions
This study focuses on emissions of the three major GHGs associated with animal 
food chains  methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O) and carbon dioxide (CO2)  as 
well as GHGs related to refrigerants. The following emission sources were included 
and further grouped into pre- and post farmgate sources, and a number of potential 
GHG emissions and sinks were excluded from the analysis (Table 1).

Table 1 also illustrates a number of processes and activities in the livestock food 

chain that have been excluded due to:

	lack of global databases, e.g. on the production of co-products at slaughter-

house, post retail emissions, etc.;

	lack of methodology or consensus on quantification approach, e.g. changes 

in soil carbon stocks from LU; and

	limited  contribution  of  the  processes  to  the  carbon  footprint,  e.g.  use  of 

production of cleaning agents, antibiotics and pharmaceuticals.

Emission categories and a description of the emissions included in each category 

are presented in Table 2. 

Table 2. Description of emission categories used in this assessment

Category

Feed N2O

Feed CO2

blending and transport
fertilizer production

processing and transport

field operations

Feed LUC CO2
Indirect (embedded) energy CO2

Manure N2O

Manure CH4
Enteric CH4
Direct energy CO2
Post farmgate

Source: Authors.

Description

Direct and indirect N2O emissions from manure deposited on pasture 
Direct and indirect N2O emissions from organic and synthetic N applied to 
crops and pasture
CO2 arising from the production and transportation of compound feed
CO2 from energy use during the manufacture of urea and ammonium nitrate 
(and small amounts of N2O)
CO2 from energy use during crop processing (e.g. oil extraction) and 
transportation by land and (in some cases) sea
CO2 arising from the use of energy for field operations (tillage, fertilizer 
application). Includes emissions arising during both fuel production and use.
CO2 from LUC associated with soybean cultivation and pasture expansion
CO2 arising from energy use during the production of the materials used to 
construct farm buildings and equipment
Direct and indirect N2O emissions arising during manure storage prior to 
application to land
CH4 emissions arising during manure storage prior to application to land
CH4 arising from enteric fermentation
CO2 arising from energy use on-farm for heating, ventilation etc.
Energy use in processing and transport

13

MethodsFigure 2. 
Overview of the GLEAM modules and computation flows 

GIS ENVIRONMENT

HERD MODULE

Defines the populaon in a cell,

e.g. herd structure, average 

weights etc.

MANURE MODULE

Calculates total 

manure N applied to 

land

FEED MODULE

Defines the percentage of each 
feed material in the diet, and 

quanfies the key parameters of 
the raon, e. g.: DE, N content, 
emissions and LU per kg feed

SYSTEM MODULE

Calculates:(a) each animal's energy requirement and 
feed intake, and (b) the total flock/herd producon 

(kg meat/milk), and emissions (manure N2O and 

CH4 enteric CH4, feed emissions)

DIRECT AND INDIRECT 

ENERGY EMISSIONS

ALLOCATION MODULE

Calculates the emissions/kg of product

POSTFARM EMISSIONS

RESULTS

Source: Authors.

3.4 overview of calcUlation Method
A specific model and related databases were developed to carry out this assessment. 
The Global Livestock Environmental Accounting model (GLEAM) was designed 
to represent processes and activities from the production of inputs into the pro-
duction process to the farmgate, the point at which products and animals leave the 
farm. It consists of five main modules: herd module, manure module, feed basket 
module, system module and allocation module and two additional modules for the 
calculation of direct and indirect on-farm energy and post farmgate emissions (Fig-
ure 2). Appendix A provides a detailed explanation of GLEAM.

3.4.1 spatial variation and the use of Geographic information system
A challenge faced in conventional LCA modelling is the complexity and variation 
in biophysical characteristics (such as soil and climate) as well as production pro-
cesses. Data on farming activities and farming system parameters were collected at 
different levels of aggregation: production system, country level, AEZs, or a com-
bination thereof (e.g. information on manure storage in developing countries was 
available  for  a  combination  of  production  systems  and  AEZs).  Additional  data, 
such as livestock numbers, pasture and availability of feedstuff was available in the 
form of Geographical Information System (GIS) grids (raster layers), with a spatial 
resolution not coarser than 5 arc minutes (ca. 10 km x 10 km at the equator). For 

14

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsthe outputs of GLEAM, a spatial resolution of 3 arc minutes (ca. 5 km x 5 km at the 
equator) was used. 

GIS can store observed data for specific locations (e.g. soil types, climate factors), 
can model new information from these data and can also calculate regional summa-
ries such as total area, emissions, etc. GIS was used to analyse spatially varied data 
(such as crop yields, livestock species distribution), generate location-specific input 
data  required  for  LCA  modelling  (e.g.  define  the  typology  of  livestock  produc-
tion systems, and calculate location-specific feed-crop availability, classification of 
dominant soil types in forested areas and location-specific temperature to estimate 
EFs such as CH4 conversion factors for MMS) and store numerical model input and 
output data in a GIS database. 

The use of GIS allowed the incorporation of spatial heterogeneity into the mod-
elling process which brought with it the benefit of enhancing the reliability of data 
used as well as results. Furthermore, it produced a more spatially accurate inven-
tory of emissions, particularly CH4 emissions which are modelled based on animal 
cohorts and feed intake. In this way, emissions were estimated at any location of 
the globe, based on available information, and then aggregated along the desired 
category, e.g. farming systems, country group, commodity and animal species. This 
assessment thus demonstrates the potential of coupling GIS technology with LCA 
for assessing GHG emissions from the livestock food chain. 

3.4.2 emission factors
The GHG EFs applied for the various emission sources in this study are specified 
in Appendix B of this report. A combination of IPCC (2006) Tier 1 and Tier 2 ap-
proaches and EFs were used in the estimation of emissions. 

Despite the existence of country-specific EFs, the study applied the same approach 
to all countries. The use of a unified approach was preferred for the assessment, to 
ensure consistency and comparability of results across regions and farming systems. 
IPCC  Tier  2  approaches  were  used  in  the  characterization  of  livestock  pop-
ulation, to calculate emissions related to enteric fermentation as well as manure 
management and storage. The Tier 1 method was used where data was generally 
lacking, e.g. estimation of carbon stocks from LUC and N2O emissions from feed 
production. 

Global Warming Potentials (GWPs) with a time horizon of 100 years based on 
the 4th Assessment Report of the IPCC (IPCC, 2007) were used to convert N2O 
and CH4 to CO2-eq terms. Consequently, GWP of 25 and 298 were used for CH4 
and N2O, respectively. 

3.4.3 Land use and land-use change
Assessment of changes in carbon stocks for agricultural land remaining in the same 
land use category requires dynamic process models and/or detailed inventory mea-
surements. According to IPCC (2006), these models should be able to represent all 
relevant management practices and their driving variables compatible with available 
country data. Their validity should also be reported in empirical assessments. As no 
models satisfy these criteria and are validated on a global scale, this analysis doesnt 
incorporate C stock changes under constant land use. Nevertheless, a discussion on 
the effect of this simplification is provided in Appendix C, in particular about the 
role of grasslands in C sequestration.

15

MethodsLand-use change (LUC) is a highly complex process. It results from the interac-
tion of drivers which may be direct or indirect3 and which can involve numerous 
transitions, such as clearing, grazing, cultivation, abandonment and secondary for-
est re-growth. The debate surrounding the key drivers of deforestation is a continu-
ing one and the causal links (direct and indirect) are both complex and unclear. 

In this assessment, LUC considered are the transformation of forest to cropland 
and of forest to pasture. The former focuses on deforestation associated with soy-
bean production in Brazil and Argentina. This choice results from the use of 2005 
as year of reference and from the following observations of trends in LU transitions 
and crop expansions:

	In the period 1990-2006,4 which is used as the reference time period in this 
study,  the  main  global  cropland  expansions  were  for  maize  and  soybean 
production;

	Maize and soybean expansion occurred in different regions of the world but 
only in Latin America can it be linked to a decrease in forest area during the 
same period; and

	Within Latin America, Brazil and Argentina account for 91 percent of the 
total soybean area. Over the period 19902006, 90 percent of the soybean 
area expansion in Latin America took place in these two countries. 

LUC emissions were then attributed to only those countries supplied by Brazil 
and Argentina for soybean and soybean cake, proportionally to the share on im-
ports from these two countries in their soybean supply. This study also provides 
an analysis of sensitivity to these assumptions, in particular on the reference time 
period, the expansion of soybean at the expense of other land types including for-
estland (arable and perennial cropland and grassland) and the assumption that all 
traded soybean and soybean cake is associated with LUC (see Appendix C). 

The second LU transformation focuses on deforestation associated with pasture 
expansion in Latin America. This choice results from the observation that, during 
the period 1990-2006, significant pasture expansions and simultaneous forest area 
decrease occurred in Latin America and Africa. However, due to the lack of reliable 
data and information, it is difficult to draw conclusions on the land-use conversion 
trends in Africa. 

LUC  emissions  associated  with  the  expansion  of  pasture  into  forest  areas  in 
Latin America are attributed to beef production in those countries in which the 
conversion occurred. Appendix C provides an elaboration of the approach applied. 

3.5 data soUrces and Mana GeMent
The availability of data varies considerably within and among key parameters. In 
general, the OECD countries possess detailed statistics, supported by several scien-
tific and technical publications. In contrast, there is a severe paucity of data in non-
OECD  countries.  Where  detailed  and  accurate  data  are  available,  they  are  often 
outdated and/or lack supporting metadata. Appendix B presents some of the data 
utilized in this assessment. 

3  Direct drivers include conversion of forest areas for plantation crops or cattle ranching, rural settlements, min-

4 

ing and logging. Indirect drivers include subsidies for agribusiness, investment in infrastructure, land tenure 
issues, absence of adequate surveillance by the government and demand for forest products, such as timber.
1990 is chosen as the initial year because it is the most recent available year with a consistent forest dataset from 
the FAOSTAT database. This practically discounts 4 years of LUC related emissions, compared to the 20-year 
timeframe recommended by IPCC (IPCC, 2006).

16

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsTable 3. Overview of the data sourced for the preparation of this assessment

Data groups

Data collection approach and sources

Herd (animal parameters)

Literature reviews, reports and surveys (see Appendix B)

Manure management

Literature reviews and reports (see Appendix B)

Feed basket

Literature reviews, reports; IFPRI (GIS based data)

LCI feed components

Yield

Literature reviews, reports; IFPRI (GIS based data),  
LCI databases Sweden and the Netherlands
Literature reviews and FAOSTAT

Non-edible products

Literature reviews and reports, FAOSTAT 

Carbon stocks

Deforestation

Animal population  
characterization 
Capital goods 

Source: Authors.

Use of model based on Gross Primary Production (GPP)

FAO Forestry statistics, IPCC guidelines, literature and own 
calculations (see Appendix C)
Herd layer data, FAOSTAT and FAO Gridded Livestock of  
the World
Ecoinvent database and literature reviews

During the process of data collection, gaps initially encountered were addressed, 
to  the  extent  possible,  by  extensive  research  of  databases,  literature  sources  and 
expert opinion. Assumptions were made when data could not be obtained. Data 
collection involved a combination of research, direct communication with experts, 
and access to public and commercially available life cycle inventory (LCI) packages 
such as Ecoinvent. The studys main data sources included: 

	Gridded Livestock of the World (FAO, 2007).
	National Inventory Reports of Annex I countries (UNFCCC, 2009a).
	National Communications of non-Annex I countries (UNFCCC, 2009b).
	Geo-referenced databases on crop production from the International Food 

Policy Research Institute (You et al., 2010).

	Above-ground net primary production (NPP) (Haberl et al., 2007)
	Life Cycle Inventory (LCI) data from the Swedish Institute for Food and 
Biotechnology (Flysjo et al., 2008), and Wageningen University, the Neth-
erlands (I. de Boer, personal communication).
	Reports from the CGIAR research institutes.
	Statistics from FAO (FAOSTAT, 2009).
	Peer-reviewed journals.

The data have been organized into data groups or basic data layers. Table 3 

summarizes the data collection approach and sources for each main data group. 

Further detail on data and data sources is given in Appendix B. 

3.6 ALLoCAtion of emissions between proDuC ts, by-proDuC ts 
and services
Livestock produce a mix of goods and services that cannot be disaggregated easily 
into individual processes. For example, a dairy cow produces milk, manure, draught 
power and capital services, and eventually meat when it is slaughtered. Given that 
multiple products are produced from each of the ruminant species, the environ-
mental  burden  associated  with  production  needs  to  be  allocated  for  each  of  the 
products. In LCA, specific techniques are required to attribute relative shares of 

17

MethodsFigure 3. 
An illustration of production activities and partitioning of total emissions to products and  
services from cattle

FEED PRODUCTION

LIVESTOCK PRODUCTION

POSTFARM TRANSPORT AND 
PROCESSING

NONFEED
PRODUCTS

 

S
E
I
T
I
V
I
T
C
A
N
O
I
T
C
U
D
O
R
P

S
T
C
U
D
O
R
P

BEEF FROM
SPECIALIZED
HERD

BEEF FROM
DAIRY HERD

Source: Authors.

SLAUGHTER
BYPRODUCTS
MANURE 
AVAILABLE FOR 
APPLICATION ON 
NONFEED CROPS 

DRAFT AND 
MANURE 
USED AS FUEL

MILK

GHG emissions to each of these goods and services. The ISO recommends avoid-
ing allocation by dividing the main process into sub-processes, or by expanding the 
product  system  to  include  additional  functions  related  to  the  co-products  (ISO, 
2006). In situations where allocation cannot be avoided (as is often the case in bio-
logical processes such as livestock production), GHG emissions can be allocated on 
the basis of causal and physical relationships. 

Where physical relationships alone cannot be established or used as a basis for 
allocation, emissions should be allocated in a way which reflects other fundamental 
relationships.  In  the  latter  case,  the  most  commonly  used  approach  is  economic 
allocation which, in the context of jointly produced products, allocates emissions 
to each product according to its share of the products combined economic value. 
Other indexes, such as weight or protein content, can also be used (Cederberg and 

18

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsFigure 4. 
Classification of ruminant production systems used in the assessment

HERD TYPE

SYSTEM

CLIMATE

COUNTRY

Dairy herd

(producing milk and meat)

Mixed1 

Grassland based2

Pure meat herd

(producing only meat)

Mixed1 

Grassland based2

Arid 
Humid 

Temperate/

tropical highlands

Arid 
Humid 

Temperate/

tropical highlands

A
B
...

A
B
...

1  Grassland-based livestock systems: Livestock production systems in which more than 10 percent of the 
dry matter fed to animals is farm-produced and in which annual average stocking rates are less than ten 
livestock units per hectare of agricultural land (FAO, 1996).

2  Mixed farming systems: Livestock production systems in which more than 10 percent of the dry matter 

fed to livestock comes from crop by-products and/or stubble or more than 10 percent of the value of 
production comes from non-livestock farming activities (FAO, 1996).

Source: Authors.

Stadig, 2003). The allocation techniques used in this assessment to apportion emis-
sions to products and services produced by ruminant systems are summarized be-
low: 

	Edible products (e.g. meat and milk): allocation based on protein content. 
	Edible and non-edible products (e.g. milk, meat and fibre): allocation based 

on economic value of outputs. 

	Slaughter  by-products:  no  allocation  is  performed  in  this  assessment. 
Appendix  F  explores  the  impact  of  allocating  emissions  to  slaughter  by-
products.

	Manure: allocation based on sub-division of production process.

 - manure  storage:  emissions  from  manure  management  systems  (MMS) 

allocated to livestock sector;

 - manure applied to feed: emissions allocated to livestock sector based on 

mass harvested and relative economic value; 

 - manure applied to non-feed: no allocation to livestock sector; and
 - manure used for fuel: Emissions are deducted from the overall emissions 

and therefore are not allocation to livestock sector.

	Capital function: no allocation is performed in this assessment.
	Services (e.g. animal draught power): biophysical allocation based on extra-
life time gross energy requirements for labour and emissions are deducted 
from the overall livestock emissions.

A detailed account of the application of the allocation technique is provided in 

Appendix A. Figure 3 illustrates flows of outputs from the cattle sector. 

3.7 prodUction systeM  typoloGy
This assessment estimates emissions at global, regional and farming system levels. A 
farming system typology was thus adapted to provide a framework for examining 
GHG emission from different dairy farming systems. This typology is based on the 
classification principles set out by FAO (1996), namely, the feed-base and the agro-
ecological conditions of production systems (Figure 4). 

19

MethodsThe following three AEZs were used: 

	temperate: temperate regions, where for at least one or two months a year 
the  temperature  falls  below  5  oC;  and  tropical  highlands,  where  the  daily 
mean temperature in the growing season ranges from 5 to 20 oC.;

	arid: arid and semi-arid tropics and subtropics, with a growing period of 

less than 75 days and 75-180 days, respectively; and

	humid:  humid  tropics  and  sub-humid  tropics  where  the  length  of  the 
growing period ranges from 181-270 days or exceeds 271 days, respectively.
The widely-used classification approach developed by FAO (1996) that was used 
here has a number of advantages: it allows researchers to use the multiple databases 
developed using this structure [e.g. geo-referenced data on animal numbers in each 
livestock production system (LPS)]; it provides a conceptual framework to make 
estimates  where  data  are  lacking;  and  it  enhances  the  compatibility  of  this  work 
with other analyses using similar classification schemes.

20

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chains4. Results 

4.1 Cattle
This study estimates that in 2005, total emissions from cattle production amount 
to 4 623 million tonnes CO2-eq. These emissions include emissions associated with 
the production of meat and milk, emissions related to land-use change, emissions 
associated with post farmgate activities, and emissions related to non-edible prod-
ucts and services, draught power and manure used for fuel. 

The following sub-sections present the emissions associated with edible prod-
ucts  (meat  and  milk)  as  well  as  a  disaggregated  overview  of  the  contribution  of 
production systems and regions to emissions. 

4.1.1 Total production, absolute emissions and emission intensities
In 2005, the global cattle sector produced approximately 508.6 million tonnes of 
milk and 61.4 million tonnes of beef, of which 56 percent of beef was produced by 
the specialized beef sector and 44 percent by the dairy herd. Table 4 reports the vol-
ume of production, absolute emissions and average GHG emissions per kg of milk 
and meat for the dairy and beef subsectors. 

Globally, about 4 255.9 million tonnes of CO2-eq were emitted by the global 
cattle sector in 2005; of this 1 419.1 million tonnes were associated with milk pro-
duction and 2 836.8 million tonnes with beef production.5 This is equivalent to 2.8 
kg CO2-eq per kg of fat and protein corrected milk and 46.2 kg CO2-eq per kg of 
carcass weight.6

Regarding beef production from the cattle sector, there is a distinct difference 
in emission intensity between beef produced by the dairy herd and the specialized 
beef herd; the carbon intensity of beef from the specialized beef herds is almost 
fourfold that produced from the dairy herd (67.8 vs. 18.4 kg CO2-eq per kg CW) 
(Table 4). The low emission intensity for dairy meat is caused by the fact that both 
milk and meat are produced by the dairy herd. Because a large proportion of the 

Table 4. Global production, absolute GHG emissions and emission intensities  
for milk and beef 

Cattle 
herd

Dairy 

Beef 

Totals 

Production

(million tonnes)

Milk2

508.6

-

508.6

Meat2

26.8

34.6

61.4

Absolute emissions1
(million tonnes CO2-eq)
Milk
Meat

Average emission intensity

(kg CO2-eq/kg product)
Milk2
Meat2

1419.1

-

1419.1

490.9

2345.9

2836.8

2.8

-

2.8

18.4

67.8

46.2

1  Absolute emissions include emissions from production, post farmgate processes and land-use change.
2  Functional unit for milk and meat defined as fat and protein corrected milk and carcass weight.
Source: GLEAM.

5  Unless otherwise stated, the term beef refers to meat from dairy and specialized beef herds. 
6  Does not include emissions associated to slaughter by-products. See Appendix F for discussion of effects on 

results.

21

Figure 5. 
Relative contribution of different processes to total GHG emissions from the 
global cattle sector

2.2%

6.1%

5.4%

3.8%

46.5%

3.6%

0.9%

0.5%

1.4%

42.6%

Source: GLEAM

Dairy

17.0%

Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Feed, CO2
LUC: soybean, CO2
Enteric, CH4
Manure MMS, CH4
Manure MMS, N2O
Direct & indirect energy, CO2
Posarm, CO2

7.4%

10.9%

0.7%

Beef

18.1%

7.4%

10.0%

0.7%

14.8%

Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Feed, CO2
LUC: soybean, CO2
LUC: pasture expansion, CO2
Enteric, CH4
Manure MMS, CH4
Manure MMS, N2O
Direct & indirect energy, CO2
Posarm, CO2

total protein from the dairy herd originates from milk (see Map 6 in Appendix G), 
a greater proportion of the emissions from dairy herd is attributed to milk. Conse-
quently, this reduces the GHG emissions attributed to meat from culled dairy cows 
and related meat production from surplus animals. 

On the other hand, the specialized beef herd carries the entire burden of emis-
sions  because  only  one  product  is  produced,  while  the  reproductive  overhead 
(cows, bulls and replacement animals) is almost the same. The overhead costs of 
the cow in dairy-based production systems are largely attributed to milk while in 
the specialized beef system the full costs are allocated to those animals destined for 
beef production. 

22

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsFigure 6. 
Contribution to total milk and beef production by production systems and  
agro-ecological zone1

Milk

Grazing

Mixed

)

%

(
 
n
o

c
u
d
o
r
p
k
l
i

 

m

 
l

a
b
o
l
g

 

 
f
o
e
r
a
h
S

 

)

%

(
 
 

n
o

c
u
d
o
r
p
 
f
e
e
b

 
l

a
b
o
l
g

 

 
f
o
e
r
a
h
S

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Arid

Humid

Temperate

Beef

Grazing

Mixed

Arid

Humid

Temperate

1 Excluding post farmgate and land-use change emissions (pasture expansion).
Source: GLEAM.

The  relative  contribution  of  production  processes  and  gases  to  the  emissions 
profile for milk and beef at global level is illustrated in Figure 5. A significant share 
of total GHG emissions is from CH4 which accounts for 50 percent and 44 percent 
of the total emissions, with enteric fermentation contributing more than 92 percent 
and 97 percent of the total CH4 emissions in dairy and beef production. 

In both dairy and beef herds, N2O emissions amounted to relatively similar pro-
portions of the total carbon footprint  approximately 29 percent of the emissions. 
Main sources of N2O emissions include N2O from manure deposited during graz-
ing and feed production. 

On a global scale, CO2 emissions represent 20 percent and 27 percent of the dairy 
and beef emission profiles, respectively. The difference in CO2 emissions between 

23

Resultsdairy and beef herds is due to the CO2 emissions from land-use change associated 
with the expansion of grassland into forest areas which accounts for 14.8 percent of 
the total emissions related to beef production and 55 percent of the CO2 emission. 

4.1.2 Emissions by production system and agro-ecological zone
Grass-based  systems  and  mixed  livestock  production  systems  contribute  22  and 
78 percent of global beef production, and 15 percent and 84 percent of global milk 
production, respectively (Figure 6). 

Average emission intensities for milk and beef produced in grazing and mixed 
farming systems were estimated at 2.9 and 2.5 kg CO2-eq/kg FPCM and 42.0 and 
38.4 kg CO2-eq/kg CW, respectively. The variation in emission intensity between 
the two systems is explained by several factors such as the generally higher slaugh-
ter weights, lower age at calving, reduced time to slaughter, and lower mortality 
rates and better feed quality in mixed farming systems. 

Lowest emission intensity in milk and beef production corresponds to the tem-
perate  zones  in  both  grassland-based  and  mixed  farming  systems  (Figures  7  and 
8),  where  productivity  is  rather  high  and  CH4  from  enteric  fermentation  is  low 
as a consequence of high digestibility of the feed in these zones. Concomitantly, 
temperate zones have slightly higher emissions associated with CO2 feed compared 
with the humid and arid areas as a result of the high dependency on imported con-
centrate feed and synthetic fertilizer use in feed production. Lower emission in-
tensity of beef produced in temperate zones is also related to the importance of 
dairy production in these areas; about 44 percent of the beef from the dairy sector 
is produced in temperate zones. Beef from the dairy sector as a consequence of the 
dairy system characteristics comes with discounted emissions because a large share 
of the emissions related to the meat from culled breeding animals is allocated to 
milk production. 

Enteric CH4 is the largest source of emissions in all systems; however it is highest 
in arid and humid zones of both grazing and mixed farming systems where feed, for 
the most part, is of low quality. 

Nitrous oxide emissions from feed production are dominant in both grazing arid 
and humid zones resulting from manure deposited on pasture during grazing, while 
in  the  mixed  systems  high  N2O  emissions  are  not  only  associated  with  manure 
deposition but also use of synthetic fertilizer in feed production (see Section 5.2).

On the other hand, CH4 emissions from manure management in both systems 
are negligible and this is explained by the high proportion of manure that is man-
aged  in  dry  MMS  such  as  drylots  or  solid  systems.  Nitrous  oxide  from  manure 
management  is  generally  low  especially  in  grazing  systems  because  animals  are 
grazing most of the time and manure is mostly deposited on pasture. 

4.1.3 Regional emissions, production and emission intensities 
In terms of total production, approximately 67 percent of the total protein from the 
global cattle sector is from milk. However, this global estimate obscures variations 
at regional level, where large differences exist both in terms of production and emis-
sions. With the exception of Latin America and the Caribbean, the contribution of 
milk protein to the total protein from the cattle sector on average ranges from 56 
percent in sub-Saharan Africa to 81 percent in Western Europe (Figure 9; Map 6 in 
Appendix G). In Latin America, meat protein contributes about 54 percent of the 

24

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsFigure 7. 
Emission intensities for milk by production system and agro-ecological zone1

Grassland-based

1
-

 

M
C
P
F
g
k
.
q
e
-

2

O
C
g
k

 

1
-

 

M
C
P
F
g
k
.
q
e
-

2

 

O
C
g
k
k

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Direct & indirect energy, CO2
LUC: soybean, CO2
Feed, CO2
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Manure MMS, N2O
Manure MMS, CH4
Enteric, CH4

Direct & indirect energy, CO2
LUC: soybean, CO2
Feed, CO2
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Manure MMS, N2O
Manure MMS, CH4
Enteric, CH4

Arid

Humid

Temperate

Mixed systems

Arid

Humid 

Temperate

1 Excluding post farmgate and land-use change emissions (pasture expansion).
Source: GLEAM.

25

ResultsFigure 8. 
Emission intensities for beef by production system and agro-ecological zone1

Grassland-based

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

50

40

30

Arid

Humid

Temperate

Mixed systems

1
-

 

W
C
g
k
.
q
e
-

2

O
C
g
k

 

1
-

 

W
C
g
k
.
q
e
-

2

O
C
g
k

 

20

10

0

Arid

Humid 

Temperate

Direct & indirect energy, CO2
LUC: soybean, CO2
Feed, CO2
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Manure MMS, N2O
Manure MMS, CH4
Enteric, CH4

Direct & indirect energy, CO2
LUC: soybean, CO2
Feed, CO2
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Manure MMS, N2O
Manure MMS, CH4
Enteric, CH4

1 Excluding post farmgate and land-use change emissions (pasture expansion).
Source: GLEAM.

26

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsFigure 9. 
Regional contribution to milk and meat protein

Milk protein

Meat protein

)

%

i

(
 
n
e
t
o
r
p

 
l

a
t
o
t
 
f
o
e
r
a
h
S

 

 

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

N. America

LAC

W. Europe

E. Europe

Russian Fed.

NENA

SSA

South Asia

E & SE Asia

Oceania

Source: GLEAM.

Figure 10. 
Emissions per kg meat and milk protein, comparing allocation of emissions to 
different outputs

Beef: emissions allocated to both edible and 
non-edible outputs
Beef: all emissions allocated to edible products

Dairy: emissions allocated to both edible and 
non-edible outputss
Dairy: all emissions allocated to edible products

1 200

1 000

800

600

400

200

i

1
-
n
e
t
o
r
p
g
k
.
q
e
-

 

2

O
C
g
k

 

0

N. America 

Source: GLEAM.

LAC

W.Europe

E. Europe

Russian Fed.

NENA

SSA

South Asia

E & SE Asia

Oceania

27

Resultstotal protein from cattle, mainly because the emphasis is on beef production rather 
than dairy. In the other world regions, meat protein ranges between 18 percent in 
Europe to 44 percent in sub-Saharan Africa. 

Figure 10 presents a regional comparison of emission intensities for two com-
putation approaches where (i) all emissions from cattle production are allocated to 
the main edible outputs from the system, milk and meat; and (ii) emissions related 
to other functions and processes, e.g. draught power and those related to the use of 
manure as a source of fuel, are deducted from the overall system emissions. 

Figure 10 illustrates the difference in carbon equivalent impact and the extent 
to which production is specialized, i.e. whether it is meant for milk and meat pro-
duction or whether animals are kept for other purposes. The starkest difference in 
emission  intensity  is  shown  for  sub-Saharan  Africa  and  South  Asia  where  cattle 
herds are multi-purpose, producing not only edible products but also non-edible 
products and services that are utilized in other production processes within or out-
side the livestock sector boundary. In these regions, use of draught power is im-
portant as well as the use of manure as a source of fuel, and allocation of emissions 
to these products and services significantly lowers the emission intensity of edible 
products in these regions. In contrast, in industrialized regions, production is more 
specialized with cattle being specifically reared to produce meat and milk products. 
In these regions, emission intensity is generally lower, because production is more 

Figure 11a. 
Regional variation in GHG emission intensities for cow milk 

10

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

1
-

 

M
C
P
F
g
k
.
q
e
-

2

O
C
g
k

 

0

N. America 

LAC

W. Europe

E. Europe

Russian Fed.

NENA

SSA

South Asia

E & SE Asia

Oceania

World

Enteric, CH4
Manure MMS, CH4
Manure MMS, N2O

Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Feed, CO2

LUC: soybean, CO2
Direct & indirect energy, CO2
Posarm, CO2

Source: GLEAM.

28

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsefficient, yields are higher, and animals are not kept for longer periods for other 
purposes such as draught power. 

Figures 11a and 11b present regional variation in emission intensity for milk and 
meat (after allocation to draught and manure used for fuel) and the contribution of 
emission categories to the emission profile. 

For milk, emission intensities vary from 1.6 kg CO2-eq/kg FPCM in Eastern 
and Western Europe to 9 kg CO2-eq/kg FPCM in sub-Saharan Africa (Figure 11a). 
Generally, industrialized regions of the world exhibit the lowest emission intensi-
ties  per  kg  FPCM  ranging  between  1.6  and  1.7  kg  CO2-eq/kg  FPCM,  while  in 
developing regions the range of emission intensity for milk is wider  2.0 and 9.0 kg 
CO2-eq/kg FPCM. 

The main contribution to the GHG emission profile of milk in developing re-
gions is enteric fermentation while in industrialized regions dominant emissions are 
largely related to feed production and processing. With regard to manure manage-
ment, CH4 emissions are highest in North America where on average 27 percent 
of manure from the dairy sector is managed in liquid systems that produce greater 
quantities of CH4 emissions (see Section 5.3.1). In contrast, N2O emissions from 
manure management are higher in developing regions as a result of the higher pro-
portion of manure managed in dry systems. 

Figure 11b. 
Regional variation in GHG emission intensities for beef

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

 
1
-

 

W
C
g
k
.
q
e
-

2

O
C
g
k

 

0

N. America 

LAC

W. Europe

E. Europe

Russian Fed.

NENA

SSA

South Asia

E & SE Asia

Oceania

World

Enteric, CH4
Manure MMS, CH4
Manure MMS, N2O

Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Feed, CO2

LUC: soybean, CO2
Direct & indirect energy, CO2
Posarm, CO2
LUC: pasture expansion, CO2

Source: GLEAM.

29

ResultsFigure 12. 
Regional comparison of emission intensity per kilogram of carcass

1
-

 

W
C
g
k
.
q
e
-

2

O
C
g
k

 

160

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

Dairy meat

Beef

All cale meat

LAC

N. America 

W. Europe

E. Europe

Russian Fed.

NENA

SSA

South Asia

E & SE Asia

Oceania

World

Source: GLEAM.

Regional  variability  in  emission  intensity  for  beef  is  presented  in  Figure  11b, 
with GHG emissions per kg carcass weight (CW) ranging from 14 kg CO2-eq/kg 
CW in Eastern Europe and Russian Federation to 76 kg CO2-eq/kg CW in South 
Asia. Highest emission intensities are found in developing regions: South Asia, sub-
Saharan Africa, LAC and East and Southeast Asia. A key driver for the high emis-
sions associated with beef is largely related to low feed digestibility, lower slaughter 
weights and higher age at slaughter. The carbon footprint of beef produced in Latin 
America comprises emissions related to land-use change from pasture expansion 
into forested areas. Consequently, land-use change is a major driver of emissions 
in the region, representing approximately one-third of the footprint (Figure 11b), 
equivalent to 24 kg CO2-eq/kg CW. These LUC estimates are however associated 
with a high level of methodological uncertainty and do not capture recent defores-
tation trends (the period considered is 1990-2006). 

The low emission intensities associated with beef in Europe (Western and East-
ern Europe, and the Russian Federation) is explained by the large proportion of 
the beef produced from the dairy herd.7 About 80 percent of the beef production 
in Europe is derived as a co-product from dairy production (from surplus calves 
and culled cows); in the Russian Federation, all beef is estimated to be produced 
by the dairy sector. The dairy sector therefore has a much higher impact on beef 
production in these regions and this is directly linked to the need for their dairy 
sectors to sustain milk production through production of calves in order to keep 
cows lactating. Figure 12 compares the regional emission intensity for beef pro-
duced by the dairy and beef herd and the average emission intensity of all beef 
produced by the cattle sector. The low emissions are also an artefact of the pro-
duction characteristics of dairy herd (dual products) (see discussion on allocation 
techniques in Appendix A) and hence a large proportion of the emissions attribut-

7  Table B22, Appendix B presents the contribution of dairy and beef herds to total beef production.

30

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsable to dairy cows is allocated to milk, resulting in a lower allocation to beef from 
the dairy herd. 

The emission intensity for beef in Western Europe, North America and Oceania 
is lower than the global average mainly because these regions are key beef-produc-
ing regions characterized by high efficiency in production and high feed digestibil-
ity (Map 8 in Appendix G). 

Table B13 in Appendix B illustrates average feed digestibility values for the aver-
age feed ration used in beef production in different regions. Highest feed digestil-
ity is found in industralized countries where feed rations are laregly composed of 
higher quality roughages and concentrates. The digestibility of average feed rations 
in developing regions is much lower, particulary in sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia 
and parts of East and Southeast Asia. Feed rations in this regions are laregly com-
posed of roughages of low quality (grass, crop residues and leaves). 

Regarding the contribution of different processes to the emission profile for beef, 
a  distinct  difference  can  be  observed  between  the  two  broad  regional  groupings 
(developing and industrialized). 

In developing regions, analogous to the dairy, the overall emission profile for 
beef is dominated by enteric CH4 and N2O emissions related to feed from manure 
deposited  on  pasture  during  grazing.  The  relatively  higher  N2O  emissions  from 
manure  management  in  sub-Saharan  Africa,  South  Asia,  and  East  and  Southeast 
Asia reflects the higher share of manure managed in dry systems. 

In contrast, enteric CH4 emissions play a less important role in industrialized 
regions; however, this is compensated by high CO2 and N2O from feed emissions, 
reflecting a high dependence on feed imports, high fertilizer use in feed production 
and a higher level of mechanization (see Section 5.2). 

4.2 Buffalo
Milk and meat production from the global buffalo sector contributes an equiva-
lent of 619 million tonnes CO2-eq consisting of emissions from the production of 
meat and milk, emissions related to land-use change, emissions associated with post 
farmgate activities, and emission related to non-edible products and services, i.e. 
draught power and manure used for fuel. 

4.2.1 Total production, absolute emissions, and emission intensities
In 2005, global buffalo milk and meat production amounted to 115.2 and 3.4 million 
tonnes, respectively, and associated with this, about 390 and 180.2 million tonnes 
CO2-eq were emitted from the production of milk and meat from buffaloes, re-
spectively (Table 5). On average, the emission intensity of buffalo milk and meat 
is estimated at 3.4 kg CO2-eq/kg FPCM and 53.4 kg CO2-eq/kg CW, respectively 
(Table 5). The emission intensity of meat produced by the dairy herd is significantly 
lower than that produced from the meat herd and the reasons are similar to those 
outlined in the previous sub-section on the cattle sector. 

Enteric fermentation is by far the most important source of emissions, contribut-
ing over 60 percent of the emissions in both milk and meat production (Figure 13). 
Other important sources of emissions include emissions from feed production, par-
ticularly N2O emissions from manure deposited largely determined by the long graz-
ing period. Emissions from manure management (N2O and CH4 emissions) together 
contribute 6 percent and 7 percent of the total emissions from dairy and meat herds.

31

ResultsTable 5. Global production, emissions and emission intensity for  
buffalo milk and meat

Buffalo 
herd

Production

(million tonnes)

Absolute emissions1
(million tonnes CO2-eq)

Milk

Meat

Totals

Milk2

115.2

-

115.2

Meat2

2.4

0.95

3.4

Milk

389.9

389.9

Meat

40.4

139.9

180.2

Average emission 

intensity

(kg CO2-eq/kg product)
Milk2
Meat2

3.4

-

3.4

16.6

143.9

53.4

1  Absolute emissions include emissions from production and post farmgate emissions.
2  Functional unit for milk and meat defined as fat and protein corrected milk and carcass weight.
Source: GLEAM.

Figure 13. 
Relative contribution of different processes to GHG emission profile of buffalo 
milk and meat

Buffalo milk

5.9%

10.1%

0.9%

4.9%

1.1%

7.3%

10.3%

Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Feed, CO2
Enteric, CH4
Manure MMS, CH4
Manure MMS, N2O
Direct & indirect energy, CO2
Posarm, CO2

59.5%

Buffalo meat

5.7% 0.3%

0.2%

1.2%

13.8%

7.0%

9.2%

Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Feed, CO2
Enteric, CH4
Manure MMS, CH4
Manure MMS, N2O
Direct & indirect energy, CO2
Posarm, CO2

62.6%

Source: GLEAM.

32

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chains4.2.2 Emissions by production system and agro-ecological zone
Average emission intensity of buffalo milk from grazing and mixed farming systems 
is estimated at 3.4 and 3.2 kg CO2-eq/kg FPCM, respectively. On the other hand, 
the emission intensity of buffalo meat from grazing and mixed farming systems is 
36.7 and 54.0 kg CO2-eq/kg CW, respectively. About 82 percent and 67 percent of 
milk and meat production from buffalo is produced in the mixed arid zones. Pro-
duction in the other ecological zones is unimportant. 

Lowest  emission  intensities  for  milk  are  found  in  the  grazing  temperate  and 

mixed arid production systems (Figure 14). 

Lowest emission intensities for buffalo meat are found in the arid zones in both 
grazing and mixed systems (Figure 15), which contribute 70 percent of all buffalo 
meat, while humid zones in both systems have highest emission intensities. Impor-
tant sources of emissions include: enteric fermentation, N2O from feed production 
and grazing; and CO2 emissions from feed production and processing. N2O from 
manure  and  feed  is  an  important  source  of  emissions  in  the  humid  zones;  these 
emissions are largely driven by the predominance of dry manure management sys-
tems and emissions from the deposition of manure on pasture. The remaining emis-
sions are insignificant in terms of their contribution towards the carbon profile.

4.2.3 Regional production emissions and emission intensities
Global buffalo milk and meat production is important in three main world regions: 
South Asia, NENA and East & Southeast Asia; South Asia contributes 90 percent 
and 70 percent of the global buffalo milk and meat, respectively, and average milk 
emission intensity ranges from 3.2 to 4.8 kg CO2-eq/kg FPCM (Figure 16a); milk 
produced in South Asia has the lowest emission intensity, explained by high yields. 
Emission intensity in South Asia is similar to the global average, explained by the 
fact that the bulk of buffalo milk (90 percent) is produced in the region. 

On the other hand, the emission intensity of buffalo meat production at regional 
level ranges from 21 kg CO2-eq/kg CW in NENA to 70.2 kg CO2-eq/kg CW in 
East & Southeast Asia (Figure 16b). Key buffalo meat producing regions include 
South Asia (producing 70 percent of the global production), East & Southeast Asia 
(20 percent) and NENA (5 percent). 

Enteric CH4 and feed N2O emissions associated with feed production are the 
dominant sources of emissions. Key sources of emissions in the buffalo carbon pro-
file comprise CH4 from enteric fermentation (contributing more than half of the 
carbon footprint), and CO2 and N2O emissions associated with feed production. 
Nitrous oxide emissions from manure management are significant in East & South-
east Asia, where manure is managed in dry and solid systems. 

33

ResultsFigure 14. 
Emission intensities for buffalo milk by production system and  
agro-ecological zone1

Grassland-based

1
-

 

M
C
P
F
g
k
.
q
e
-

2

O
C
g
k

 

1
-

 

M
C
P
F
g
k
.
q
e
-

2

O
C
g
k

 

4.0

3.0

2.0

1.0

0.0

4.0

3.0

2.0

1.0

0.0

Direct & indirect energy, CO2
LUC: soybean, CO2
Feed, CO2
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Manure MMS, N2O
Manure MMS, CH4
Enteric, CH4

Direct & indirect energy, CO2
LUC: soybean, CO2
Feed, CO2
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Manure MMS, N2O
Manure MMS, CH4
Enteric, CH4

Arid

Humid 

Temperate

Mixed systems

Arid

Humid 

Temperate

1 Excluding post farmgate.
Source: GLEAM.

34

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsFigure 15. 
Emission intensities for buffalo meat by production system and  
agro-ecological zone1

Grassland-based

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

1
-

 

W
C
g
k
.
q
e
-

2

O
C
g
k

 

1
-

 

W
C
g
k
.
q
e
-

2

O
C
g
k

 

Direct & indirect energy, CO2
LUC: soybean, CO2
Feed, CO2
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Manure MMS, N2O
Manure MMS, CH4
Enteric, CH4

Direct & indirect energy, CO2
LUC: soybean, CO2
Feed, CO2
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Manure MMS, N2O
Manure MMS, CH4
Enteric, CH4

Arid

Humid 

Temperate

Mixed systems

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Arid

Humid 

Temperate

1 Excluding post farmgate.
Source: GLEAM.

35

ResultsFigure 16a. 
Regional variation in GHG emission intensities for buffalo milk1

1
-

 

M
C
P
F
g
k
.
q
e
-

2

O
C
g
k

 

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

NENA

South Asia

E & SE Asia

World

Posarm, CO2
Direct & indirect energy, CO2
LUC: soybean, CO2
Feed, CO2
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Manure MMS, N2O
Manure MMS, CH4
Enteric, CH4

1 Excludes regions where contribution to global production is less than 2 percent.
Source: GLEAM.

Figure 16b. 
Regional variation in GHG emission intensities for buffalo meat1

1
-

 

W
C
g
k
.
q
e
-

2

O
C
g
k

 

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

LAC

NENA

South Asia

E & SE Asia

World

Posarm, CO2
Direct & indirect energy, CO2
LUC: soybean, CO2
Feed, CO2
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Manure MMS, N2O
Manure MMS, CH4
Enteric, CH4

1 Excludes regions where contribution to global production is less than 2 percent.
Source: GLEAM.

36

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chains4.3 Small RuminantS
The contribution of the small ruminant sector to GHG emissions is equivalent to 
474 million tonnes CO2-eq. These total emissions from the sheep and goat produc-
tion comprise emissions from production of edible (meat and milk) and non-edible 
products (natural fibre) as well as emissions from post farmgate processes. The dis-
cussion in subsequent sections presents total emissions and emission intensities re-
lated to small ruminant production at global, farming system and regional grouping 
levels for edible products. 

4.3.1 Total production, absolute emissions, and emission intensities
Globally, small ruminant production of meat and milk is responsible for 428.8 mil-
lion tonnes CO2-eq, of which 254.4 million tonnes CO2-eq (59 percent) are associ-
ated with sheep production and 174.5 tonnes CO2-eq (41 percent) are associated 
with goat production. Total production from the small ruminant sector amounts 
to 20.0 and 12.6 million tonnes of milk and meat, respectively. Goats contribute 
almost 60 percent of the milk produced by small ruminants, while sheep contribute 
62 percent of the meat (Table 6). 

On  average,  the  emission  intensity  of  small  ruminant  milk  is  6.5  kg  CO2-eq/
kg FPCM. In terms of emission intensity, goats milk has lower emission intensity 
(5.2 kg CO2-eq/kg FPCM compared with 8.4 kg CO2-eq/kg FPCM for milk from 
sheep) due to higher yields compared with milk from sheep. Average emission in-
tensity for small ruminant meat is 23.8 kg CO2-eq/kg CW, while emission intensity 
for sheep and goats meat is quite similar  24.0 and 23.5 kg CO2-eq/kg CW, respec-
tively (Table 6). 

Similar to cattle and buffalo, CH4 emissions are important, accounting for half of 
the total emissions associated with small ruminant production (Figure 17). Enteric 
fermentation is the single most important emission category in both milk and meat 
production, contributing 57 percent and 55 percent of the total GHG emissions 
from milk and meat production, respectively.

Nitrous  oxide  emissions  amount  to  relatively  similar  proportions  (27  percent 
and 28 percent) of the total carbon footprint for both milk and meat. Within this, 
N2O emissions from manure storage and management are insignificant (4 percent 
and 2 percent for milk and meat, respectively), mainly because small ruminants are 
grazing most of the time and consequently a very small proportion of the manure 
is managed. 

Table 6. Global production, emissions and emission intensity for small ruminants
Average emission intensity

Production

Species

(million tonnes)

Milk2

Meat2

Absolute emissions1
(million tonnes CO2-eq)
Meat
Milk

Sheep

Goats

Totals

8.0

12.0

20.0

7.8

4.8

12.6

67.4

62.4

129.4

186.9

112.5

299.4

(kg CO2-eq/kg product)
Meat2
Milk2

8.4

5.2

6.5

24.0

23.5

23.8

1  Absolute emissions include emissions from production and post farmgate emissions.
2  Functional unit for milk and meat defined as fat and protein corrected milk and carcass weight.
Source: GLEAM.

37

ResultsFigure 17. 
Relative contribution of different processes to GHG emission profile of small 
ruminant milk and meat

Small ruminant milk

1.6%

0.3%

3.8%

1.9%

15.6%

7.3%

12.3%

Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Feed, CO2
Enteric, CH4
Manure MMS, CH4
Manure MMS, N2O
Direct & indirect energy, CO2
Posarm, CO2

Small ruminant meat

1.8%

1.7%

2.0%

2.0%

17.6%

Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Feed, CO2
Enteric, CH4
Manure MMS, CH4
Manure MMS, N2O
Direct & indirect energy, CO2
Posarm, CO2

8.8%

11.1%

57.2%

54.9%

Source: GLEAM.

Within the emissions profile, CH4 from manure management is unimportant 
because  virtually  all  manure  is  either  deposited  on  pasture  or  managed  in  dry 
systems such as drylots and solid storage systems (see Table B19, Appendix B). 
Emissions associated with feed production comprising both N2O (mainly from 
manure) and CO2 emissions amount to 35 percent of the total emissions. Carbon 
dioxide emissions from on-farm energy use and embedded energy as well as post 
farmgate activities make a relatively small contribution towards the overall carbon 
footprint. 

38

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chains4.3.2 Emissions by production system and agro-ecological zone
Emission intensity for milk is higher in grazing systems with an average of 7.6 kg 
CO2-eq/kg FPCM compared with 6.6 kg CO2-eq/kg FPCM in mixed farming sys-
tems (Figure 18). A similar trend is found for small ruminant meat; average emis-
sion intensity per kg CW is 24.0 and 23.2 kg CO2-eq/kg CW in grazing and mixed 
systems, respectively (Figure 19).

In small ruminant milk production in grazing systems, emissions intensity is high-
est in temperate zones, a trend which contrasts with the emission intensity trends 
for dairy cattle (see Figure 7). The higher emission intensity for small ruminant milk 
in grazing temperate zones is explained by a combination of factors: (i) total emis-
sions are dominated by emissions from the temperate areas in regions such as Asia 
and Africa, where production conditions are poor for the most part; (ii) sheep milk 
production dominates small ruminant milk in the temperate zones, however milk 
yields from sheep are much lower compared with goats; and (iii) goats milk, which 
is characterized by higher yields per animal, mainly occurs in the arid areas. 

On the other hand, for small ruminant meat there is no systematic trend across 
production systems; in grazing systems, highest emission intensity is found in tem-
perate zones, while in mixed systems, meat produced in the arid zones has the high-
est emission intensity. 

The difference in emission intensity of small ruminant meat is explained by a 
combination of factors: (i) high emission intensity in grazing temperate areas is re-
lated to the fact that in temperate zones small ruminants, particularly sheep, are 
reared  for  mainly  for  meat  and  therefore  the  carcass  bears  the  whole  burden  of 
emissions; (ii) temperate grazing areas are also characterized by low yields, which 
are closely related to poor production conditions and low feed digestibility, hence 
the high emission intensity. 

Figure 19, however, masks much of the variation that can be found within simi-
lar production systems and climatic conditions. Disaggregated emission intensity 
at production system level show temperate zones in grassland-based systems with 
highest emission intensity, about 27.5 kg CO2-eq/kg CW. However, regions such 
as Oceania and W. Europe show a contrasting trend, with lowest emission intensi-
ties within this production system and AEZ typology (13.7 and 19.8 kg CO2-eq/kg 
CW, respectively) as a result of their efficient production systems. Within temperate 
grassland-based systems, the predominance of other regions such as East & South-
east Asia, NENA and Latin America & Caribbean drive the emission intensities 
of the system. These high emissions are largely related to poor quality feed, poor 
performance of animals, and slower growth rates. 

Methane emissions from enteric fermentation dominate the emission profile in 
both systems and across all three AEZs. Nitrous oxide emissions associated with 
feed  production  are  relatively  higher  for  grassland-based  systems  and  this  arises 
from the deposition of manure on pasture.

The high CH4 emissions from manure management in the mixed farming sys-
tems  relative  to  grazing  systems  indicate  the  management  of  manure  in  systems 
other than pasture-based systems.

CO2 emissions related to feed production, transport and processing are important 
in the temperate areas in both systems, accounting for 12 percent and 19 percent, re-
spectively, and 12 percent and 14 percent, respectively, of the average carbon footprint 
of small ruminant milk and meat produced in grazing and mixed temperate zones. 

39

ResultsFigure 18. 
Emission intensities for small ruminant milk by production system and  
agro-ecological zone1

Grassland-based

1
-

 

M
C
P
F
g
k
.
q
e
-

2

O
C
g
k

 

1
-

 

M
C
P
F
g
k
.
q
e
-

2

O
C
g
k

 

9.0

8.0

7.0

6.0

5.0

4.0

3.0

2.0

1.0

0.0

8.0

7.0

6.0

5.0

4.0

3.0

2.0

1.0

0.0

Direct & indirect energy, CO2
Feed, CO2
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Manure MMS, N2O
Manure MMS, CH4
Enteric, CH4

Direct & indirect energy, CO2
Feed, CO2
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Manure MMS, N2O
Manure MMS, CH4
Enteric, CH4

Arid

Humid 

Temperate

Mixed systems

Arid

Humid 

Temperate

1 Excluding post farmgate.
Source: GLEAM.

40

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsFigure 19. 
Emission intensities for small ruminant meat by production system and  
agro-ecological zone1

Grassland-based

1
-

 

W
C
g
k
.
q
e
-

2

O
C
g
k

 

1
-

 

W
C
g
k
.
q
e
-

2

O
C
g
k

 

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Direct & indirect energy, CO2
Feed, CO2
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Manure MMS, N2O
Manure MMS, CH4
Enteric, CH4

Direct & indirect energy, CO2
Feed, CO2
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Manure MMS, N2O
Manure MMS, CH4
Enteric, CH4

Arid

Humid

Temperate

Mixed systems

Arid

Humid 

Temperate

1 Excluding post farmgate.
Source: GLEAM.

41

ResultsFigure 20a. 
Regional contribution to global small ruminant milk production1

Goats milk

Sheeps milk

)

%

(
 
n
o

c
u
d
o
r
p
k
l
i

 

m

 
l

a
b
o
l
g

 

 
f
o
e
r
a
h
S

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

LAC

W. Europe

E.Europe

NENA

SSA

South Asia

E&SE Asia

1 Excludes regions where contribution to global production is less than 2 percent.
Source: GLEAM.

4.3.3 Regional production, emissions and emission intensities
The production of small ruminant milk and meat is largely concentrated in devel-
oping regions. Figures 20a and 20b illustrate this trend; with the exception of small 
ruminant milk production in Western Europe and lamb and mutton production in 
Oceania and Western Europe, small ruminant production is generally more impor-
tant in developing world regions. 

Small ruminants produce not only edible products; other important co-products 
include natural fibre such as wool, cashmere and mohair. As mentioned in Section 
3.6 of this report, we have applied an economic value allocation to partition total 
GHG emissions between the edible products (meat and milk) and non-edible prod-
ucts (natural fibre). Figure 21 illustrates the impact of allocation to co-products. 

Figure 21 illustrates those regions where the natural fibre production is impor-
tant and has a high economic value compared with edible products, such as North 
America, Latin America & Caribbean, Oceania, and East & Southeast Asia. In the 
other regions, natural fibre production is generally not profitable and of low eco-
nomic value. 

At a regional level, emission intensity for small ruminant milk ranges from 4.7 
kg CO2-eq/kg FPCM in Western and Eastern Europe to almost 8.9 kg CO2-eq/
kg FPCM in East & Southeast Asia. Emissions in NENA, sub-Saharan Africa and 
South Asia are 8.7, 6.9, and 4.9 kg CO2-eq/kg FPCM, respectively (Figure 22a). 
Within the developing regions, South Asia has the lowest emissions explained by 
high milk productivity. Overall, across the regions, goats milk tends to have lower 
emission intensity mainly because of the higher productivity compared with sheep. 
Methane from enteric fermentation is the dominant source of emissions in devel-
oping regions, ranging from 60 percent of the GHG emissions profile in South Asia 
to 69 percent in sub-Saharan Africa. For developing regions, N2O emission related 

42

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsFigure 20b. 
Regional contribution to global small ruminant meat production1

Goats meat

Lamb and muon

)

%

(
 
n
o

c
u
d
o
r
p

 
l

a
b
o
l
g

 

 
f
o
e
r
a
h
S

20

15

10

5

0

LAC

W. Europe

NENA

SSA

South Asia

E&SE Asia

Oceania

1 Excludes regions where contribution to global production is less than 2 percent.
Source: GLEAM.

Figure 21. 
Emissions per kg meat and milk protein, comparing allocation of emissions to 
different outputs

Meat: all emissions allocated to edible 
products
Meat: emissions allocated to both edible and 
non-edible outputs

Milk: all emissions allocated to edible 
products
Milk: emissions allocated to both edible and 
non-edible outputs

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

i

1
-
n
e
t
o
r
p
g
k
.
q
e
-

 

2

O
C
g
k

 

0

N. America

Source: GLEAM.

LAC

W. Europe

E.Europe

Russian Fed.

NENA

SSA

South Asia

E & SE Asia

Oceania

43

ResultsFigure 22a. 
Regional variation in GHG emission intensities for small ruminant milk1

1
-

 

M
C
P
F
g
k
.
q
e
-

2

O
C
g
k

 

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

W. Europe

E. Europe

NENA

SSA

South Asia

E & SE Asia

World

Enteric, CH4
Manure MMS, CH4
Manure MMS, N2O

Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Feed, CO2

Direct & indirect energy, CO2
Posarm, CO2

1 Excludes regions where contribution to global production is less than 2 percent.
Source: GLEAM.

Figure 22b. 
Regional variation in GHG emission intensities for small ruminant meat1

1
-

 

W
C
g
k
.
q
e
-

2

O
C
g
k

 

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

LAC

W. Europe

Enteric, CH4
Manure MMS, CH4
Manure MMS, N2O

NENA

SSA

South Asia

E & SE Asia

Oceania

World

Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Feed, CO2

Direct & indirect energy, CO2
Posarm, CO2

1 Excludes regions where contribution to global production is less than 2 percent.
Source: GLEAM.

44

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsto feed production is a significant source of emissions as a result of the deposition 
of manure during grazing (see Section 5.3 in Chapter 5). While CH4 emissions from 
manure are negligible in most regions because manure is mainly managed in dry 
systems, in South Asia and East & Southeast Asia, CH4 emissions from manure are 
slightly higher as a result of the higher temperatures in warmer climatic zones. 

In most regions, N2O from manure management is also negligible because a large 
proportion of the manure produced is deposited on pasture and these emissions are 
captured in feed production (in this analysis, manure deposited on pasture is con-
sidered as a fertilizer). However, NENA, sub-Saharan Africa, South Asia and East 
& Southeast Asia have relatively high N2O emissions from manure because manure 
is not only deposited on pasture but also managed in other MMS such as drylot or 
solid systems which tend to have higher rates of conversion of N excreted to N2O 
emissions. 

Emissions of meat from small ruminants range from as low as 15 kg CO2-eq/kg 
CW in Oceania to 31 kg CO2-eq/kg CW in sub-Saharan Africa. Very little variation 
exists within the developing regions; emissions for East & Southeast Asia, Latin 
America, NENA and South Asia are 23.0, 25.5, 27.9 and 29 kg CO2-eq/kg CW, 
respectively (Figure 22b). Contributions of different sources to emission intensity, 
differences among regions and the underlying reasons are very much the same as 
described above for milk. 

Post farmgate emissions per kg carcass weight in Oceania are significant because 
of the importance of mutton and lamb exports from Australia and New Zealand. The 
two countries supply a major portion of global lamb and mutton exports, equivalent 
to 50 percent and 67 percent of their total production in 2005, respectively. 

4.4 SummaRy of ReSultS
4.4.1 Comparison between ruminant species
Despite the similarities in emission profiles, there are differences among cattle, buffa-
lo and small ruminant species. The carbon footprint for milk from small ruminants 
is more than double that of milk from dairy cattle and buffalo: 6.5 kg CO2-eq/kg 
FPCM vs. 2.8 and 3.4 kg CO2-eq/kg FPCM, respectively (Figure 23a). With regard 
to meat from ruminants, small ruminant meat has a smaller carbon footprint com-
pared with that of beef; 23.8 kg CO2-eq/kg CW vs. 46.2 and 53.4 kg CO2-eq/kg 
CW for beef and buffalo meat, respectively (Figure 23b). 

Among the edible commodities produced by ruminant systems, milk generally 
has the lowest emission intensity compared to meat suggesting that dairy systems 
are more efficient than pure meat systems. This is because dairy herds produce both 
milk and meat while beef systems are maintained mainly for calf production.

The difference in emission intensity among ruminant species can be attributed to 

a number of factors such as:

	Higher milk yields from dairy cattle and buffalo as opposed to small rumi-

nants;

	Greater fecundity, and faster reproductive cycles and growth rates in small 

ruminants;

	Larger supporting breeding herds are required to sustain the production of 
beef; non-productive animals produce CH4 and urinary-N without contrib-
uting to milk and meat production; and

	Whether LUC is associated with the production process. 

45

ResultsFigure 23a. 
Average emission intensity for milk from cattle, buffalo and small ruminants

1
-

 

M
C
P
F
g
k
.
q
e
-

2

O
C
g
k

 

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

Posarm, CO2
Direct & indirect energy, CO2
LUC: soy, CO2
Feed, CO2
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Manure MMS, N2O
Manure MMS, CH4
Enteric, CH4

Dairy

Buffalo

Small ruminants

Source: GLEAM.

Figure 23b. 
Average emission intensity for meat from cattle, buffalo and small ruminants

1
-

 

W
C
g
k
.
q
e
-

2

O
C
g
k

 

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Source: GLEAM.

Posarm, CO2
Direct & indirect energy, CO2
LUC: pasture expansion, CO2
LUC: soy, CO2
Feed, CO2
Ferlizer & crop residues, N2O
Applied & deposited manure, N2O
Manure MMS, N2O
Manure MMS, CH4
Enteric, CH4

Beef

Buffalo

Small ruminants

46

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsThis  assessment  also  found  a  wide  diversity  in  emission  intensity  at  regional 
and production system level. These variations are largely driven by differences in 
production goals (specialized versus non-specialized production) and management 
practices, including animal husbandry methods, animal health and genetics which 
influence levels of productivity. 

4.4.2 Emission intensity gap within systems, climatic zones and regions
The comparison of emission intensity for ruminant commodities produced within 
the same region and comparable production conditions (production systems and 
agro-ecological zones) shows the existence of a considerable emission intensity gap. 
Average emission intesities within each region for each combination of production 
system and climatic zone as well as the lowest and highest emission intesity of pixels 
accounting for 10 percent of the production in the same system-region-AEZ were 
assessed. Figure 24 is a schematic representation of the analytical approach used to 
assess the emission intensity gap within regions, production systems and climatic 
zones.

Tables 7-9 provide an illustration of this variation in emission intensity for cattle 
(dairy and beef), buffalo milk and small ruminants (milk and meat). The emission 
intensity gap is particularly substantial in dairy and beef production. For example, 
in mixed temperate dairy systems in sub-Saharan Africa, the average emission intes-
ity is 7.6 kg CO2-eq/kg FPCM, compared to 1.6 and 13.3 kg CO2-eq/kg FPCM in 
lowest and higher 10 percent, respectively (Table 7). 

Within the dairy mixed and grassland-based systems in sub-Saharan Africa, Latin 
America and the Caribbean, and East and Southeast Asia, the emission intensity of 
the lowest 10 percent is comparable to other regions with similar production condi-
tions. This is explained by the dominance of high productive countries within these 
systems and climatic zones. For example, in sub-Saharan Africa, within the dairy 
mixed and grassland-arid zones, South Africa alone accounts for almost 25 percent 

Figure 24. 
Schematic representation of emission intensity gap, for a given commodity, within 
a region, climate zone and farming system

n
o

c
u
d
o
r
P

90%

10%

Source: Authors.

10% lowest

Average

10% highest

Emission intensity (value at pixel level)

47

ResultsTable 7. Variation of cattle emission intensities within regions, systems and agro-ecological zone1
Humid
average

Temperate
average

average

Arid

 
 

10% 
highest

10% 
lowest

10% 
lowest

10% 
highest

10% 
lowest

10% 
highest

1.9
2.0
1.8
1.9
9.4
3.4
NA
8.0
5.4
17.3

2.0
NA
1.9
NA
10.2
10.1
1.8
4.2
6.3
18.9

30.5
25.7
12.6
34.0
81.0
31.9
168.1
53.9
95.3

1.5
1.7
1.5
1.8
2.3
1.5
NA
4.1
1.7
5.5

1.7
NA
1.7
NA
10.0
2.4
1.5
3.8
2.2
6.3

26.9
20.2
11.2
18.1
40.1
11.0
58.8
38.2
32.9

1.7
1.8
1.7
1.9
3.5
2.6
NA
6.8
4.0
9.7

1.9
NA
1.7
NA
10.1
7.7
1.6
4.1
4.8
10.8

28.6
24.1
11.9
24.4
54.5
18.9
103.0
46.8
59.7

1.3
1.8
1.5
1.4
2.6
1.4
1.0
3.4
1.4
1.7

1.3
1.8
1.5
1.5
2.7
1.6
1.5
2.7
1.8
1.7

26.0
12.9
12.3
16.7
33.1
11.7
20.4
37.4
27.4

1.5
1.9
1.6
1.6
3.7
2.3
1.0
4.5
3.0
7.6

1.7
1.9
1.7
1.6
3.2
2.5
1.5
4.1
3.6
3.1

28.5
17.3
13.9
20.4
43.0
20.5
46.8
46.6
56.0

 
1.7
2.0
1.7
1.8
5.3
2.9
1.8
6.5
5.0
13.3

1.8
2.0
1.8
1.7
4.1
7.3
1.5
5.5
5.5
5.6
 
30.3
21.9
16.3
25.5
54.0
31.6
77.6
59.0
73.0
 
32.9
24.7
14.6
21.5
57.5
29.4
26.5
72.7
58.8

1.7
1.7
1.5
1.8
1.9
2.1
1.7
4.0
1.4
1.7

1.7
1.7
1.5
1.7
1.4
1.6
1.7
2.9
1.7
1.8

28.4
13.6
11.1
17.5
36.9
29.1
25.3
36.5
44.2

1.9
1.8
1.6
1.8
4.3
2.7
1.8
5.2
3.1
10.0

1.9
1.8
1.6
1.9
5.9
1.8
1.8
3.8
3.1
9.6

32.0
19.9
12.0
28.4
46.9
31.1
73.0
42.9
75.0

Mixed dairy
N. America
Russian Fed
W. Europe
E. Europe
NENA
E & SE Asia
Oceania
South Asia
LAC
SSA
Grassland dairy 
N. America
Russian Fed
W. Europe
E. Europe
NENA
E & SE Asia
Oceania
South Asia
LAC
SSA
Mixed beef
N. America
W. Europe
E. Europe
NENA
E & SE Asia
Oceania
South Asia
LAC
SSA
Grassland beef
N. America
W. Europe
E. Europe
NENA
E & SE Asia
Oceania
South Asia
LAC
SSA

 
2.0
1.9
1.8
2.0
9.7
3.7
1.9
6.8
4.9
17.2

1.9
1.8
1.8
2.0
10.6
2.0
1.9
5.2
6.0
16.6
 
36.1
23.0
12.7
35.7
61.3
33.8
110.5
48.5
106.6
 
36.6
23.0
13.2
38.5
66.7
33.2
33.6
57.2
102.6

24.2
14.1
11.6
19.5
47.3
28.9
22.6
42.8
41.1

31.2
20.4
12.4
36.6
55.0
30.5
31.6
48.9
76.9

29.9
21.7
12.9
18.6
47.5
17.4
26.9
52.4
43.2
1 Regions representing less than 2% of global production within systems are not included.
Note: The average is calculated at regional-climatic zone level. 10% lowest is the upper bound of lowest emission intensities up to 10% of 
production. 
10% highest is the lower bound of highest emission intensities down to 90% of production.
NA: Not Applicable. Some regions may not have data for a combination of system and AEZ or production is insignificant within the system and AEZ. 
Source: GLEAM.

30.1
25.6
NA
35.6
70.1
31.9
80.6
64.9
118.8

27.7
23.9
NA
35.0
53.3
11.2
71.4
43.8
49.9

27.4
18.7
12.0
15.9
26.4
10.3
21.3
40.8
38.3

28.7
23.9
NA
35.3
62.4
25.2
76.9
53.9
93.4

48

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsTable 8. Variation of buffalo milk emission intensities within regions, systems and agro-ecological zone1

 
 

Mixed dairy
NENA
E & SE Asia
South Asia
Grassland dairy

10% 
lowest

2.8
2.6
2.7

Arid

average

10% 
highest

10% 
lowest

Temperate
average

10% 
highest

10% 
lowest

Humid
average

10% 
highest

3.4
4.0
3.3

4.8
5.8
4.1

2.8
3.7
2.4

3.6
5.2
3.0

4.3
6.6
4.2

3.3
4.2
2.6

3.3
5.2
3.5

4.0
6.2
4.5

NENA

4.3
2.7
3.0

5.0
2.8
3.3

3.5
2.5
2.4

2.7
2.6
2.7

E & SE Asia
South Asia

3.6
3.0
2.7
1 Regions representing less than 2% of global production within systems are not included.
Note: The average is calculated at regional-climatic zone level. 10% lowest is the upper bound of lowest emission intensities up to 10% of 
production. 10% highest is the lower bound of highest emission intensities down to 90% of production.
NA: Not Applicable. Some regions may not have data for a combination of system and AEZ or production is insignificant within the system and AEZ. 
Source: GLEAM.

NA

3.0
2.5

NA

3.3
2.7

NA

3.5
2.8

3.8
4.0
2.9

of production in this regional-system-climatic zone with emission intensity ranging 
between 1.4 and 1.8 kg CO2-eq/kg FPCM. Similarly, in mixed and grassland-based 
systems in temperate zones, South Africa contributes 20 and 70 percent of the re-
gional production, respectively, with emission intensity ranging between 1.5 and 1.9 
kg CO2-eq/kg FPCM.

In Latin America and the Caribbean, milk production in Mexico in both grass-
land and mixed arid and temperate areas represents 30 percent of the production 
within these regional climatic zones and emission intensity ranges between 1.4 and 
1.9 kg CO2-eq/kg FPCM.

High  milk  productivity  systems  in  countries  such  as  Israel  and  Saudi  Arabia 
within the arid zones result in low emission intensity (range between 1.2-1.5 kg 
CO2-eq/kg FPCM for Israel and 1.1-2.0 kg CO2-eq/kg FPCM for Saudi Arabia). 
About 23 percent of production within the mixed temperate dairy system in East 
and Southeast Asia occurs in Japan with a range of emission intensity 1.2 to 1.4 kg 
CO2-eq/kg FPCM.

This variation highlights the heterogeneity within each production system and 
emphasizes the opportunities for reducing emission intensity particularly in low 
productive  regions  by  bridging  the  gap  in  emission  intensities  between  efficient 
producers and producers with a potential for improvement. This mitigation poten-
tial doesnt require changes in farming systems and can be based on already existing 
technologies  and  practices.  It  is  estimated  to  30%  of  the  sectors  total  emissions 
and further explored in the overview report published in parallel to the current one 
(FAO, 2013a). This situation is completed by case study analysis to explore regional 
dimensions of mitigation in the sector.

49

ResultsTable 9. Variation of small ruminants emissions intensities within regions, system and agro-ecological zone1

 
 

Arid

average

10% 
lowest

10% 
highest

10% 
lowest

Temperate
average

10% 
highest

10% 
lowest

Humid
average

10% 
highest

Grassland dairy 

W. Europe
E. Europe
NENA
E & SE Asia
South Asia
LAC
SSA
Mixed dairy
W. Europe
E. Europe
NENA
E & SE Asia
South Asia
LAC
SSA
Grassland meat
W. Europe
NENA
E & SE Asia
Oceania
South Asia
LAC
SSA
Mixed meat
W. Europe
NENA
E & SE Asia
Oceania
South Asia
LAC
SSA

2.8

4.2

5.7

6.3

3.3

3.0

5.1

3.1

4.5

4.6

3.0

2.9

2.7

5.3

7.8
11.4

19.1

13.4
9.3

18.6

16.8

7.4

12.9

13.9

13.4

17.2

17.2

4.9

4.7

11.2

6.9

6.0

8.0

6.6

4.7

4.8

9.3

5.6

4.2

5.9

7.4

12.7
24.7

24.6

14.9
26.7

24.6

26.2

15.2

23.4

20.4

14.3

32.8

22.7

6.4

5.1

14.2

7.9

8.1

11.7

9.4

 
6.4

5.2

13.1

7.5

6.3

10.2

10.2

 
20.2

42.2

32.0

16.7
35.4

29.9

37.4

 
21.6

41.1

29.9

15.6

44.5

27.5

2.5

2.6

4.1

9.0

3.8

3.2

6.1

2.3

2.9

3.6

5.4

3.0

2.9

6.5

9.6

18.2

18.3

13.2

8.5

17.4

20.3

9.7

14.8

18.0

13.6

9.9

22.1

5.1

3.6

5.4

11.3

6.5

8.1

7.0

4.7

4.4

5.9

9.3

5.1

4.8

7.5

20.4

42.9

25.8

14.1

16.6

29.0

22.4

18.8

32.6

22.2

13.9

29.5

30.4

6.5

5.0

6.6

13.5

8.8

11.6

8.3

 
7.6

5.2

7.9

11.4

7.7

10.4

8.6

 
23.8

57.5

32.4

14.5

24.5

38.5

30.0

 
22.6

51.7

26.5

15.0

45.8

38.5

1.6

NA
8.0

3.4

2.5

3.2

7.2

3.5

4.3

3.7

6.0

3.0

1.9

5.7

19.2

15.3

9.4

14.0

20.8

18.3

21.7

18.0

14.3

9.3

13.9

14.7

16.4

2.9

NA
9.5

5.7

2.6

9.6

8.7

5.3

4.9

7.8

7.5

5.9

5.5

7.3

19.9

16.1

13.2

14.7

22.1

24.9

33.8

25.4

16.1

15.5

14.6

20.0

23.5

4.4

NA
10.7

11.8

2.7

11.4

10.6

8.4

5.2

9.8

9.8

7.9

11.1

8.9

21.5

16.8

19.0

15.3

23.7

33.8

46.3

26.7

17.9

23.7

15.2

35.5

30.4

19.3

34.7

25.4

34.0

49.7

18.0

28.2
1 Regions representing less than 2% of global production within systems are not included.
Note: The average is calculated at regional-climatic zone level. 10% lowest is the upper bound of lowest emission intensities up to 10% of 
production. 10% highest is the lower bound of highest emission intensities down to 90% of production.
NA: Not Applicable. Some regions may not have data for a combination of system and AEZ or production is insignificant within the system and AEZ. 
Source: GLEAM.

35.6

43.3

50

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chains5. Discussion

This section discusses the key drivers of variation in emissions from major process-
es in the ruminant supply chain that contribute significantly to the carbon footprint 
of ruminant species, highlighting differences among species and world regions. The 
section also discusses some of the parameters and assumptions that could strongly 
influence the results. 

5.1 Methane eMissions froM  enteric ferMentation 
Regardless of the species, the largest source of GHG emissions in ruminant produc-
tion is CH4, with more than 90 percent originating from enteric fermentation and 
the rest from manure. Globally, enteric fermentation from cattle, buffalo, and small 
ruminants contributes 2 448 million tonnes CO2-eq, of which 76 percent is emitted 
by cattle and 14 percent and 10 percent by buffalo and small ruminants, respec-
tively. The production of enteric CH4 from ruminants is mainly affected by feed 
intake and feed quality which, in turn, defines the total energy and nutrient intake 
and consequently animal performance. 

Many of these factors are interrelated, some of which affect net emissions and 
others  emission  intensity.  At  animal  level,  net  emissions  are  influenced  by  feed 
intake  and  digestibility,  while  emission  intensity  is  a  function  of  net  emissions, 
yield per animal, health and genetics. At herd level, factors affecting net emissions 
are similar to those cited above, while emission intensity is determined by issues 
such  as  reproductive  and  mortality  rates,  herd  structure,  management,  etc.  The 
following sections discuss some of the important factors that drive the variation in 
enteric CH4. 
Productivity.  Productivity  is  an  important  factor  in  explaining  the  variation  of 
emissions  among  different  production  typologies.  Studies  show  a  close  correla-
tion between carbon footprint and yield per animal (Capper et al., 2008; Gerber et 
al., 2011; Cederberg and Flysjo, 2004), highlighting the trend of decreasing emis-
sion intensity with increasing productivity. Regions and production systems with 
greater productivity have lower emission intensity partly because high yields shift 
the distribution of feed towards less feed for maintenance functions and more for 
production. As productivity per animal increases, CH4 emissions per animal are 
typically higher because of higher feed intake. However, as the productivity of each 
animal increases, the farmer can reduce the herd size to produce the same amount 
of output. 

Figure 25a illustrates the differences in emission efficiency among the regions; 
the main reason for the differences is to be found in low productivity of the herd, 
which is in turn caused by low fertility, high mortality rates, low growth rates and 
low feed digestibility (see Appendix B). Gerber et al. (2011) have demonstrated the 
relationship  between  the  carbon  footprint  of  dairy  cattle  milk  and  productivity, 
and a similar trend has been established for small ruminants (Figure 25b). Lower-
producing dairy animals tend to lose more feed energy as CH4 per unit of milk 
produced.  The  benefits  of  improving  animal  productivity  on  CH4  emissions  re-
sults from the dilution effect of fixed maintenance where increasing productivity 

51

Figure 25a. 
Regional variation in productivity and CH4 emissions from enteric fermentation 
for beef herds

kg CW.animal-1.year-1

Enteric CH4.kg CW-1

1
-
r
a
e
y
.
1
-
l

i

a
m
n
a
.
W
C
g
k

 

400

350

300

250

200

150

100

50

0

N. America

W. Europe

E. Europe

Russian Fed.

Oceania

LAC

NENA

E & SE Asia

SSA

South Asia

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

1
-

W
C
g
k
.

 

4

H
C
 
c
i
r
e
t
n
E

Source: GLEAM.

Figure 25b. 
Regional variation in productivity and CH4 emissions from enteric fermentation 
for dairy goats

Milk yield

Enteric CH4.kg milk-1

1
-
k
l
i

 

m
g
k
.

4

H
C
 
c
i
r
e
t
n
E

1
-
r
a
e
y
.
1
-
l

i

a
m
n
a
.
M
C
P
F
g
k

 

900

800

700

600

500

400

300

200

100

0

Oceania

N. America

E. Europe

Russian Fed.

W. Europe

South Asia

E & SE Asia

LAC

NENA

SSA

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

Source: GLEAM.

52

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsFigure 26. 
Regional variation in digestibility of the feed ration and CH4 emissions from en-
teric fermentation for beef cattle

Enteric CH4.kg CW-1

Average digesbility

60

50

40

30

20

10

1
-

W
C
g
k
.

 

4

H
C
 
c
i
r
e
t
n
E

0

N. America

W. Europe

E. Europe

Russian Fed.

Oceania

LAC

NENA

SSA

E & SE Asia

South Asia

Source: GLEAM.

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

)

%

(
 
n
o

a
r
 
d
e
e
f
 
f
o
y
t
i
l
i

 

b

s
e
g
i
D

decreases the amount of CH4 emitted per unit of product because emissions that 
arise from energy requirements for maintenance are spread over a larger output. 

Feed digestibility. Enteric CH4 emissions are also determined by feed properties, 
particularly the digestibility of the feed ration. The energy content of feed also af-
fects the amount of CH4 produced in enteric fermentation, with lower quality of 
feed causing greater CH4 emissions (Figure 26). Regions with higher feed digest-
ibility also often have higher proportion of high quality roughages, feed crops and 
concentrates in their diets, often an indication of higher quality ration (see Tables 
B7-B12 in Appendix B). As the digestibility of the feed ration increases, the amount 
of energy available to the animal also increases per kg of feed intake. With an in-
crease in per kg of feed intake, more production can be realized and therefore CH4 
produced per kg of production decreases.

Herd structure. A key factor that explains the variations in emissions across regions 
is the structure of the herd. Breeding populations are required to maintain the herd 
and thus reproductive performance is important because the cost of maintaining 
and replacing breeding stock also affects feed efficiency. In regions where the com-
position of the herd is skewed towards higher number of animals in the breeding 
herd, overall CH4 emissions and emission intensities are most likely high because 
demand is placed on feed (with a large share of feed energy used for maintenance 
requirements rather than production). Figures 27a and 27b present the percentage 
contribution  of  enteric  fermentation  to  total  CH4  from  beef  and  dairy  cattle  by 
cohort groups. A breakdown of enteric CH4 emissions by source not only illus-

53

DiscussionFigure 27a. 
Regional variation in the relative contribution of animal cohorts to enteric CH4  
dairy herds

Meat animals

Bulls

Replacement stock

Milking cows

4

H
C

 
l

a
t
o
t
 
f
o
%
 
s
a

 

 

4

H
C
 
c
i
r
e
t
n
E

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

N. America 

LAC

W.Europe

E. Europe

Russia Fed.

NENA

SSA

South Asia

E & SE Asia

Oceania

Source: GLEAM.

Figure 27b. 
Regional variation in the relative contribution of animal cohorts to enteric CH4  
beef herds

Meat animals

Bulls

Replacement stock

Cows

4

H
C

 
l

a
t
o
t
 
f
o
%
 
s
a

 

 

4

H
C
 
c
i
r
e
t
n
E

100

90

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

N. America 

LAC

W. Europe

E.Europe

NENA

SSA

South Asia

E & SE Asia

Oceania

Source: GLEAM.

54

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainstrates the key hotspots of CH4 emissions but also explains the variation in emission 
intensity among regions. 

Figure 27a illustrates regional differences in dairy herd structure. Non-milk pro-
ducing animals in dairy herds typically include replacement animals and adult bulls; 
these categories of animals are significant contributors to the CH4 costs of produc-
ing milk at the herd level. While CH4 from enteric fermentation is the main con-
tributor to GHG emissions in all regions, there are major differences in the sources 
of emissions. Generally, in regions such as sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia, a 
large  proportion  of  enteric  CH4  (approximately  50  percent)  originates  from  the 
breeding herd and replacement stock, in combination with a low milk production 
per cow; hence a large proportion of the resources are used for other purposes such 
as maintenance and draught power. In these regions, non-milk productive functions 
contribute substantially to the maintenance energy requirement of the herd because 
they represent a significant use of energy and resources with no production of us-
able edible product produced. 

In contrast, in Western and Eastern Europe, Oceania, Russian Federation, and 
East & Southeast Asia, more than 50 percent of the enteric CH4 is from milking 
cows, pointing to increased use of feed for productivity purposes and thus explain-
ing the lower emission intensity in these regions. 

In typical beef systems, mature cows are kept for only calf production and have 
to  be  maintained  along  with  bulls  and  replacement  stock,  which  increases  emis-
sions per unit of carcass produced. The breeding stock in beef production systems 
(cows,  replacement  stock  and  bulls)  accounts  for  55-99  percent  of  the  total  feed 
requirements of the beef herd, and 52-97 percent of total CH4 emissions. A higher 
slaughter generation (meat animals for fattening) is an indication of higher repro-
ductive performance of the breeding herd and specialization of production such as 
in Oceania, Europe, North America and Latin America. 

For small ruminants, there is no systematic difference in herd structure among 
regions, largely attributable to the greater fecundity in small ruminants and faster 
growth rates compared with cattle. The absence of draught power also reduces the 
gap among regions. 

Energy  partitioning  and  utilization.  Methane  is  produced  in  the  process  of  feed 
energy utilization within the animal. Changes in the efficiency of feed energy utili-
zation therefore influence CH4 emissions of animals. The efficiency of feed energy 
utilization depends on the type of animal, the type or quality and quantity of feed, 
environmental conditions, etc. 

The  way  energy  is  partitioned  between  the  different  body  functions  (mainte-
nance  and  production)  also  helps  explain  the  variation  in  emission  intensity.  All 
animals have a necessary maintenance requirement that must be met and results in 
no production, yet are still associated with CH4 losses. Ruminants partition feed 
energy over the following functions: maintenance, growth, lactation and reproduc-
tion; and in all cases, maintenance has priority. In situations where feed quality is 
low, relatively less energy is left for (re)productive functions. 

The proportion of feed energy expended on animal maintenance as opposed to 
productive purposes is higher in those regions with low production rates at both ani-
mal (Figures 28a, 28b and 28c) and herd (Figures 29a and 29b) level. Figures 28a, 28b 
and 28c present the partitioning of energy requirements across the world regions for 

55

DiscussionFigure 28a. 
Regional comparison of energy partitioning across the different functions 
in milking cows

Milk producon

Pregnancy

Acvity

Maintenance

1
-
r
a
e
y
.
1
-
l

i

a
m
n
a
.
J

M

140

120

100

80

60

40

20

0

N. America 

LAC

W. Europe

E. Europe

Russian Fed.

NENA

SSA

South Asia

E & SE Asia

Oceania

Source: GLEAM.

Figure 28b. 
Regional comparison of energy partitioning across the different functions 
in milking ewes

Wool producon
Milk producon

Pregnancy
Acvity

Maintenance

1
-
r
a
e
y
.
1
-
l

i

a
m
n
a
.
J

M

9

8

7

6

5

4

3

2

1

0

LAC

W. Europe

E. Europe

Russian Fed.

NENA

SSA

South Asia

E & SE Asia

Source: GLEAM.

56

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsFigure 28c. 
Regional comparison of energy partitioning across the different functions 
in adult female goats

Mohair producon
Cashmere producon

Milk producon
Pregnancy

Acvity
Maintenance

1
-
r
a
e
y
.
1
-
l

i

a
m
n
a
.
J

M

18

16

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

N. America 

LAC

W. Europe

E. Europe

Russian Fed.

NENA

SSA

South Asia

E & SE Asia

Oceania

Source: GLEAM.

Figure 29a. 
Regional comparison of energy partitioning across the different functions 
in dairy cattle herds

1
-
r
a
e
y
.
1
-
l

i

a
m
n
a
.
J

M

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Pregnancy
Milk producon

Growth
Work

Acvity
Maintenance

N. America

Russian Fed.

W. Europe

E. Europe

NENA

E & SE Asia

Oceania

South Asia

LAC

SSA

Source: GLEAM.

57

DiscussionFigure 29b. 
Regional comparison of energy partitioning across the different functions 
in beef cattle herds

Pregnancy
Growth

Work
Acvity

Maintenance

1
-
r
a
e
y
.
1
-
l

i

a
m
n
a
.
J

M

50

45

40

35

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

N. America

W. Europe

E. Europe

NENA

E & SE Asia

Oceania

South Asia

LAC

SSA

Source: GLEAM.

milk production from cattle and small ruminants. For example, in dairy cattle in sub-
Saharan Africa, NENA, South Asia and Latin America & Caribbean, energy intake 
is low and, as a consequence, a large proportion of energy is used for maintenance 
(78 percent, 67 percent, 72 percent and 67 percent, respectively) while in industrial-
ized regions a greater share is used for lactation as illustrated in Figure 28a.

Key assumptions and uncertainties. Given that enteric CH4 is the single largest con-
tributor to GHG emissions in ruminant production, the method and EFs used for 
calculating CH4 from enteric fermentation are fundamental for assessing the carbon 
footprint of ruminant species. Enteric CH4 emissions were calculated on the basis 
of the IPCC Tier 2 approach (IPCC, 2006 Volume 4, Chapter 10), where CH4 emis-
sions are estimated for different animal categories in the herd as a direct function of 
gross energy requirements and the CH4 conversion rate (see Appendix A).

Uncertainties in Tier 2 estimates may be associated with population data, pro-
duction practices and performance data, including feeding strategy. The use of Tier 
2 methodology requires a detailed characterization of the livestock population. Un-
certainty in livestock population depends on the extent and reliability of livestock 
population data. In addition, different accounting conventions for animals, particu-
larly for those that do not live for a whole year such as small ruminants, also add 
to the uncertainty. Furthermore, total animal numbers are often reported as single 
values and composition of the different cohorts in herds is not reported separately, 
making it difficult to characterize these populations. 

To overcome this problem in this study, the population was modelled on the basis 
of a number of herd parameters (see Tables B2-B6 in Appendix B) obtained through 

58

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsdata collection and literature reviews. In addition, there is a scarcity of published 
data  on  production  practices,  dietary  information,  dry  matter  intake  (DMI)  and 
animal performance, which may contribute to the uncertainty of model prediction. 
While the feed rations used in this assessment represent the general diet character-
istics within each region/country, there may be some uncertainty associated with 
local variation in feed as well as management practices which may also affect the 
ultimate energy requirements of the animal and consequently CH4 emissions. 

5.2 eMissions froM  feeD proDuction
Feed production constitutes 36 percent, 36 percent and 28 percent of the total emis-
sions for cattle, small ruminants and buffalo, respectively. Emissions related to feed 
are a function of several factors:

	Feed  ration  (i.e.  specific  feed  materials  in  the  ration).  Feed  materials  have 
different emission intensities because they are produced in different modes. 
Generally, rations with higher proportions of by-products and concentrates 
tend to have higher emission intensities. The regional average feed composi-
tion for ruminant species is presented in Appendix B. 

	Mode of feed production: whether feed production utilizes additional pro-

duction inputs such as fertilizers, pesticides, etc. 

	Source  of  feed  materials:  reliance  on  off-farm  produced  feed  or  imported 

feed also has an impact on the emission intensity of the feed-crop. 

	Feed  associated  with  LUC  adds  additional  emissions  (see  Appendix  C  on 

land use and LUC).

Feed conversion is a measure of the efficiency with which animals convert feed 
into a gain in body weight or usable product. There are large differences in feed 
conversions among the various species. The feed conversion of ruminants is usually 
much lower than that of non-ruminants. High feed consumption per kilogram of 
protein is partly due to the biological time-lag that it takes for an animal to reach 
slaughter weight or to calve, and partly due to the amount of feed required by the 
breeding stock. For example, a suckler cow gives birth to one calf per year. This calf 
needs between one to four years to reach slaughter weight, depending on produc-
tion conditions. 

Feed conversion also varies among regions for the following reasons:

	animals need a certain amount of feed as their maintenance energy require-

ment;

	the proportion of breeding stock in the herd  these animals also need to be 

fed even though they are unproductive;

	regions  that  rely  on  dairy  herds  for  their  meat  supply  have  a  higher  feed 

conversion ratio (FCR) because they produce two products; and 

	the characteristics of the production system are also important; aspects such 
as mortality rates (when animals die or are culled before they reach slaughter 
weight or first lactation represents significant loss of feed resources), growth 
rates, age at first calving (lower age at first calving reduces feed requirements 
during the growth period), etc. influence feed requirements. 

Figure 30 compares feed utilization efficiency for dairy and beef herds by region 
expressed as DMI per unit of protein produced. Increased animal performance due 
to improved genetics, nutrition and management results in improved feed use ef-
ficiency. This improvement is largely a function of dilution of the growing animals 

59

DiscussionFigure 30. 
Regional variation in feed conversion ratio for the cattle sector

Dairy herd

Beef herd

Cale

 

i

1
-
n
e
t
o
r
p
g
k
.
d
e
e
f
 
g
k

1 800

1 600

1 400

1 200

1 000

800

600

400

200

0

N. America

Russian Fed.

W. Europe

E. Europe

NENA

E & SE Asia

Oceania

South Asia

LAC

SSA

Source: GLEAM.

maintenance requirements in respect to their total feed requirements. A higher pro-
portion of feed is used for growth and production while a lower proportion for 
maintenance. 

In cattle production, emissions of N2O are the predominant emissions in feed 
production in all regions (Figure 31a). This trend is similar for small ruminants, 
with the exception of North America and Western Europe where both N2O and 
CO2 emissions contribute equal shares of emissions, while in Eastern Europe CO2 
emissions per kg of feed intake are higher (Figure 31b). In cattle production, South 
Asia has the lowest emission intensity per kg of DMI, a consequence of the large 
proportion of crop residues used as feed material which make up more than 60 per-
cent of the feed ration (see Tables B7 and B8, Appendix B).

5.2.1 Nitrous oxide from feed production
Nitrous oxide emissions associated with feed production are related to the use of N 
fertilizer in feed production, N2O arising from the deposition of manure on grazing 
land, N from crop residues returned to soils, and N2O emissions from the applica-
tion of manure to land. 

Manure is an important source of N2O emissions, and in ruminant production 
systems manure N2O emissions from feed production result from manure depos-
ited directly by animals on pasture as well as the manure applied to crops. In the 
latter case, manure applied to land comprises of all manure that is handled in MMS 
and includes manure from other species. 

N2O  emissions  may  arise  directly  as  a  result  of  application  of  the  N  sources 
mentioned above. In addition to the direct emissions, N inputs may also lead to 
indirect formation of N2O after leaching or following gaseous losses and deposition 
of ammonia and nitric oxides. In ruminant production, the main source of N2O 

60

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsFigure 31a. 
Regional difference in N2O and CO2 emission intensity of feed  cattle

 
1
-
e
k
a
t
n

i
 

2

 

M
D
g
k
.
q
e
-

O
C
g
k

 

1.0

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

CO2

N2O

CO2 LUC soybean

N. America

LAC

W. Europe

E. Europe

Russian Fed.

NENA

SSA

South Asia

E & SE Asia

Oceania

Source: GLEAM.

Figure 31b. 
Regional difference in N2O and CO2 emission intensity of feed  small ruminants

N2O

CO2 

 
1
-
e
k
a
t
n

i
 

 

M
D
g
k
.
q
e
-

2

O
C
g
k

 

0.9

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0

N. America

LAC

W. Europe

E. Europe

Russian Fed.

NENA

SSA

South Asia

E & SE Asia

Oceania

Source: GLEAM.

61

Discussionemissions is manure, with most of the N2O losses originating from manure that has 
been deposited or applied. 

Figures 32a and 32b present emission intensities for feed for cattle and small ru-
minants illustrated by region and source of N. In all developing regions, as well as 
in Oceania and Western Europe, the predominant source of N2O emissions associ-
ated with both cattle and small ruminant species is manure deposited during grazing 
and applied manure. On the contrary, N2O emissions from fertilizer application (N 
fertilizer) are important in North America and to a lesser extent in Europe. 

The composition of the feed ration is a key factor in explaining the variation in 
N2O emissions because of the vast differences in feed production (see Tables B7-
B12, Appendix B, for detailed feed basket composition). For example, in regions 
where fresh grass is the dominant source of feed, N inputs within the system are 
more  likely  to  come  from  manure.  However,  in  intensive  grazing  systems,  N2O 
emissions are also likely to be important due to the use of N chemical fertilizer to 
maintain the productivity of pastures. High N2O emissions from grazing in regions 
such as Latin America and the Caribbean and sub-Saharan Africa are mainly a con-
sequence  of  the  importance  of  pasture  as  a  source  of  feed.  For  small  ruminants, 
N2O emissions from grazing are concentrated in Oceania, sub-Saharan Africa and 
Latin America. 

Regions with a high proportion of concentrates in the feed basket (and to a cer-
tain extent hay produced off-farm and silage), are likely to have a larger proportion 
of N2O emissions from nitrogen fertilizer. N2O emissions from fertilizer use in feed 
production for cattle are significant in North America, and Europe due to the high 
N application rates on feed in these regions. In the rest of the worlds regions, use 
of fertilizer is negligible; in these regions, N nutrients for feed crop production are 
largely met from manure. It is also important to note that fertilizer input for other 
crops can be high in these regions as a consequence of large differences in crop yield 
and N fertilizer use. N2O emissions from feed production can be very different for 
the same feed crop in grown in different locations. 

Assumptions and uncertainties. Determining N2O emissions is often difficult due to 
the high spatial and temporal variability of N2O fluxes. N2O emissions related to 
feed are based on the IPCC guidelines (2006) following the Tier 1 protocol, and in 
the modelling of N2O emissions we adopted a simplified approach that took into 
account only N additions from fertilizer, manure and biomass on pasture and feed 
crops. However, other factors also drive N2O emissions, such as local climatic con-
ditions and soil properties (including water and N dynamics, soil type and struc-
ture), and management practices (tillage, irrigation, N application techniques, etc.), 
thus rendering the quantification of N2O emissions challenging, which also implies 
that the results may contain substantial uncertainty.

There are additional uncertainties related to N2O emissions, such as those relat-
ed to N application rates coupled with limited information on manure application 
techniques and timing; the fate of manure and the lack of detailed estimates of the 
proportion of manure excreted at pasture; and how residues are managed (whether 
burned  or  incorporated).  In  addition,  the  N  content  in  pasture  and  manure  can 
vary during the year due to climatic conditions and stages of grass growth. All these 
aspects are difficult to capture given the scale of the analysis. 

In this study, it is also assumed that all managed manure is applied to crops pro-

62

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsFigure 32a. 
Regional difference in N2O emission intensity of feed  cattle

N-residues

N-ferlzer

Deposited manure

Applied manure

1
-
e
k
a
t
n

i
 

2

 

M
D
g
k
.
q
e
-

O
C
g
k

 

0.50

0.45

0.40

0.35

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

N. America

LAC

W. Europe

E. Europe

Russian Fed.

NENA

SSA

South Asia

E & SE Asia

Oceania

Source: GLEAM.

Figure 32b. 
Regional difference in N2O emission intensity of feed  small ruminants

N-residues

N-ferlzer

Deposited manure

Applied manure

1
-
e
k
a
t
n

i
 

 

M
D
g
k
.
q
e
-

2

O
C
g
k

 

0.50

0.45

0.40

0.35

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

N. America

LAC

W. Europe

E. Europe

Russian Fed.

NENA

SSA

South Asia

East Asia

Oceania

Source: GLEAM.

63

Discussionduced in the same location that production takes place. This may result in high N2O 
emissions from applied manure particularly in areas where crop yields are low. 

Another important aspect that influences the emissions from feed production is 
the choice of feed material; for example, in regions where the use of crop residues 
and  by-products  is  important,  there  will  be  a  tendency  towards  lower  emission 
intensities per kg of DM because part of those emissions have been allocated to the 
main crop while regions that rely on concentrate feed, cultivated pasture, grains as 
a source of feed are likely have to have higher emissions intensities. 

5.2.2 Carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuel use in feed production
Carbon dioxide emissions from feed production are related to the use of fossil fuels, 
particularly diesel in tractors and harvesting machinery, oil in dryers, and natural 
gas in the manufacture and application of synthetic fertilizer and LUC. In the post-
farm stages of feed production, CO2 is emitted in conjunction with various feed 
processes (with drying being important) and transport. 

In general, CO2 emissions from energy use in feed production, processing and 
transport are strongly correlated to the feed ration. Other factors that also explain 
the variation in emission intensity among world regions include: the level of mecha-
nization, the rate of fertilizer application, dependence on imported feed and source 
of feed (a key determinant of emissions related to transport of feed) and the extent 
to which the feed in question is associated with LUC. 

Figures illustrate the emission intensity of feed by different processes in feed pro-
duction and by region for both cattle (Figure 33a) and small ruminants (Figure 33b). 
In both cases, CO2 emissions from fossil fuel use in feed production are important 
in industrialized regions. In these regions, two key factors explain the high emission 
intensities: (i) high fertilizer application rates; and (ii) transport of feed due to the 
higher proportion of by-products, feed crops or imported hay in the feed ration. 

In other world regions, emission intensity is low and dominated by CO2 emis-
sions from energy use in field work. In both cattle and small ruminant production, 
sub-Saharan Africa has the lowest CO2 feed emissions and there are several reasons 
for this: (i) reliance on natural pasture as a source of feed and low concentrate feed 
use; (ii) low use/negligible use of inputs such as fertilizer in the production of feed; 
and (iii) the low level of mechanization in the region.

Assumptions and uncertainties. The estimation of CO2 emissions in this study are 
influenced by a number of assumptions and factors such as energy source and relat-
ed emission coefficients used (see Table B14, Appendix B); level of mechanization 
(Table A1, Appendix A); and where feed is sourced and composition of the feed 
ration  both of which are variable.

5.2.3 carbon dioxide emissions from land-use change
Emissions from LUC attributable to the ruminant sector amount to 450 million 
tonnes CO2-eq, the bulk of these emissions (93 percent) are related to pasture ex-
pansion into forest areas for beef production in Latin America. The use of soybean 
produced on previously forested land as feed especially for dairy production con-
tributes another 30 million tonnes CO2-eq. The approach used in this assessment 
for estimating emissions from C stock changes associated with livestock induced 
LUC is further elaborated in Appendix C. 

64

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsFigure 33a. Regional variation in CO2 (fossil fuel-related) emission intensity of 
feed  cattle

Transport and processing
Concentrate blending

Mechanizaon: feed producon
Ferlizer applicaon

1
-
e
k
a
t
n

i
 

2

 

M
D
g
k
.
q
e
-

O
C
g
k

 

0.35

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

N. America

LAC

W. Europe

E. Europe

Russian Fed.

NENA

SSA

South Asia

E & SE Asia

Oceania

Source: GLEAM.

Figure 33b. 
Regional variation in CO2 (fossil fuel-related) emission intensity of 
feed  small ruminants

Transport and processing
Concentrate blending

Mechanizaon: feed producon
Ferlizer applicaon

1
-
e
k
a
t
n

i
 

 

M
D
g
k
.
q
e
-

2

O
C
g
k

 

0.40

0.35

0.30

0.25

0.20

0.15

0.10

0.05

0.00

N. America

LAC

W. Europe

E. Europe

Russian Fed.

NENA

SSA

South Asia

E & SE Asia

Oceania

Source: GLEAM.

65

DiscussionTable 10. Regional sources of soybean and soybean cakes in 2005

 
 

Brazil

soybean

Argentina

other

soybean 

cake

soybean

soybean 

cake

soybean

soybean 

cake

percentage

LAC

E & SE Asia

E. Europe

N. America

Oceania

Russian Fed.

South Asia

SSA

NENA

W. Europe

42

17

0

0

0

5

6

0

12

61

Source: FAOSTAT (2013).

49

7

9

0

60

5

2

0

7

34

41

14

0

0

0

0

1

1

19

0

15

10

27

0

0

37

0

60

23

38

17

68

100

100

100

95

93

99

69

38

36

83

63

100

40

57

98

39

69

28

Table 11. Main exporters of soybean and soybean cakes in 2005

 
 

soybean

soybean cake

exports

share of 

exports

share of 

(million tonnes)

global exports

(million tonnes)

global exports 

Argentina

Brazil

United States of America

India 

Paraguay

Source: FAOSTAT (2013).

20.8

14.4

5.1

4.8

0.8

37%

26%

9%

8%

1%

10.0

22.4

25.7

0.0

3.0

15%

34%

39%

0%

5%

Soybean expansion. In quantifying total emissions associated with the transforma-
tion of forest for soybean cultivation, LUC emissions are attributed to only those 
countries supplied by Brazil and Argentina with soybean and soybean cake. Tables 
10 and 11 present the regional share of soybean and soybean cake sourced from 
Brazil and Argentina and main exporting countries, respectively.

This analysis shows that about 224 million tonnes CO2-eq are emitted per an-
num from the expansion of soybean production in Brazil and Argentina to meet 
global demand for pigs, chickens and cattle feed. The bulk of these emissions arise 
in response to soybean demand in Europe, East Asia and LAC (Table 12) which 
source large quantities of their soybean feed from Argentina and Brazil. The emis-
sions  estimated  for  the  livestock  sector  in  Western  Europe  are  particularly  high, 
which not only indicates a high reliance on imported soybean and soybean cake for 
feed, but also use of soybean with a high emission intensity, particularly because a 
large share is sourced from Brazil (see Table 10).

On a species level, the largest share of these emissions is attributed to the non-
ruminant sector, equivalent to 195 million tonnes CO2-eq (87 percent). This is not 

66

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsTable 12. Regional comparison of land-use change emissions associated with 
soybean production 

region

Cattle

pigs

chicken

(million tonnes CO2-eq)

Latin America

East and Southeast Asia

East Europe

North America

Oceania

Russian Federation

South Asia

Sub-Saharan Africa

Near East and North Africa

Western Europe

World 

Source: GLEAM.

5.2

0.9

0.6

0.5

2.4

0.1

0.0

0.0

0.2

19.6

29.6

19.3

25.3

2.1

0.0

1.5

0.1

0.0

0.0

0.0

36.7

85.0

47.9

25.1

0.4

0.1

1.6

0.1

4.5

0.5

5.6

23.9

109.6

surprising because of the high share of soybean in diets of non-ruminants. Regard-
ing the cattle sector, LUC emissions from soybean are important in Europe where 
it is utilized in dairy production. The results suggest that emissions are largely in-
fluenced by: (i) the quantity of soybeans and soybean cake imported from the two 
countries; and (ii) the share of soybean in the ration of the diet. 

Pasture expansion. According to our estimations, about 13 million hectares of forest 
land in Latin America were converted to pasture land between 1990 and 2006. De-
forestation for pasture establishment in the region emitted about 420 million tonnes 
CO2-eq per year, releasing on average 32 tonnes CO2-eq ha-1 yr-1. At country level, 
changes in C stocks range between 30 and 35 tonnes CO2-eq ha-1 yr-1 (Table 13). 
The estimates of GHG emissions due to pasture-driven LUC presented here repre-
sent a first step towards an estimation of LUC emissions. The analysis is consistent 
with  the  Tier  1  methodology  outlined  in  the  IPCC  guidelines  (IPCC,  2006).  In 
order to progress towards better methodologies, certain gaps in data, methods, and 
in scientific understanding need to be addressed. 

These preliminary estimates indicate that the inclusion of CO2 emissions from 
land-use change have a significant influence on the carbon footprint of livestock 
products. However, changes in soil carbon sequestration due to land use are impor-
tant are important and need to be considered. 

Assumptions and uncertainties. Due to the uncertainty in the methods and data for 
calculating the impacts of LUC, we recognize the high level of uncertainty associ-
ated  with  this  estimation.  There  is  much  uncertainty  regarding  the  magnitude  of 
LUC  emissions  due  to  (a)  uncertainty  in  the  estimates  of  deforestation  rates;  (b) 
uncertainty in the carbon storage capacity of different forests, (c) the modes of C re-
lease, and (d) uncertainties in the dynamics of land use, thus limiting the accuracy of 
the estimated carbon loss (Houghton and Goodale, 2004; Ramankutty et al., 2006). 

67

DiscussionTable 13. Annual carbon stock changes and emissions from pasture expansion  
in Latin America

countries

Brazil

Chile

Paraguay

Nicaragua

average emissions

tonnes CO2/ha

tonnes CO2/ha/yr

total carbon losses
million tonnes CO2-eq

- 509.7

- 510.7

- 488.1

- 485.3

- 31.9

- 31.9

- 30.5

- 30.3

-325.3

-36.7

-31.7

-13.8

Source: Authors calculations.

This analysis also relies on a Tier 1 approach and use of IPCC default values and is 
therefore subject to high levels of uncertainty. We test other existing methods and 
assumptions in Appendix C to illustrate the range of uncertainty that exists. 

The way in which the LUC emissions should be allocated over beef production 
is a question for further research. Within this analysis, we allocate emissions to total 
beef produced within the country; however, not all beef production is carried out 
on deforested land. A related methodological issue is the debate on the allocation of 
emission related to LUC because of the complexity in ascertaining the key driver 
of land-use change. In addition, the calculated emission intensity is highly sensitive 
to the time period selected over which emissions from the initial deforestation are 
annualized.  Appendix  C  explores  alternative  approaches  to  estimating  emissions 
related to LUC, incorporating some of the issues discussed here. 

5.3 eMissions froM  Manure ManageMent
5.3.1 Methane from manure management
Animal manure emits CH4 depending on the way it is produced and managed. Ru-
minants (cattle, buffalo and small ruminants) contribute 109 million tonnes of CH4 
from manure (2 percent of total emissions from ruminants), of which 86 percent is 
from cattle. Three primary factors affect the quantity of CH4 emitted from manure 
management operations: type of treatment or storage facility, climate and composi-
tion of the manure. 

Storage and treatment of manure in liquid systems such as lagoons or ponds 
leads to the development of anaerobic conditions which result in high CH4 emis-
sions. In addition, higher ambient temperature and moisture content also favour 
CH4 production. The composition of manure is directly related to animal types 
and diets. 

Manure CH4 emissions are lower in regions where manure is handled in dry sys-
tems. In dairy and beef cattle production, where liquid MMS (lagoons, liquid/slurry 
systems) are common, the proportion of manure CH4 emissions in total CH4 emis-
sions is considerable, and particularly in regions where animals are confined for a 
part of the year, such as Europe and North America. For dairy, this ranges from 
5 percent in Eastern Europe to 35 percent in North America; on the other hand, 
in beef production the use of liquid systems is confined to Western Europe and 
Eastern Europe where 6 percent and 14 percent of CH4 emissions originate from 
manure, respectively. The anaerobic nature of liquid manure systems increases the 
potential for CH4 production and reduces N2O production. 

68

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsIn the other world regions, a large fraction of the manure from cattle is handled 
in dry systems, while in small ruminant production manure is managed in dry sys-
tems, including drylots and solid systems, or deposited on pastures and ranges. 

Maps 9 and 10 in Appendix G present the CH4 conversion factor that defines the 
portion of CH4 producing potential achieved by each manure management system. 
Methane conversion factor is higher in North America and Europe, which explains 
the higher CH4 emissions. The high CH4 conversion factor in North America and 
Europe is due to the use of liquid MMS. 

Assumptions and uncertainties. In this study, CH4 emissions from manure manage-
ment are calculated using the IPCC Tier 2 approach. This approach uses country-
specific  inputs  of  volatile  solids  estimated  from  DMI,  feed  digestibility  and  ash 
content of manure, a CH4 conversion factor based on climate and type of manure 
management and storage system, and the maximum CH4 potential (Bo) of manure 
based on species and diet. 

Uncertainties  related  to  estimation  of  CH4  from  manure  management  derive 
from: limited activity data on manure management; differences in manure manage-
ment  practices;  and  the  effect  of  time-related  aspects  such  as  storage  periods,  as 
well as seasonal temperature variations in emission rates which are not explicitly 
accounted for in the calculations. 

5.3.2 nitrous oxide from manure management
Nitrous oxide is produced directly and indirectly during storage and treatment of 
manure before it is applied to land. Indirect N2O emissions result from volatile N 
losses that occur mainly from ammonia (NH3) and NOX and leaching of nitrate. 
Key important variables that influence N2O emissions from manure management 
include  the  amount  of  N  excreted  and  the  way  in  which  manure  is  managed.  A 
considerable amount of N entering the livestock food chain through feed is wasted; 
ruminants excrete between 75 percent and 95 percent of the N they ingest (Castillo 
et al., 2000; Eckard et al., 2007). Maps 11 and 12 in Appendix G compare the pro-
portion of feed nitrogen retained by dairy and beef herds. 

Animal productivity is important for N excretion; as more milk or meat is pro-
duced per animal, the maintenance requirement of protein per unit of production 
is reduced. Thus, the animal product can be produced with less N consumed and 
excreted. Figure 34 illustrates the relationship between animal performance and N 
excretion per kg of milk protein; a comparison among regions reveals that, on aver-
age, high-producing animals excrete less N per unit of protein produced because 
more nutrients are directed towards production. 

Manure  handling  and  storage  also  influence  N2O  emissions  from  manure.  A 
large proportion of N2O from manure management is released as direct N2O, the 
bulk of which originates from dry systems (with approximately 60 percent and 65 
percent from drylot systems in beef and dairy cattle production). All manure from 
small ruminants and buffalo is managed in dry systems (drylot and solid systems). 
Nitrous oxide emissions are most likely to occur in dry manure handling systems 
that have aerobic conditions (in the presence of oxygen), but that also contain pock-
ets of anaerobic (in the absence of oxygen) conditions. 

For dairy and beef cattle, most N2O emissions from manure management are 
found in developing regions. Oceania is the only region without N2O emissions 

69

DiscussionFigure 34. 
Nitrogen excretion per kg milk protein versus average regional  
milk yield  dairy cattle

kg of N ex.kg of milk protein-1 

Milk yield

i

1
-
n
e
t
o
r
p

 

k
l
i

m

 

 
f
o
g
k
.
x
e
N

 

 
f
o
g
k

 

4.0

3.5

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

N. America

W. Europe

Oceania

E. Europe

Russian Fed.

East & SE Asia

LAC

NENA

SSA

South Asia

10 000

1
-
r
a
e
y
.
1
-
l

i

a
m
n
a
.
k
l
i

 

m
g
k

9 000

8 000

7 000

6 000

5 000

4 000

3 000

2 000

1 000

0

Source: GLEAM.

associated with manure management because all manure from beef and small ru-
minants  in  Oceania  is  assumed  to  be  deposited  on  pasture.  The  proportion  of 
N2O from leaching is insignificant and has a limited impact on total N2O from 
manure management because only a small proportion of leached N is converted 
to N2O. 

Assumptions and uncertainties. The basis for the estimation of N emissions is the 
total mass of N excreted. Excretion is determined as the difference between crude 
protein intake and retention within the animal. N2O emissions associated with ma-
nure deposited on pasture, ranges and paddocks are not included in these estimates 
but considered as part of the feed production component (cf. Appendix A), because 
they are considered as a source of N fertilizer in feed production. 

5.4 coMparison with other stuDies 
A  direct  comparison  with  literature  values  from  other  LCAs  is  often  complicated 
by the use of differing boundaries, functional units, disparate assumptions and algo-
rithms in calculating emissions. Nevertheless, comparisons can be useful to provide 
an indication of the validity of results and contribute to drawing conclusions. Tables 
14 and 15 compare existing studies for beef cattle and small ruminants with the cur-
rent study. While several studies have focused on the cattle sector and to a limited 
extent small ruminants, many of these estimates are at a much smaller scale and are 
often  specific  to  regions  or  production  systems  within  countries  (e.g.  Verge  et  al., 
2008; Peters et al., 2009; Biswas et al., 2010; Beauchemin et al., 2010; Pelletier et al., 
2010; Nguyen et al., 2010; Kanyarushoki et al., 2010; Zhou et al., 2007, Zervas and 
Tsiplakou, 2012; Edwards-Jones et al., 2009). For purposes of this comparison, only 
those studies with a national or regional scope were selected.

70

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainss
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
E
/
s
e
ti
i
s
n
e
t
n

I
 

n
o
i
s
s
i

m
E

e
p
o
c
s

e
l
t
t
a
c
 
f
e
e
b
 
r
o
f
 
s
e
i
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
i
 
n
o
i
s
s
i

 

m
e
 
f
o
n
o
s
i
r
a
p
m
o
C

 
.

4
1

 
e
l

b
a
T

 

m
e
t
s
y
s

y
r
t
n
u
o
c

y
d
u
t
s

 

 

M
A
E
L
G

y
d
u
t
S

 

W
C
g
k
/
q
e
-
2

 

W
C
g
k
/
q
e
-
2

 

O
C
g
k
7

 

 

O
C
g
k
1

 

.

7
2

.

4
2

 

W
C
g
k
/
q
e
-
2

 

O
C
g
k
1

 

.

3
2

 

W
C
g
k
/
q
e
-
2

 

O
C
g
k
2

 

.

2
2

 

W
C
g
k
/
q
e
-
2

 

O
C
g
k
4

 

.

2
3

)

C
U
L

 
t
u
o
h
t
i

w

(

 

 

W
C
g
k
/
q
e
-
2

 

O
C
g
k
8
2

 

)

C
U
L

 
t
u
o
h
t
i

w

(

 

W
C
g
k
/
q
e
-
2

 

O
C
g
k
4

 

.

2
3

)

C
U
L

 
t
u
o
h
t
i

w

(

 

W
C
g
k
/
q
e
-
2

 

O
C
g
k
2

 

.

2
3

)

C
U
L

 
t
u
o
h
t
i

w

(

 

W
L
g
k
/
q
e
-
2

 

W
C
g
k
/
q
e
-
2

 

O
C
g
k
1

 

 

O
C
g
k
0

 

.

9
1

.

9
3

 

W
L
g
k
/
q
e
-
2

 

O
C
g
k
6
2

 

 

W
C
g
k
/
q
e
-
2

 

O
C
g
k
1

 

.

1
1

.

2
3

 
s
e
n
n
o
t
 
n
o
i
l
l
i

m
5

 

.

7
1

2

O
C

2

O
C

 
s
e
n
n
o
t
 
n
o
i
l
l
i

m
1

 

.

6
1

Post farmgate

N

N

N

Y

N

N

N

Energy

Feed CO2

Feed N2O

Manure N2O

Manure CH4

Enteric CH4

N

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

N

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

)
o

i
r
a
n
e
c
s
 

m
r
a
f
 
e
g
a
r
e
v
a
 
l
a
n
o

i
t
a

N

(

 
 
r
e
l

k
c
u
s
 
l
a
r
o
t
s
a
P

d
n
a
l
e
r
I

)
1
1
0
2
(
 
.
l
a

 
t
e
 
y
e
l

o
F

 

f
e
e
b
h
s
i
r
I
 
l
a
c
i

p
y
T

d
n
a
l
e
r
I

)
6
0
0
2
(
 
n
e
d

l

 

o
H
d
n
a
 
y
e
s
a
C

 
a
d
a
n
a
C

n
a
p
a
J

)
3
0
0
2
(
 
.
l
a

 
t
e
 
i

i

k
s
n
m
O

)
7
0
0
2
(
 
.
l
a

 
t
e
 
o
n

i
g
O

.

d
e
d
u
l
c
x
e
 
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
 
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e
 
:

N

 
;

d
e
d
u
l
c
n
i
 
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
 
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e
 
:

Y

f
e
e
B

7
2
U
E

l
i
z
a
r
B

)
9
0
0
2
(
 
.
l
a

 
t
e
 

g
r
e
b
r
e
d
e
C

)
0
1
0
2
(
 
.
l
a

 
t
e
 
p

i
e
L

71

l
i
z
a
r
B

)
6
0
0
2
(
 
.
l
a

 
t
e
 
s

m
a
i
l
l
i

W

DiscussionM
A
E
L
G

y
d
u
t
S

 

W
C
g
k
/
q
e
-
2

 

O
C
g
k
1

 

.

8
1

 

 

W
C
g
k
/
q
e
-
2

 

O
C
g
k
3

 

.

0
2

k
l
i

 

m
g
k
/
q
e
-
2

 

O
C
g
k
7

 

.

4

 

k
l
i

 

m
g
k
/
q
e
-
2

 

O
C
g
k
9

 

.

2

 

 

W
C
g
k
/
q
e
-
2

 

O
C
g
k
8

 

.

4
1

 

)
l
o
o
w
o
t
 
n
o
i
t
a
c
o
l
l
a
 
h
t
i

w

(

 

 

W
C
g
k
/
q
e
-
2

 

O
C
g
k
9
1

 

 

)
l
o
o
w
o
t
 
n
o
i
t
a
c
o
l
l
a
 
t
u
o
h
t
i

w

(

 
 

 

W
C
g
k
/
q
e
-
2

 

O
C
g
k
0

 

.

9
1

 

W
C
g
k
/
q
e
-
2

 

O
C
g
k
9

 

.

5
2

7

.

 

W
C
g
k
/
q
e
-
2

O
C
g
k

 

6
5

 
:

g
n
i
z
a
r
G

.

5
8
4

 
:

d
e
x
i
M

Post farmgate

N

N

Y

Energy

Y

Y

Y

Feed CO2

Y

Y

Y

Feed N2O

Y

Y

Y

Manure N2O

Y

Y

Y

N

Y

Y

Y

Y

4

H
C

 
s

m
a
r
g
a
g
i
g

 

1
4
6

4

H
C

 
s

m
a
r
g
a
g
i
g

 

9
6
8

4

H
C

 
s

m
a
r
g
a
g
i
g

 

5
2
9

4

H
C

 
s

m
a
r
g
a
g
i
g

 

0
6
7

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

N

Manure CH4

Enteric CH4

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

Y

g
n

i
z
a
r
g
-
o
r
e
Z

g
n

i
z
a
r
G

d
e
x
i
M

i

 
t
n
a
n
m
u
r
 
l
l
a
m
S

t
a
e
m

i

 
t
n
a
n
m
u
r
 
l
l
a
m
S

k
l
i

m

7
2
U
E

)
0
1
0
2
(
 
.
l
a

 
t
e
 
p

i
e
L

7
2
U
E

)
0
1
0
2
(
 
.
l
a

 
t
e
 
p

i
e
L

72

b
m
a
L

d
n
a
l
a
e
Z
w
e
N

 

)
1
1
0
2
(
 
.
l
a

 
t
e
 
d
r
a
g
d
e
L

b
m
a
L

n

i
a
p
S

 
 

h
c
s
o
B
-
i
l

o
p
R

i

)
0
1
0
2
(
 
.
l
a

 
t
e

s
t
a
o
G

p
e
e
h
S

a
n

i

h
C

a
n

i

h
C

)
3
0
0
2
(
 
.
l
a
 
t
e
 
i
j
a
m
a
Y

)
3
0
0
2
(
 
.
l
a

 
t
e
 
i
j
a
m
a
Y

.

d
e
d
u

l
c
x
e
 
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
 
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e
 
:

N

 
;

d
e
d
u
l
c
n
i
 
y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
 
n
o

i
s
s
i

m
e
 
:

Y

y
t
i
s
n
e
t
n

i
 

n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e

e
p
o
c
s

m
e
t
s
y
s

s
e
i
c
e
p
s

y
r
t
n
u
o
c

i

s
t
n
a
n
m
u
r
 
l
l
a
m

s
 
r
o
f
 
s
e
i
t
i
s
n
e
t
n
i
 
n
o
i
s
s
i

 

m
e
 
f
o
n
o
s
i
r
a
p
m
o
C

 
.

5
1

 
e
l

b
a
T

y
d
u
t
s

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsThe following factors have been identified as potential reasons for the deviation 

in results.

Scope. Studies can: (a) have different system boundaries; (b) include different emis-
sions categories within the same system boundaries; (c) have different functional 
units; or (d) include different emission sources within an emission category. 

Input data/assumptions. Quantifying emissions requires input data on key param-
eters such as livestock population numbers and distributions, herd structures and 
crop  yields.  Ideally,  validated  empirical  data  sets  should  be  used,  but  there  are 
often gaps in the data on key parameters, which necessitate assumptions. In many 
cases, key input data have been found to vary; for example a comparison of small 
ruminant population numbers in the 27 Member States of the European Union 
(EU27) revealed that the small ruminant population for these countries used in this 
current study are 30 percent higher than those used by Leip et al. (2010). The au-
thors also noted that there was an observed difference between the small ruminant 
inventory that they utilized and national inventory reports. The animal inventory 
utilized in this study was, however, found to be consistent with those reported by 
the countries. 

Calculation  methods.  A  review  of  the  studies  revealed  the  major  differences  in 
methodology  across  all  studies  particularly  in  the  use  of  different  approaches 
such  as  use  of  Tier  1  vs.  Tier  2  approaches,  and  differences  in  allocation  tech-
nique  applied.  Generally,  due  to  the  importance  of  enteric  fermentation,  most 
recent studies apply a Tier 2 approach, particularly for cattle. While the approach 
may  be  similar,  studies  may  obtain  different  results  which  may  largely  depend 
on data inputs such as animal weights, feed digestibility and feed composition, 
all of which are important in assessing emissions from enteric fermentation. On 
the other hand, the assessment of enteric fermentation in small ruminants in the 
few studies conducted (Leip et al., 2010; Yamaiji et al., 2003; Edward-Jones et al., 
2009) has largely been based on the Tier 1 approach using the IPCC default value 
of 8 kg CH4 per head. 

The  allocation  technique  applied  may  also  explain  variations  in  emission  
intensity. Significant differences were found between this study and the EU27 study 
(Leip et al., 2010) for small ruminant milk production (cf. Table 14), which is also 
explained  by  the  differences  in  allocation  techniques.  The  authors  allocate  emis-
sions between three outputs: milk, meat and lamb/kids based on the nitrogen con-
tent of the products, and emissions related to the raising of young animals during 
pregnancy are allocated to meat. In contrast, this study allocates emissions between 
milk, meat and wool based on economic value of the products and subsequently 
utilizes protein content of products to allocate emissions among the edible prod-
ucts (see allocation technique in Appendix A). A key explanation of the deviation 
between the current study and EU27 study is related to the fact that a large part of 
the total dairy herd emissions (i.e. emissions associated with the adult females and 
male animals and replacement animals) in our study are allocated to milk, while 
only emissions of the dairy activity (time from the first lactation to the slaughtering 
of the animal) are allocated to milk in the EU27 study (Weiss and Leip, 2012). 

73

DiscussionThe overlying issues with comparison lie in the lack transparency of information 
and a standardized methodology or protocol for conducting LCAs and reporting 
results. The variability among studies in methods used places emphasis on the need 
to clearly define and agree on methodologies for estimating GHG emissions from 
the ruminant sector. 

5.5 analysis of uncertainty 
Estimates of GHG emissions are subject to large uncertainties. Fundamentally, un-
certainties are associated with the variables used in the calculation of EFs, in esti-
mates of activity data (e.g. animal populations and herd parameters) and assump-
tions  made.  This  section  presents  a  partial  analysis  of  uncertainty,  based  on  the 
Monte Carlo (MC) Simulation approach.

In order to focus the analysis of uncertainty, parameters that had the greatest influ-
ence on emission intensity were identified. Key contributors to emissions were de-
fined as those emissions categories contributing more than 10 percent of the emissions 
and with a high degree of uncertainty arising from either the lack of data or inherent 

Table 16. Summary of parameters and uncertainty distributions used in the Monte Carlo simulation runs for  
dairy and beef in France

Distribution

cV1

Min

Max

reference and basis for 
uncertainty estimates 

parameters and 
emission factors
Parameters 
Feed digestibility

Dairy: Milk yield
Dairy: Age at first calving
Beef: Age at slaughter 
Beef: Age at first calving
Emission factors
Enteric CH4 emission factor

Normal 

0.10

Normal 
Normal
Normal 
Normal

0.2
0.19
0.23
0.17

Normal

0.10

EF1: N2O emission factor, synthetic and 
organic N
EF3: N2O emission factor, pasture, 
rangeland and paddock
EF4: Emission factor, N volatilization 
EF5: Emission factor, leaching
Fraction of applied synthetic N to 
volatilization NH3, Nox
Fraction of applied organic N to 
volatilization NH3, Nox
Ammonium Nitrate manufacture EF

Beta Pert

Beta Pert

Beta Pert
Beta Pert
Beta Pert

Beta Pert

Normal

Normal
Soybean scenario 1: GLEAM 
Normal
Soybean scenario 2: PAS 2050-1:2012
Normal
Soybean scenario 3: One-Soy
Soybean scenario 4: Reduced time-frame Normal

0.27

0.08
0.15
- 
0.08

Assuming IPCC uncertainty range of 
20% (IPCC, 2006  Volume 4, Chapter 10, 
Section 10.2.3)
Institut de lElevage, 2011
Institut de lElevage, 2011
Institut de lElevage, 2011
Institut de lElevage, 2011

Assuming IPCC (2006, Volume 4,  
Chapter 10, Section 10.3.4) uncertainty 
range of 20% 
IPCC (2006, Table 11.1)

0.003

0.03

0.007

0.06

IPCC (2006, Table 11.1)

0.002
0.0005
0.03

0.05
0.025
0.3

IPCC (2006, Table 11.3)
IPCC (2006, Table 11.3)
IPCC (2006, Table 11.3)

0.05

0.5

IPCC (2006, Table 11.3)

Based on values for fertilizer CO2 EFs in 
Wood and Cowie (2004)
See Appendix C on LULUC 
See Appendix C on LULUC
See Appendix C on LULUC
See Appendix C on LULUC

1  CV  Coefficient of Variation is the ratio of the standard deviation to the mean. The 95 percent confidence interval is approximately equal to the 

standard deviation or coefficient multiplied by two.

74

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsvariability or assumptions made. For the ruminant sector, emission categories that 
contribute more than 10 percent include CH4 from enteric fermentation, CO2 from 
land-use change, and N2O from feed production (see Section 4). Section 5.4 highlight-
ed some of the important factors that are likely to influence emissions. The MC simu-
lation was applied to two countries, France and Paraguay. In France, uncertainties in 
both mixed dairy and beef production systems were assessed, while in Paraguay the 
focus was on grazing systems. The choice of countries was based on criteria such as 
the availability of statistics for inventory data [standard deviation (SD), confidence 
interval or ranges], and relative importance of production in these countries. 

5.5.1 the approach
Choice of probabilistic distributions of input variables. Monte Carlo simulations en-
able an investigation into how input uncertainty propagates through the life-cycle 
emissions model. However, there is little data on probability distributions of the 
input data required to perform a MC simulation. 

In this assessment, the probability distributions were defined using the SD from 
a number of sources and applying the coefficient of variation indicated in Tables 16 
and 17, and normal distributions were assigned to technical parameters for which 
no choice of mode could be justified given available information. 

Table 17. Summary of parameters and uncertainty distributions used in the Monte Carlo simulation runs 
for beef in Paraguay

Distribution

cV1

Min

Max

reference and basis for 
uncertainty estimates

parameters and 
emission factors

Parameters 
Feed digestibility

Normal 

0.10

Beef: Age at slaughter 
Beef: Age at first calving
Emission factors
Enteric CH4 Emission factor

EF1: N2O emission factor, 
synthetic and organic N
EF3: N2O emission factor, 
pasture, rangeland and paddock
EF4: Emission factor, N 
volatilization 
EF5: Emission factor, leaching
Fraction of applied synthetic N 
to volatilization NH3, Nox
Fraction of applied organic N 
to volatilization NH3, Nox
Ammonium Nitrate 
manufacture EF
Land-use change: Pasture 
expansion (combined scenario)

Normal 
Normal

Normal

Beta Pert

Beta Pert

Beta Pert

Beta Pert
Beta Pert

Beta Pert

Normal

Normal

0.24
0.02

0.10

0.27

0.28

Assuming IPCC uncertainty range of 20% 
(IPCC, 2006  Volume 4, Chapter 10,  
Section 10.2.3)
Ferreira et al. (2007); Frechou (2002)
Ferreira et al. (2007); Frechou (2002)

Assuming IPCC (2006, Volume 4, Chapter 10, 
Section 10.3.4) uncertainty range of 20% 
IPCC (2006, Table 11.1)

0.003

0.03

0.007

0.06

IPCC (2006, Table 11.1)

0.002

0.05

IPCC (2006, Table 11.3)

0.0005
0.03

0.025
0.3

IPCC (2006, Table 11.3)
IPCC (2006, Table 11.3)

0.05

0.5

IPCC (2006, Table 11.3)

Based on values for fertilizer CO2 EFs in Wood 
and Cowie (2004)
Combined uncertainty range calculated based on 
IPCC default uncertainty values for carbon pools 
and uncertainty in land area estimates

1  CV  Coefficient of Variation is the ratio of the standard deviation to the mean. The 95 percent confidence interval is approximately equal to the 

standard deviation or coefficient multiplied by two.

75

DiscussionTable 18. Emission intensity for imported soybean and soybean cake used  
in France 
approach

soybean cake

soybean

GLEAM
PAS 2050-1:2012
One-Soy 
Reduced time-frame

Source: Authors calculations.

4.81
1.42
2.98
2.31

kg CO2-eq/kg product

5.35
1.58
3.31
2.56

Table 19. Default carbon stock values for Paraguay and uncertainty values  
of carbon pools 

carbon 
stocks

tonnes C/ha

uncertainty of 
the carbon pool1

percentage

Previous land: Forest
Biomass
Soil carbon
Dead organic matter (DOM)
Total carbon stocks
Land-use after conversion: Grassland
Biomass
Soil carbon
Dead organic matter
Total Carbon stocks
Carbon stock change

260.4

65
2.8
328.2

0
63
0
63

265.2

24%
95%
30%

02

95%

03

1  Two standard deviation CI 95%.
2  No uncertainty analysis is needed for Tier 1 since the default assumption is that all biomass is cleared and 

therefore the default biomass after conversion is zero.

3  No uncertainty analysis is needed for Tier 1 since the default assumption is unchanging carbon stocks in DOM.
Source: Authors calculations.

For the IPCC parameters, these are mainly provided with a potential range, of-
ten estimated by expert opinion or drawn from studies. The ranges for EF1, EF3, 
EF4, EF5 were taken from IPCC (2006) and beta-pert distributions were used to 
model parameters from IPCC based on the maximum and minimum value. These 
distributions and underlying data sources are also summarized in Tables 16 and 17. 
We also employed MC simulation analysis to understand the uncertainty associ-
ated with LUC. The approaches described in Appendix C were used to generate 
parameter  ranges  used  in  the  MC  simulation.  The  three  alternative  soybean  ap-
proaches were only applied to the French case study where imported soybean cake 
is used as feed. The soybean emission intensity calculated for the GLEAM and the 
three additional scenarios for soybean imported by France from Brazil and Argen-
tina are presented in Table 18. 

The approach for assessing the uncertainty related to changes in C stocks re-
sulting from pasture expansion into forest areas takes into account the uncertainty 
associated with carbon fluxes from carbon pools considered and the uncertainty as-

76

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainssociated with the land area estimates. The two uncertainties were run separately and 
then combined. The IPCC guidelines (2006) indicate that, if using aggregate land 
use area statistics for activity data (e.g. FAO data on land area), as is the case in this 
study, a default level of uncertainty for the land area estimates of 50 percent may 
be applied.

 Estimates of the carbon loss on land conversion include uncertainties in several 
underlying quantities: the carbon in the above-ground biomass, the carbon in the 
below-ground biomass (generally estimated as a percentage of the above-ground 
biomass), the carbon in the soil, and the fraction of all carbon lost upon conversion. 
The uncertainty associated with carbon fluxes from three carbon pools considered 
in this study are taken from IPCC guidelines (2006, Volume 4) and the Good Prac-
tices Guidelines for national GHG inventories (IPCC, 2003) and are presented in 
Table 19. 

Total  uncertainty  combining  uncertainty  in  carbon  stock  changes  per  hectare 
with the uncertainty in land area converted was calculated using the error propaga-
tion approach outlined in Chapter 6, IPCC Good Practice Guidance (2000, Chapter 
6 equations 6.3 and 6.4) that combines different uncertainties to provide an uncer-
tainty estimate for an inventory. The result of the combined uncertainty used as 
input in the Monte Carlo simulation is presented in Table 17. 

Uncertainty  estimates  and  sensitivity  analysis.  In  this  assessment,  the  number  of 
simulations run was 10 000. For any analysis of this type, it is important to deter-
mine the sources of uncertainty and the impact that parameters and their embedded 
assumptions have on the results. A sensitivity analysis was therefore used to iden-
tify parameters that have a significant effect on the uncertainty estimates. Sensitivity 
analysis also identifies the most influential parameters indicating emissions sources 
that offer the opportunity to decrease the overall uncertainty associated with life-
cycle of milk and beef production emissions. The relative sensitivity of input vari-
ables was assessed by Monte Carlo using the Rank Correlation Coefficient (RCC)8 
calculated between all inputs variables and the emission intensity as their contribu-
tion to the overall uncertainty.9

5.5.2 results from the uncertainty analysis 
France
The mean emission intensity for milk production in mixed farming system in kg 
CO2-eq calculated on the basis of kg milk was estimated to be 1.9 kg CO2-eq/kg 
milk (0.95 kg CO2-eq/kg milk at the CI95%). The range of values around the mean 
obtained with the uncertainty analysis was 0.9-2.8 kg CO2-eq/kg milk (Figure 35 
and Table 20). The average emission intensity for beef is 15.6 kg CO2-eq/kg CW 
(8.0 kg CO2-eq/kg CW) (Figure 36 and Table 20) The range of values was 7.5-23.6 

8  RCC is a measure of the strength and direction of association between input variables and output estimates. If 
an input parameter and an output estimate have a high correlation coefficient, it means that the input has a sig-
nificant impact on the output; positive correlation coefficients indicate that an increase in the input is associated 
with an increase in the output estimate while negative coefficients indicate an inverse relationship. The larger the 
absolute value of the correlation coefficient, the stronger the relationship.

9  Crystal ball computes the rank correlation between inputs and each output parameter then normalizes these to 
sum to 100 percent. This provides a measure of sensitivity, i.e. the contribution of each parameter to the overall 
uncertainty of emission intensity.

77

DiscussionTable 20. Summary of results from Monte Carlo analysis for mixed dairy and  
beef production in France

Mean emission intensity
EI standard deviation
Coefficient of Variation

Source: Authors calculations.

Mixed dairy production

Mixed beef production

1.89 kg CO2-eq/kg milk

15.6 kg CO2-eq/kg CW

0.49
26%

4.10
26%

Figure 35. 
Probability distribution for milk emission intensity in France

Fit Lognormal

kg CO2-eq.kg milk-1

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.00

0.80

1.00

1.20

1.40

1.60

1.80

2.00

2.20

2.40

2.60

2.80

3.00

3.20

Source: Authors.

Figure 36. 
Probability distribution for beef emission intensity in France

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

0.04

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.00

Fit Lognormal

kg CO2-eq.kg CW-1

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

400

360

320

280

240

200

160

120

80

40

0

8.00

10.00

12.20

14.00

16.00

18.00

20.00

22.00

24.00

26.00

Source: Authors.

78

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsTable 21. Impact of alternative soybean scenarios on emission intensity for 
dairy and beef in France

gleaM

pas 2050-1:2012

one-soy

reduced 
time-frame

Beef
Mean Emission intensity
(kg CO2-eq/kg CW)
Contribution to variance
Dairy
Mean Emission intensity
(kg CO2-eq/kg milk)
Contribution to variance

Source: Authors calculations.

15.6

0%

1.89

0%

14.9

0.1% 

1.78

0%

15.2

0%

1.82

0%

15.0

0%

1.81

0%

kg CO2-eq/kg CW. Both probability distribution frequencies (PDFs) for France 
are positively skewed indicating that the distribution has a longer right tail (Figures 
35 and 36). 

The coefficient of variation defines the standard deviation as a percentage of the 
mean and can be used to compare SDs with different means. Despite the markedly 
different means and SD for milk and beef, the coefficient of variation for both milk 
and beef in France is 26 percent of the mean.

Impact of alternative soybean approaches on emission intensity. Different scenarios 
to assess the impact of soybean-related LUC were tested for both dairy and beef 
production systems in France and the results are presented in Table 21. Soybean 
cake accounts for a small proportion of the feed ration (between 2-6 percent of the 
feed ration for both dairy and beef) and hence has a negligible impact on emission 
intensity.

Paraguay
Figure 37 presents the results from the Monte Carlo simulation for Paraguay. The 
mean value for the emission intensity of beef produced in grazing systems in Para-
guay (including carbon losses from deforestation for pasture) is 294.2 kg CO2-eq/
kg CW (136.3 kg CO2-eq/kg CW), with the 95 percent certainty interval around 
the mean ranging from 157.8-430.6 kg CO2-eq/kg CW. The coefficient of variation 
(CV) is estimated at 24 percent of the mean. 

Impact of LUC uncertainty on emission intensity of beef in Paraguay. Table 22 pres-
ents the results from the propagation of uncertainty associated with land area esti-
mates, carbon stock losses per hectare as well as the combined scenario of the two 
uncertainties. 

The assumptions and uncertainties in total land area converted and carbon stocks 
and their impact on the mean were about the same magnitude. The sensitivity anal-
ysis showed that uncertainty in the total land area converted is the single largest 
contributor to variance, accounting for 27 percent of the variance, while uncertainty 
in estimates of the carbon in soil and biomass accounts for nearly 9 percent of the 
variance.

79

DiscussionFigure 37. 
Probability distribution for beef emission intensity in Paraguay

Fit Lognormal

kg CO2-eq.kg CW-1

0.04

y
t
i
l
i

b
a
b
o
r
P

0.03

0.02

0.01

0.00

90

120

150

180

210

240

270

300

330

360

390

420

450

480

y
c
n
e
u
q
e
r
F

400

400

400

360

320

280

240

200

160

120

80

40

0

Source: Authors.

Table 22. Effects of alternative LUC uncertainty estimates on average emission 
intensity for beef production in Paraguay

emission intensity (kg CO2-eq/kg CW)

95% probability range

 
Land area
Carbon stocks 
Baseline (combined scenario)

Mean

292.1 (22%)*
293.4 (21%)*
294.2 (24%)*

* Percentages in brackets relate to Coefficient of Variation (CV)
Source: Authors calculations.

Low
163.7
173.0
157.9

High
420.6
413.7
430.6

Analysis of sensitivity. Tables 23 and 24 illustrate the contribution to variance (CoV)10 
and the RCC for the uncertain input parameters (above a 1 percent threshold) and 
presents  the  most  important  factors  affecting  the  total  uncertainty  measured  by 
the absolute value of RCC between the parameters and the emission intensity. For 
milk production in mixed systems in France, three parameters contribute about 90 
percent of the total variance in the emission intensity; feed digestibility is the largest 
contributor to variance, accounting for almost half of the total, and the uncertainty 
in N2O EF3 and milk yield contributing another 22 and 20 percent of the variance, 
respectively.  In  beef  production,  the  N2O  EF3  and  feed  digestibility  parameters 
contribute 93 percent of the variance (Table 23). 

10  The contribution to variance (CoV) provides information on how much each variable contributed to the uncer-

tainty of emission intensity relative to the contribution of other variables. 

80

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsTable 23. Percent Contribution to Variance (CoV) and Rank Correlation 
Coefficient (RCC) in mixed dairy and beef systems in France

parameter

Dairy

Beef

Feed digestibility

N2O EF3 Pasture, ranging and paddock
Milk yield

Age at first calving

EF for enteric fermentation

EF 1 for synthetic and organic N
EF 4 for N volatilization
EF 5 for N leaching

NA: Not Applicable; NS: Not Significant.
Source: Authors calculations.

CoV

47%

22.2%

20.4%

5.4%

1.7%

1.0%
NS
NS

RCC

-0.66

0.45

-0.43

0.22

0.12

0.09
NS
NS

CoV

42.2%

51.5%

NA

NS

NS

2.5%
1.5%
1.2%

RCC

-0.63

0.69

NA

NS

NS

0.15
0.12
0.1

Table 24. Percent Contribution to Variance (CoV) and Rank Correlation 
Coefficient (RCC) for grazing beef systems in Paraguay

parameter

Beef

N2O EF3 Pasture, ranging and paddock

Land-use change pasture: combined scenario

Feed digestibility

Age at slaughter

Source: Authors calculations.

CoV

44%

34%

17%

5%

RCC

0.64

0.52

-0.40

0.21

The  sensitivity  analysis  shows  that  the  key  parameters  contributing  to  uncer-

tainty for both the dairy and beef scenarios are: 

	the feed digestibility variable plays a significant role in total emissions; 47 
percent and 42 percent of the uncertainty in emission intensity of milk and 
beef is caused by the uncertainty in feed digestibility variable, respectively. 
Digestibility is a dominant factor in the calculations of a number of emis-
sion  sources  and  hence  its  role  in  influencing  the  uncertainty  in  emission 
intensity.

	N2O EF3 for manure deposited on pasture due to the high degree of uncer-

tainty i.e., wide distribution (large natural variability) of possible values. 

	In dairy production, milk yield has an impact on the uncertainty of milk 

emission intensity due to the high variability in milk production. 

For Paraguay, the sensitivity analysis shows that 4 parameters: N2O EF3 Pasture, 
ranging and paddock, feed digestibility and land-use change, and age at slaughter 
contribute 99 percent of the variance to the emission intesity of beef in Paraguay 
(Table 24). 

The uncertainty in N2O EF3 is the largest contributor to variance (44 percent); 
the rate of emissions of N2O (per unit N applied/deposited) is perhaps the most 
uncertain effect in GHG emission profile. In addition to the wide distribution N2O 
EF3 (the N2O emissions factor for N deposited on pasture, range or paddock), it is 
assumed that 95 percent of the manure in this case is deposited directly on pasture 

81

Discussionhence the high N2O emissions. The uncertainty in the estimates of LUC combined 
scenario (carbon stock losses per hectare and in the land area estimates) account for 
34 percent of the variance. 

In conclusion, the uncertainty performed for the two case studies show that rela-
tively few parameters (N2O EF3 Pasture, ranging and paddock, feed digestibility 
and LUC) are responsible for most of the variance. Although the present analysis 
captures several important parameter uncertainties, significant model uncertainties 
still remain. 

Point estimates from LCAs describe only an average situation and many sce-
narios may be equally plausible. Uncertainty analysis such as these offer the op-
portunity to understand and estimate the imprecision of the average result resulting 
from uncertainties in input data as well as deliver more meaningful results.

82

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chains6. Conclusion

Globally, ruminant supply chains are estimated to produce 5.7 gigatonnes CO2-eq 
per annum of which 81 percent, 11 percent and 8 percent is associated with cattle, 
buffalo and small ruminant production.

This  report  provides  the  first  comprehensive  and  disaggregated  global  assess-
ment of emissions from the ruminant sector, which enables the understanding of 
emission pathways and hotspots. This is a fundamental, initial step towards identi-
fication of mitigation strategies. 

Average emission intensity for products from ruminants were estimated at 2.8, 
3.4 and 6.5 kg CO2-eq/kg FPCM for cow milk, buffalo and small ruminant milk, 
respectively, and 46.2, 53.4, and 23.8 kg CO2-eq/kg CW for beef, buffalo and small 
ruminant meat, respectively. Although there is great heterogeneity among produc-
tion systems, some commodities are associated with particularly high emission in-
tensities. These emission profiles and the on-going growth in output call for the 
adoption of mitigation practices.

The ranges of emission intensity within supply chains suggest that there is room 
for improvement (Tables 7 to 9). This mitigation potential is further explored in 
an overview report published in parallel to this one (FAO, 2013a). It is estimated 
to reach 30% of the sectors global emissions. The overview report also explores 
regional mitigation potentials through case study analysis. When drawing any con-
clusions about scope for improvement, one must distinguish those production pa-
rameters that can be managed from those that are related to agro-ecological condi-
tions  and  cannot  be  managed.  This  is  particularly  true  for  extensive  production 
systems, where the environment cannot be controlled, or at prohibitive costs. 

Regarding these systems, and those facing particularly harsh environments, miti-
gation practices should not be proposed at the cost of diminished resilience and 
food security. Bearing these caveats in mind, the results of this study indicate six 
areas of possible interventions to reduce the emission intensity from ruminant sup-
ply chains:

	Reducing LUCs arising from pasture expansion and feed crop cultivation;
	Improving feeding practices and digestibility of diets;
	Improving grazing and pasture management to increase soil organic carbon 

(SOC) stocks;

	Increasing yields, e.g. through genetics, feeding and animal health;
	Improving  manure  management    reducing  the  use  of  uncovered  liquid 

MMS, particularly in dairy systems; and

	Increasing energy use efficiency, especially in postfarm part of the supply 

chain.

Comparison of this study with others shows that methods matter. Discrepancies 
in  results  are  well  explained  by  different  system  boundaries,  allocation  methods 
and  computation  of  emissions,  especially  with  regard  to  LUC,  enteric  CH4  and 
feed N2O. The many different methods that are being used to measure and assess 
the emissions of animal rearing make it difficult to compare results and set priori-

83

ties for the continuous improvement of environmental performance along supply 
chains. This calls for an effort to harmonize approaches and data used in this kind 
of analysis.

This  report  presents  an  update  and  refinement  of  the  previous  assessment  in 
Livestocks  long  shadow  (FAO,  2006).  It  should  be  understood  as  one  step  in  a 
series of assessments, to measure and guide progress in the sectors environmental 
performance. 

Numerous  hypothesis  and  methodological  choices  were  made,  introducing  a 
degree  of  uncertainty  in  the  results.  Furthermore,  data  gaps  forced  the  research 
team to rely on generalizations and projections. A partial sensitivity analysis was 
conducted in order to illustrate the effect of these approximations. Results were 
tested for methodological choices regarding land-use change emissions and input 
data uncertainty. This partial analysis showed that the emission intensity at 95% 
confidence interval is 50%

Priorities for refinement of GLEAM include:

	Information  about  the  feed  rations,  particularly  the  amount  of  roughage, 

by-products and concentrates in the ration;

	Information on manure management;
	Methods for allocation of emissions, especially for slaughter by-products;
	Quantification of the emissions associated with land use and LUC;
	Quantification of feed N2O that better reflect where and how manure N is 

applied to crops.

Methodological  developments  are  been  carried  out  by  private  and  public  sec-
tor organizations to improve the accuracy and comparability of results over time. 
LEAP    the  Partnership  on  Livestock  Environmental  Assessment  and  Perfor-
mance11 will be instrumental to these developments; this multi-stakeholder initia-
tive is facilitated by FAO and involves government representatives, private sector 
organizations and civil society in an effort to harmonize indicators and methods for 
the assessment of environmental performance in the livestock sector.

Although  estimating  GHG  emissions  from  the  sector  provides  an  important 
starting  point  for  understanding  the  sectors  potential  for  mitigating  emissions, 
identifying approaches to reduce emissions requires complementary analysis. 

First, the private and public costs of mitigation, as well as the social dimensions 
associated with technology changes and the impact of mitigation efforts on food 
consumption trends, should be understood in order to identify viable and accept-
able options. Several groups are addressing these questions, including FAO. There 
is also a need to broaden the scope of environmental performance assessment be-
yond GHG emissions, in order to avoid undesired policy outcomes. GLEAM will 
progressively be adapted to compute a wider set of metrics that enable several envi-
ronmental parameters to be quantified. The model provides a consistent and trans-
parent analytical framework within which to explore proposed mitigation methods, 
thereby providing an empirical basis for policy-making.

11  http://www.fao.org/ag/againfo/livestock-benchmarking/en/

84

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsReferences

Beauchemin, K.A., Janzen, H.H., Little, S.M., McAllister, T.A. & McGinn, S.M. 
2010. Life cycle assessment of greenhouse gas emissions from beef production in 
western Canada: A case study. Agricultural Systems, 103: 4150.

Biswas, W.K., Graham, J., Kelly, K. & John, M.B. 2010. Global warming contribu-
tions from wheat, sheep meat and wool production in Victoria, Australia  A life 
cycle assessment. Journal of Cleaner Production, 18(14): 13861392.

BSI. 2008. PAS 2050:2008. Specification for the assessment of the life cycle green-
house gas emissions of goods and services. British Standards Institution. Lon-
don.

BSI.  2012.  PAS  2050-1:2012.  Assessment  of  life  cycle  greenhouse  gas  emissions 
from horticultural products Supplementary requirements for the cradle to gate 
stages of GHG assessments of horticultural products undertaken in accordance 
with PAS 2050. British Standards Institution. London.

Capper, J., Cady, R.A. & Bauman, E.D. 2008. The relationship between cow pro-

duction and environmental impact. 

Casey, J.W. & Holden, N.M. 2006. Quantification of GHG emissions from suck-

ler-beef production in Ireland. Agricultural Systems, 90: 79-98.

Castillo, A.R., Kebreab, E., Beever, D.E. & France, J. 2000. A review of efficiency 
of  nitrogen  utilization  in  dairy  cows  and  its  relationship  with  environmental 
pollution. J. Anim. Feed Sci. 9: 32.

Cederberg, C. & Flysjo, A. 2004. Environmental assessment of future pig farming 
systems - quantifications of three scenarios from the FOOD 21 synthesis work. 
The Swedish Institute for Food and Biotechnology, SIK Report No. 723: 154.

Cederberg, C. & Stadig, M. 2003. System expansion and allocation in life cycle as-
sessment of milk and beef production. Int. J. Life. Cycle Assess., 8(6): 350356.

Cederberg, C., Meyer, D. & Flysjo, A. 2009. Life cycle inventory of greenhouse gas 
emissions and use of land and energy in Brazilian beef production. SIK Report 
No. 792.

de Vries, M. & de Boer, I.J.M. 2010. Comparing environmental impacts for live-
stock products: A review of life cycle assessments. Livestock Science, 128: 1-11.
Del Prado, A. & Scholefield, D. 2008. Use of SIMSDAIRY modelling framework 
system to compare the scope on the sustainability of a dairy farm of animal and 
plant genetic-based improvements with management-based changes. Journal of 
Agricultural Science, 146: 195-211.

Eckard, R.J., Chapman, D.F. & White, R.E. 2007. Nitrogen balances in temper-
ate perennial grass and clover dairy pastures in south-eastern Australia. Aust. J. 
Agric. Res., 58: 11671173. 

Ecoinvent.  2009.  Swiss  Centre  for  Life  Cycle  Inventories  database.  Available  at 

http://www.ecoinvent.ch/

Edward-Jones, G., Plassmann, K. & Harris, I.M. 2009. Carbon footprinting of 
lamb and beef production systems: insights from an empirical analysis of farms 
in Wales, UK. Journal of Agricultural Science, 147: 707-719.

85

FAO. 1996. World livestock production systems: current status, issues and trends, by 
Sere, C. & Steinfeld, H. FAO Animal Production and Health Paper 127. FAO. 
Rome.

FAO. 2006. Livestocks long shadow  Environmental issues and options, by Stein-
feld, H., Gerber, P., Wassenaar, T., Castel, V., Rosales, M. & de Haan, C. FAO. 
Rome.

FAO. 2007. Gridded livestock of the world 2007, by Wint, W. & Robinson, T. FAO. 

Rome.

FAO. 2010. Greenhouse gas emissions from the dairy sector  A life cycle assessment, 
by Gerber, P., Opio, C., Vellinga, T., Herderson, B. & Steinfeld, H. FAO. Rome.
FAO. 2013a. Tackling climate change through livestock, by Gerber, P., Steinfeld, H., 
Henderson,  B.,  Opio,  C.,  Mottet,  A.,  Dijkman,  J.,  Falcucci,  A.  &  Tempio,  G. 
FAO. Rome.

FAO. 2013b. Greenhouse gas emissions from pig and chicken supply chains  A life 
cycle assessment, by MacLeod, M., Gerber, P., Mottet, A., Tempio, G., Falcucci, A., 
Opio, C., Henderson, B. & Steinfeld H. FAO. Rome.

FAOSTAT. 2009. FAO Statistical Database. Accessed 2009.
FAOSTAT. 2011. FAO Statistical Database. Accessed 2011.
FAOSTAT. 2012. FAO Statistical Database. Accessed 2012.
Ferreira, N., Cattoni, C.J., Caceres, S.C. & Frutos, J. 2007. An economic oppor-
tunity survey of small dairy farms in Paraguay. Trop. Anim. Health Prod., 39: 
603-610.

Flysjo, A., Cederberg, C. & Strid, I. 2008. LCA-databas for konventionella foder-
medel - miljopaverkan i samband med production. SIK rapport No. 772, Version 
1.1.

Foley, P.A., Crosson, P., Lovett, D.K., Boland, T.M., OMara, F.P. & Kenny, D.A. 
2011. Whole-farm systems modeling of greenhouse gas emissions from pastoral 
suckler beef cow production systems. Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, 
142: 222-230.

Frechou, R.V. 2002. Las actividades percuarias en el MERCOSUR. 
Gerber,  P.,  Vellinga,  T.,  Opio,  C.  &  Steinfeld,  H.  2011.  Productivity  gains  and 
greenhouse gas emissions intensity in dairy systems. Livestock Science, 139(1-2): 
100108.

Haberl, H., Erb, K.H., Krausmann, F., Gaube, V., Bondeau, A., Plutzar, C., Gin-
grich,  S.,  Lucht  W.  &  Fischer-Kowalski  M.  2007.  Quantifying  and  mapping 
the global human appropriation of net primary production in Earths terrestrial 
ecosystem. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 104: 
12942-12947.

Houghton, R.A. & Goodale, C.L. 2004. Effects of LUC on the carbon balance of 
terrestrial ecosystems. In DeFries, R.S., Asner, G.P. & R.A. Houghton, eds. Eco-
systems and Land-use change. Washington, D.C., American Geophysical Union. 
IEA. 2009. International Energy Agency  Statistical database. http://www.iea.org.
Institut de lElevage. 2011. Institut de lElevage, France. http://www.inst-elevage.

asso.fr/

IPCC. 2000. Good Practice Guidance and Uncertainty Management in National 
Greenhouse Gas Inventories. Penman, J., Kruger, D., Galbally, I., Hiraishi, T., 
Nyenzi, B., Enmanuel, S., Buendia, L., Hoppaus, R., Martinsen, T., Meijer, J., 
Miwa, K. and Tanabe, K. (Eds). Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change 
(IPCC), IPCC/OECD/IEA/IGES, Hayama, Japan.

86

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsReferences

IPCC. 2003. Good Practice Guidance for Land Use, land-Use Change and For-
estry. Penman, J., Gytarsky, M., Hiraishi, T., Kruger, D., Pipatti, R., Buendia, L., 
Miwa, K., Ngara, T., Tanabe, K. and Wagner, F. (eds). Intergovernmental Panel 
on Climate Change (IPCC), IPCC/IGES, Hayama, Japan. 

IPCC. 2006. 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories pre-
pared by the National Greenhause Gas Inventories Programme, Eggleston, H.S., 
Buenida, L., Miwa, K., Nagara, T. & Tanabe, K. (eds). Published: IGES, Japan.

IPCC.  2007. Climate change 2007: IPCC Fourth Assessment Report.  Cambridge 

University Press, UK.

ISO. 2006. Environmental management  Life Cycle Assessment  Requirements 

and guidelines. ISO 14044. Geneva.

Kanyarushoki, C., van der Werf, M.G.H. & Fuchs, F. 2010. Life cycle assessment 
of cow and goat milk chains in France. Proceedings of LCA Food 2010. Bari, Italy.
Ledgard, S.F., Lieffering, M., Coup, D. & OBriens, B. 2011. Carbon footprint-
ing of New Zealand lamb from the perspective of an exporting nation. Animal 
Frontiers, 1(1): 4045.

Leip, A., Weiss, F., Wassenaar, T., Perez, I., Fellmann, T., Loudjani, P., Tubiello, F., 
Grandgirard, D., Monni, S. & Biala, K. 2010. Evaluation of the livestock sec-
tors contribution to the EU greenhouse gas emissions (GGELS) - Final Report, 
European Commission, Joint Research Centre.

Nguyen,  T.L.T.,  Hermansen,  J.E.  &  Mogensen,  L.  2010.  Environmental  conse-
quences of different beef production systems in the EU. J. Clean. Prod. 18: 756-
766.

Oenema, O., Wrage, N., Velthof, G. L., van Groenigen, J. W., Dolfing, J. & Kui-
kman, P. J. 2005. Trends in global nitrous oxide emissions from animal produc-
tion systems. Nutrient Cycling in Agroecosystems, 72(1): 51-65.

Ogino, A., Orito, H., Shimada, K. & Hirooka, H. 2007. Evaluating environmen-
tal  impacts  of  the  Japanese  beef  cow-calf  system  by  the  life  cycle  assessment 
method. Animal Science Journal, 78: 424432.

Ominski, K.H., Boadi, D.A., Wittenberg, K.M., Fulawka, D.L. & Basarab, J.A. 
2003. Estimates of enteric methane emissions from cattle in Canada using the 
IPCC Tier-2 methodology. 

Pelletier, N., Pirog, R. & Rasmusssen, R. 2010. Comparative life cycle environ-
mental  impacts  of  three  beef  production  strategies  in  the  upper  Midwestern 
United States. Agricultural Systems, 103: 4150.

Perera, B.M.A.O. 2011. Reproductive cycles of buffalo. Anim Reprod Sci, 124(3-4): 

194-99.

Peters, G.M., Rowley, H.V, Wiedemann, S., Tucker, R., Short, M.D. & Schulz, M. 
2010. Red meat production in Australia: Life cycle assessment and comparison 
with overseas studies. Environ. Sci. Technol., 44(4): 13271332.

Ramankutty, N., Gibbs, H.K., Achard, F., Defries, R., Foley, J.A. & Houghton, 
R. A. 2006. Challenges to estimating carbon emissions from tropical deforesta-
tion. Global Change Biol., 13: 5166, 2007.

Ripoli-Bosch, R., de Boer, I.J.M., Bernues, A. & Vellinga, T. 2010. Greenhouse 
gas emissions throughout the life cycle of Spanish lamb-meat: a comparison of 
three production systems. In: Economic, social and environmental sustainability 
in sheep and goat production systems. 7th International Seminar of the FAO-CI-
HEAM Network on Sheep and Goats, Sub- Network on Production Systems, 
Zaragoza, Spain.

87

Schils, R.L.M., de Haan, M.H.A., Hemmer, J.G.A., van den Pol-van Dasselaar, 
A.,  de  Boer,  J.A.,  Evers,  A.G.,  Holshof,  G.,  van  Middelkoop,  J.C.  &  Zom, 
R.L.G. 2007. DairyWise, a whole-farm dairy model. J. Dairy Sc., 90: 53345346.
Thomassen, M. A., Dalgaard, R., Heijungs, R. & de Boer, I. 2008. Attributional 
and consequential LCA of milk production. International Journal of Life Cycle 
Assessment, 13(4): 339349.

UNFCCC. 2009a. 2009 Annex I Party GHG Inventory Submissions. from http://
unfccc.int/national_reports/annex_i_ghg_inventories/national_inventories_
submissions/items/4771.php.

UNFCCC. 2009b. Non-Annex I National Communications. from http://unfccc.

int/national_reports/non-annex_i_natcom/items/2979.php.

Verge, X.P.C., Dyers, J.A., Desjardins, R.L. & Worth, D. 2008. Greenhouse gas 
emissions from the Canadian beef industry. Agricultural Systems, 98(2): 126134.
Weiss, F. & Liep, A. 2012. Greenhouse gas emissions from the EU livestock sector: 
a life cycle assessment carried out with the CAPRI model. Agriculture, Ecosys-
tems & Environment, 149: 124134.

Williams, A., Audsley, E. & Sandars, D.L. 2006. Determining the environmental 
burdens and resource use in the production of agricultural and horticultural com-
modities. DEFRA project report IS0205. Department for Environment, Food 
and Rural Affairs. London.

Wood, S. & Cowie, A. 2004. A review of greenhouse gas emission factors for fer-
tiliser  production.  Research  and  Development  Division,  State  Forests  of  New 
South Wales. Cooperative Research Centre for Greenhouse Accounting for IEA 
Bioenergy Task 38.

Yamaji, K., Ohara, T. & Akimoto, H. 2003. A country-specific, high resolution 
emission  inventory  for  methane  from  livestock  in  Asia  in  2000.  Atmospheric 
Environment, 37: 43934406.

You, L., Crespo, S., Guo, Z. Koo, J., Ojo, W., Sebastian, K., Tenorio, T.N., Wood, 
S. & Wood-Sichra, U. 2010. Spatial Production Allocation Model (SPAM) 2000, 
Version 3. Release 2. Available at http://MapSPAM.info

Zervas, G. & Tsiplakou, E. 2012. An assessment of GHG emissions from small 
ruminants in comparison with GHG emissions from large ruminants and mono-
gastric livestock. Atmospheric Environment, 49: 1323.

Zhou, J.B., Jiang, M.M., & Chen, G.Q. 2007. Estimation of methane and nitrous 
oxide emission from livestock and poultry in China during 19492003. Energy 
Policy, 35: 37593767

88

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsAppendices

List of tables

A1. 

A2. 
 

A3. 

A4. 
 

B1. 

B2. 

B3.  

B4. 

B5. 

B6. 

B7. 

B8. 

B9. 

B10.  

B11.  

B12.  

B13.  

B14.  

B15.  

B16.  

B17.  
 

B18.  
 

B19.  

B20.  

B21.  

B22.  
 
 

B23.  

C1.  
 

C2.  
 

Estimated average level of mechanization by region 

Summary of the allocation techniques used in the calculation of  
plant-based feed emissions  

Example of allocation between edible products from dairy production 

Example of allocation between non-edible (wool) and edible products  
from sheep dairy production 

Spatial resolution of the main input variables 

Herd parameters for dairy cattle, regional averages 

Herd parameters for beef cattle, regional averages 

Herd parameters for goats, regional averages 

Herd parameters for sheep, regional averages 

Herd parameters for buffalo, regional averages 

Dairy cattle feed ration, regional averages 

Beef cattle feed ration, regional averages 

Dairy buffalo feed ration, regional averages 

Buffalo meat feed ration, regional averages 

Small ruminant milk feed ration, regional averages 

Small ruminant meat feed ration, regional averages 

Calculated feed digestibility, regional averages 

Emissions factors for fuel consumption 

Dairy cattle manure management systems, regional averages 

Beef cattle manure management systems, regional averages 

Buffalo milk production manure management systems,  
regional averages 

Buffalo meat production manure management systems,  
regional averages 

Small ruminant manure management systems, regional averages 

Dressing percentages for large ruminants  

Dressing percentages for small ruminants  

Percentage of dairy and beef herds, ratio of beef production from  
cattle herds and emission allocation factor for milk and meat  
from the dairy herd 

Emission allocation factors for sheep 

Global area expansion for selected crops with highest area expansion  
(1990-2006) 

Average annual land-use change rates in Argentina and Brazil  
(1990-2006) 

91

101

103

107

108

112

113

114

114

115

115

117

117

118

118

119

119

120

120

120

121

121

121

122

122

123

123

124

134

135

C3.  

C4.  

C5.  

C6.  

C7.  

C8.  

C9.  

C10.  
 

C11.  
 

C12.  

C13.  
 

C14.  
 

D1.  
 

D2.  

D3.  
 

D4.  

D5.  

D6.  

E1.  

E2.  
 

E3. 
 

E4.  

E5.  

E6.  

E7.  
 

E8.  

E9.  
 

E10.  

F1.  

F2.  
 

F3.  
 

Net changes in area for main land use categories (19902006) 

Pasture expansion against forestland in Latin America (1990-2006) 

Country specific estimates of above-and below-ground biomass 

Default soil organic C stocks for mineral soils 

Soil organic carbon pool at 0-30 cm depth 

Alternative approaches for soybean LUC emissions calculations 

Summary of soybean LUC emission intensity for the four approaches 

Proportion of expanded soybean area derived from each land use  
category 

Estimated changes in pasture area and annual carbon losses for  
the reduced time-frame approach 

Soybean LUC emissions per unit of output and hectare 

Comparison of studies on LUC associated with pasture expansion  
in Brazil  

Total GHG emissions from the ruminant sector in the European Union  
and changes in C stocks in permanent pasture 

Average regional specific CO2 emissions per MJ from electricity and  
heat generation 

Emission intensity for road transport 

Average emissions intensities associated with road transport  
from plant to retail 

International trade in beef, 2005 

Emission intensity for ocean transport 

Regional emission factors for processing of beef and lamb 

Typology of animal housing considered in this assessment  

An example of a life cycle inventory for a high investment structure  
for small ruminants 

Allocation of embedded energy in housing  an example for small  
ruminants in arid zones in OECD countries 

Milking, cooling and storage equipment considered in this assessment 

Average emission factors for embedded energy for dairy cattle  

136

137

138

140

140

141

143

143

144

145

146

147

154

157

157

158

158

159

162

162

162

164

165

Average emission factors for embedded energy for dairy sheep and goats   165

Total on-farm direct energy use and associated emissions for  
high level dairy farms 

Emissions from direct energy for different levels of mechanization 

Emission factors for direct on-farm energy use for dairy cow milk  
production in OECD and non-OECD countries 
Regional emission factors for direct on-farm energy use 

Beef cattle products and by-products, by type of use 

Total revenue from one adult cattle sold by the slaughterhouse and  
share of by-products  

Emissions intensity of beef with and without allocation to slaughter 
by-products in Western Europe 

165

166

166
167

171

173

173

92

List of figures

A1. 

A2. 

C1. 

C2. 

C3. 
 

C4. 

Schematic representation of GLEAM 

Structure of herd dynamics for cattle 

Net land conversion between 1990 and 2006, by region 

Maize and soybean area expansion between 1990 and 2006, by region 

Main soil classes in Latin American forested areas based on the World  
Reference Base for Soil Resources classification 

Annual forest loss in Brazil 

97

98

133

134

 

139

144

93

APPENDIX A
The Global livestock environmental 
assessment model (GLEAM)

1. IntroDuC tIon
The Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model (GLEAM) is a process-
based static model that simulates the functioning of livestock production systems. 
The current version of the model (V1.0) focuses primarily on the quantification of 
GHG emissions, but future versions will include other processes and flows for the 
assessment of other environmental impacts, such as those related to water, nutrient 
and land use. 

The model differentiates the 11 main livestock commodities, which are: meat and 
milk from cattle, sheep, goats and buffalo; meat from pigs; and meat and eggs from 
chickens. It calculates the GHG emissions and production for a given production 
system within a defined spatial area, thereby enabling the calculation of the emis-
sion intensity for combinations of commodities, farming systems and locations. 

The main purpose of this appendix is to explain the way in which GLEAM calcu-
lates the emission intensity of livestock products. The input data used in GLEAM 
(and associated issues of data quality and management) are addressed in Appen-
dix B. The focus of this appendix is on:

	providing an overview of the main stages of the calculations;
	outlining the formulae used; and 
	explaining some of the key assumptions and methodological choices made.

2. ModEL ovErviEw
The model is GIS-based and consists of:

	input data layers;
	routines  written  in  Python  (http://www.python.org/)  that  calculate  inter-

mediate and output parameters; and 

	procedures  for  running  the  model,  checking  calculations  and  extracting 

output.

The basic spatial unit used in the GIS is a cell of 3 arc minutes. The emissions and 
production are calculated for each cell using input data of varying levels of spatial 
resolution (see Appendix B). The overall structure of GLEAM is shown in Figure 
A1, and the purpose of each module summarized below. 

	The herd module starts with the total number of animals of a given species 
and system within a cell (see Appendix B for a brief description of the way 
in which the total animal numbers are determined). The module also deter-
mines the herd structure (i.e. the number of animals in each cohort group, 
and the rate at which animals move between cohort groups) and the charac-
teristics of the average animal in each cohort (e.g. weight and growth rate). 
	The manure module calculates the rate at which excreted N is applied to 

pasture and crops.

95

	The feed module calculates key feed parameters, i.e. the nutritional content 

and emissions per kg of the feed ration. 

	The  system  module  calculates  each  animals  energy  requirement,  and  the 
total amount of animal product (milk, meat and fibre) produced in the cell 
each year. It also calculates the total annual emissions arising from manure 
management, enteric fermentation and feed production. 

	The  allocation  module  combines  the  emissions  from  the  system  module 
with the emissions calculated outside GLEAM, i.e. emissions arising from 
(a)  direct  on-farm  energy  use;  (b)  the  construction  of  farm  buildings  and 
manufacture of equipment; and (c) post-farm transport and processing. The 
total  emissions  are  then  allocated  to  output  in  the  form  of  products  and 
services  (milk,  meat  and  eggs,  fibre  and  draught  power)  and  the  emission 
intensity per unit of commodity calculated. Each of the stages in the model 
is described in more detail below.

3 HErd ModuLE
The functions of the herd module are to:

	Determinate  the  herd  structure,  i.e.  the  proportion  of  animals  in  each 

cohort, and the rate at which animals move between cohorts; and

	Calculate the characteristics of the animals in each cohort, i.e. the average 

weight and growth rate of adult females and adult males.

Emissions from livestock vary depending on animal type, weight, phase of produc-
tion (e.g. whether lactating or pregnant) and feeding situation. Accounting for these 
variations in a population is important if emissions are to be accurately characterized. 
The use of the IPCC (2006) Tier 2 methodology requires the animal population to 
be categorized into distinct cohorts. Data on animal herd structure are generally not 
available at the national level. Consequently, a specific herd module was developed 
to decompose the herd into cohorts. The herd module characterizes the livestock 
population by cohort, defining the herd structure, dynamics and production. 

Herd structure. The national herd is disaggregated into six cohorts of distinct ani-
mal classes: adult female and adult male, replacement female and replacement male, 
and male and female surplus or fattening animals which are not required for main-
taining the herd. Figure A2 provides an example of a herd structure (in this case for 
cattle). In this assessment it is assumed that all surplus calves are fattened for meat.12 
The key production parameters required for herd modeling include data on mor-
tality, fertility, growth and replacement rates, also known as rate parameters. In 
addition, other parameters are used to define the herd structure. They include:

	the age or weight at which animals transfer between categories e.g. the age 
at  first  parturition  for  replacement  females  or  the  weight  at  slaughter  for 
fattening animals;

	duration of key periods i.e. gestation, lactation, time between servicing; and 
	the ratio of breeding females to males.

12  In some intensive dairy systems, surplus calves may be slaughtered within a few days after birth. 

96

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chains 

d
e
e
f
 
f
o
 
s
n
o

r
o
p
o
r
p

 
.
e
.
i
(
 
s
n
o

a
r
 
l

i

a
m
n
a
 
t
u
o
b
a
 
s
n
o

p
m
u
s
s
A

)
n
o

a
r
 
e
h
t
 
n

i
 
l

a
i
r
e
t
a
m

l

s
d
e
i
y
p
o
r
C

 

 

g
n
i
s
s
e
c
o
r
p
d
n
a
 
t
r
o
p
s
n
a
r
t
 
,
k
r
o
w
d
e
fi
n

l

 

i
 

 

e
s
u
y
g
r
e
n
E

2

O
N
 
r
o
f
 
 
s
r
o
t
c
a
f
 
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
E

s
e
t
a
r
 
n
o

a
c
i
l

 

p
p
a
N
 
c

e
h
t
n
y
S

 

 

 

n
o
i
s
n
a
p
x
e
e
r
u
t
s
a
p
&
n
o

c
u
d
o
r
p
n
a
e
b
y
o
s
 

e
g
n
a
h
c
 
e
s
u
-
d
n
a
L

 

 

s
e
p
y
t
 
l

i

e
u
f
 
t
n
e
r
e
ff
d
 
r
o
f
 
s
r
o
t
c
a
f
 
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
E

 

s
l
a
i
r
e
t
a
m
d
e
e
f
 
f
o
 
s
e
u
a
v

l

 
l

a
n
o

i
r
t
u
N

 
s
r
o
t
c
a
f
 
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e

 
 

e
g
n
a
h
c
 
e
s
u
-
d
n
a
L

r
o
t
c
a
f
 
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e

 

 

H
C
e
c
i
R

4

l

 

a
i
r
e
t
a
m
d
e
e
f
 
h
c
a
e
 
r
o
f
 
a
h
 
r
e
p
 
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e

 

4

 

H
C
d
n
a
O
N

 

2

 
,

2

 

O
C
 
f
o
n
o

a
u
c
l
a
C
 
-

l

 

s
t
c
u
d
o
r
p
-
y
b
d
n
a
 
s
e
u
d
i
s
e
r
 
p
o
r
c
 
,

p
o
r
c
 
o
t
 
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

 

m
e
 
f
o
n
o

a
c
o

l
l

A
 
-

 

n
o

a
r
 
f
o
g
k
 
r
e
p
 
s
e
u
a
v

l

 
l

 

a
n
o

i
r
t
u
n
d
n
a
 
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

 

m
e
 
f
o
n
o

a
u
c
l
a
C
 
-

l

n
o

a
r
 
n

i
 
l

 

 

a
i
r
e
t
a
m
d
e
e
f
 
h
c
a
e
 
f
o
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p
 
f
o
n
o

a
n
m
r
e
t
e
D

i

 

 
-

E
L
U
D
O
M
D
E
E
F

 

 

s
g
g
e
d
n
a
k
l
i

 

m

 
,
t
a
e
m

i

 
f
o
 
t
n
e
t
n
o
c
 
n
e
t
o
r
p
 
r
o
f
 
s
e
u
a
V

l

a
h
 
r
e
p
d
e

 

i
l

 

 

p
p
a
N
e
r
u
n
a
m

 

 
f
o
g
k
*

 

e
r
u
n
a
m

 

 

 
f
o
e
t
a
r
 
f
o
n
o

a
u
c
l
a
C

l

s
p
o
r
c
 
&
 
s
s
a
r
g
o
t
 
n
o

a
c
i
l

 

p
p
a

e
r
u
t
c
u
r
t
s
 
d
r
e
h
 
f
o
n
o

a
u
c
l
a
C

l

 

 

E
L
U
D
O
M
E
R
U
N
A
M

E
L
U
D
O
M
D
R
E
H

 

 

d
n
a
 
,
y
t
i
l


r
e
f
 
,
y
t
i
l

a
t
r
o
m

 
.
g
.
e
(
 
s
r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
p
d
r
e
H

 

)
s
e
t
a
r
 
t
n
e
m
e
c
a
p
e
r

l

 

n
e
v
i
g
a
 
f
o

 

 
,
l
l

e
c
 
a
n

 

i

i
 
s
l
a
m
n
a
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
n

 
 
l

a
t
o
T

 

i

)
s
g
p
d
r
a
y
k
c
a
b

 
.
g
.
e
(
 
s
e
i
c
e
p
s
 
d
n
a
m
e
t
s
y
s

 

M
A
E
L
G

 

 
f
o
n
o
i
t
a
t
n
e
s
e
r
p
e
r
 
c
i
t
a
m
e
h
c
S

 
.

1
A
 
e
r
u
g
F

i

 

M
D
g
k
 
r
e
p
E
G
d
n
a
E
D

 

 

 

 
,
E
  M

 

M
D
g
k
/
N
g
k

 

 

M
D
g
k
/
q
e
-

O
C
g
k

 

2

 

M
D
g
k
/
a
h

****

 

i

i

d
o
o
f
 
r
o
f
 
g
n
g
n
e
v
a
c
s
 
r
o
g
n
g
n
a
r
 
s
l
a
m
n
a
 
r
o
f
 
d
e
r
i
u
q
e
r
 
y
g
r
e
n
e

i

 
l

a
n
o

d
d
a

i

 

 

 

e
h
t
 
r
o
f
 
t
n
u
o
c
c
a
o
t
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
e
c
n
a
n
e
t
n
a
m
e
h
t
 
s
t
s
u
d
a


j

i

 

 

 
l

e
v
e

l
 
y
t
i
v

c
A

 
l

 

a
u
n
n
a
e
g
a
r
e
v
a
 
.
g
.
e
 
,
s
r
e
t
e
m
a
r
a
p

 
l

 

a
t
n
e
m
n
o
r
i
v
n
e
d
e
t
c
e
e
s
 
n
o
a
t
a
D

l

 

s
e
t
a
r
 
g
n
h
c
a
e

i

l
 
,
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t

 

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
t
n
e
m
e
g
a
n
a
m
e
r
u
n
a
m

 

 
r
o
f
 
s
r
o
t
c
a
f
 
n
o
i
s
s
i

 

m
e
O
N
d
n
a

 

2

 

4

H
C

d
e
g
a
n
a
m

 
s
i
 

 

e
r
u
n
a
m
w
o
h
 
t
u
o
b
a
 
s
n
o

p
m
u
s
s
A

 

y
t
i
c
a
p
a
c
 
g
n
i
c
u
d
o
r
p
e
n
a
h
t
e
m
m
u
m
i
x
a
m
e
r
u
n
a
m

o
B

 

 

 

 

E
L
U
D
O
M
M
E
T
S
Y
S

 

t
r
o
h
o
c
 
h
c
a
e
n

 

 

s
e
t
a
r
 
h
t
w
o
r
g
d
n
a
 
s
t
h
g
e
w
e
g
a
r
e
v
A

i

i

i
 
s
l
a
m
n
a
 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N
**

 

97

n
o

e
r
c
x
e
N
d
n
a
 
s
d

 

 

i
l

l

o
s
 
e

a
o
v

l

 
f
o
 
s
e
t
a
r
 
s

l
a
m
n
a
h
c
a
e
 
-

i

 

s
g
g
e
/
k
l
i

m

/
t
a
e
m

 

 
f
o
n
o

c
u
d
o
r
p

 
l

a
t
o
t
 
-

 

e
r
u
n
a
m
m
o
r
f
 
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e
 
-

e
n
a
h
t
e
m
 
c
i
r
e
t
n
e
 
-

s
t
n
e
m
e
r
i
u
q
e
r
 
y
g
r
e
n
e
 
s

l
a
m
n
a
h
c
a
e
 
-

i

 

e
k
a
t
n

i
 

d
e
e
f
 
s

l
a
m
n
a
h
c
a
e
 
-

i

 

d
e
e
f
 

m
o
r
f
 
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e
 
-

 

:
f
o
n
o

a
u
c
l
a
C

l

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p
 
t
a
e
m
e
e
r
f
-
e
n
o
b

 

t
n
e
t
n
o
c
 
n
e
t
o
r
p

i

 

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p
g
n
i
s
s
e
r
d

 

 
:
s
r
o
t
c
a
f
 
n
o
i
s
r
e
v
n
o
C

y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
 
l

 

i

a
m
n
a
h
c
a
e
 
r
o
f
 
)
s
g
g
e
d
n
a
k
l
i

 

 

m

 
,
t
a
e
m

 
f
o
(
 
n
o

c
u
d
o
r
p

 
l

y
r
o
g
e
t
a
c
 
l

 

i

a
m
n
a
h
c
a
e
 
r
o
f
 
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

m
e

 
l

 

E
L
U
D
O
M
N
O
I
T
A
C
O
L
L
A

a
t
o
T

a
t
o
T
**

 

S
N
O
I
S
S
I
M
E
M
R
A
F
T
S
O
P

 

t
c
u
d
o
r
p
 
f
o
g
k
 
r
e
p
 
s
n
o
i
s
s
i

 

 

m
e
e
h
t
 
f
o
n
o

a
u
c
l
a
C

l

 

S
N
O
I
S
S
I
M
E
Y
G
R
E
N
E
T
C
E
R
D
N

I

 

I
 

 

D
N
A
T
C
E
R
D

I

 

l

e
g
d
e
w
o
n
k
 
t
r
e
p
x
e
d
n
a
 
s
e
s
a
b
a
t
a
d
g
n

s
i
x
e
 
,

 

w
e
i
v
e
r
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
t
i
l
 

m
o
r
f
 
n
e
k
a
t
 
a
t
a
d
 
t
u
p
n

I

)
d
e
t
a
r
e
n
e
g

 
l

e
d
o
m

 

(
 
a
t
a
d
e
t
a
d
e
m
r
e
t
n

i

I

*

.
s
r
o
h
t
u
A

 
:
e
c
r
u
o
S

Appendix A - The Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model (GLEAM)Figure A2. 
Structure of herd dynamics for cattle

Calves

Calves

Adult female

In-calf heifers

Replacement female

Adult male

Young bulls and oxen

Replacement male

Male and female
surplus calves 

Sale
Death

Sale
Death

Sale
Death

Sale
Death

Sale
Death

Source: Authors.

4. MAnurE  ModuLE
The function of the manure module is to calculate the rate at which excreted N is 
applied to feed crops.

The manure module calculates the amount of manure N collected and applied to 

grass and cropland in each cell by:

	calculating the amount of N excreted in each cell by multiplying the number 

of each animal type in the cell by the average N excretion rates;

	calculating the proportion of the excreted N that is lost during manure man-
agement and subtracting it from the total N, to arrive at the net N available 
for application to land; and 

	dividing the net N by the area of (arable and grass) land in the cell to deter-

mine the rate of N application per ha.

5. FEEd ModuLE
The functions of the feed module are to:

	Calculate the composition of the ration for each species, system and loca-

tion;

	Calculate the nutritional values of the ration per kg of feed DM; and
	Calculate of GHG emissions and land use per kg of DM of ration.

The feed module determines the diet of the animal, i.e. the percentage of each 
feed material in the ration, and calculates the emissions (N2O, CO2 and CH4) aris-
ing from the production, processing and transport of the feed. It allocates the emis-
sions to crop co-products such as crop residues or meals) and calculates the emis-
sion intensity per kg of feed. It also calculates the nutritional value of the ration, in 
terms of its energy and N content. 

5.1 determination of the ration
Animal rations are generally a combination of different feed ingredients. For rumi-
nants, three broad categories of feed are considered: roughages, by-products and 
concentrates. Typically, major feed ingredients include:

98

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chains	Grass: ranges from natural pasture and roadsides to improved and cultivated 

grasslands and leys.

	Feed  crops:  crops  specially  grown  to  feed  livestock,  e.g.  maize  silage  or 

grains.

	Tree leaves: browsed in forests or collected and carried to livestock.
	Crop  residues:  plant  material  left  over  from  food  or  other  crops,  such  as 

straw or stover, left over after harvesting.

	Agro-industrial by-products and wastes: by-products from the processing 
of non-feed crops such as oilseeds, cereals, sugarcane, and fruit. Examples 
include cottonseed cakes, rapeseed cakes and brans.

	Concentrates: high quality mixtures of by-products and feed that are pro-

cessed at specialized feed mills into compound feed.

In all livestock production systems, the composition of the feed ration depends 
on the availability of pasture and fodder, the crops grown and their respective yields. 
The fraction of concentrates in the ration varies widely, according to the need to 
complement locally available feed, the purchasing power of farmers, and access to 
markets. While actual diets will vary depending on what crops are grown locally and 
the price of feed crops, the balance of forage, crops and by-products must be reason-
able in order to match animal performance. The proportion of each feed component 
is determined differently for industrialized and developing country regions: 

	for the industrialized regions, the composition (i.e. feed materials) and rela-
tive portions of the feed ration materials are taken from country national 
inventory reports, literature and targeted surveys. 

	for  developing  countries,  due  to  scanty  information,  a  feed  allocation 
scheme was devised based on literature and expert knowledge. This alloca-
tion scheme assumes that in developing regions there is a close relationship 
between land use and the feed ration. 

Feed allocation scheme for developing countries. The feed allocation scheme is based 
on the availability of feed resources (crops and forage) and animal requirements. 
The determination of the feed ration is outlined stepwise below: 

1.  Define the proportion of by-products and concentrates in the ration (based 
on surveys, literature and expert knowledge) and the difference is considered 
roughages. 

2.  Calculate the total roughage availability in each pixel based on the dry mat-
ter yields per hectare of pasture, fodder and crop residues and the land area 
of the respective feeds. Data for this calculation was obtained from a number 
of sources: FAOSTAT for specific crops (e.g. fodder beet, soybean, rapeseed, 
cottonseed, sugar beet and palm fruit); You et al. (2010) from the Spatial Pro-
duction Allocation Model (SPAM) for 20 crops; and Haberl et al. (2007) to 
estimate the above-ground net primary productivity for pasture. 

3.  Feed requirements for all ruminant species were then assessed. This was done 
by expressing the different ruminant species and categories of animals in cat-
tle equivalent, to take into account the fact that these animals are competing 
for the same feed resource. 

4.  To assess the feed availability, a ratio between the total roughage availability 
(calculated in 2 above) and ruminant species biomass (in cow equivalent cal-
culated in 3 above) was obtained. 

99

Appendix A - The Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model (GLEAM)5.  Total ruminant annual feed requirements are then calculated for the total cow 
equivalent  based  on  the  assumption  that  an  animal  consumes  about  2  to  3 
percent of its bodyweight on a daily basis and hence, on an annual basis, DMI 
will range between 7.3 and 14 kg DM.

6.  The total amount of roughage feed available is then compared with the animal 
feed requirements within each cell. Comparing the total feed availability with 
the animal requirements provides an indication of feed adequacy in terms of 
sufficiency, deficiency or surplus for any given location. An area can be clas-
sified based on the dry matter availability and generally a dry matter avail-
ability of less than 2 percent of the bodyweight can be considered as a deficit, 
dry matter availability between 2 and 3 percent can be considered as adequate, 
and above 3 percent can be considered as surplus. In situations where ample 
feed is not available to meet the requirements of the animals (i.e. less than 2 
percent), the feed ration is supplemented with leaves and hay.

7.  The proportion of each roughage material within the feed ration is then ob-
tained  by  dividing  the  quantity  available  of  each  roughage  material  by  the 
total available roughage. 

8.  The proportions of the roughage materials (calculated in 7 above) plus the 
by-products and concentrate proportions (defined in 1 above) form the total 
feed ration which sums to 100.

Tables B7 to B12 in Appendix B present the average feed rations and the pro-
portions of the different feed materials within the feed ration for the worlds main 
regions and species. 

5.2 determination of the rations nutritional values
Nutritional values such as the digestibility and N-content of each individual feed 
material  are  used  to  calculate  the  nutritional  value  of  animal  feed  rations.  These 
nutritional values are multiplied by the percentage of each feed material in the ra-
tion to arrive at the average energy and N content per kg of DM for the ration as a 
whole. Table B13 in Appendix B compares regional variation in digestibility of feed 
rations for ruminant species.

5.3 determination of the rations GHG emissions and land use per kg  
of dM from feed 
The categories of GHG emission included in the assessment of each feed materials 
emissions are:

	direct and indirect N2O from grass and crop cultivation;
	CO2 arising from loss of above and below ground carbon brought by land-

use change;

	CO2 from the on-farm energy use associated with field operations (tillage, 

manure application, etc.) and crop drying and storage;

	CO2 arising from the manufacture of fertilizer;
	CO2 arising from crop transport; and
	CO2 arising from off-farm crop processing.

A brief outline of how the emissions were calculated is provided below. 

Determination of feed emissions: N2O from pasture and crop cultivation. Nitrous 
oxide emissions from cropping include direct N2O, and indirect N2O from leach-

100

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsing and volatilization of ammonia. It was calculated using the IPCC (2006) Tier 1 
methodology. Synthetic N application rates were defined for each crop at a national 
level, based on existing data sets (primarily FAOs fertilizer use statistics, http://
www.fao.org/ag/agp/fertistat/index_en.htm) and adjusted down where yields were 
below certain thresholds. Manure N application rates were calculated in the manure 
module. Crop residue N was calculated using the crop yields and the IPCC (2006, 
Volume 4, Chapter 11, p. 11.17) crop residue formulae.

Determination of pasture and crop emissions: CO2 from land-use change. The ap-
proach for estimating emissions from land-use change is presented in Appendix C.

Determination of feed emissions: CO2 from fertilizer manufacture. The manufac-
ture of synthetic fertilizer is an energy-intensive process, which can produce sig-
nificant amounts of GHG emissions, primarily via the use of fossil fuels, or through 
electricity generated using fossil fuels. The emissions per kg of fertilizer N will vary 
depending on the factors such as the type of fertilizer, the efficiency of the produc-
tion  process,  the  way  in  which  the  electricity  is  generated,  and  the  distance  the 
fertilizer is transported. Due to the lack of reliable data on these parameters, and on 
fertilizer trade flow, the average European fertilizer emissions factor of 6.8 kg CO2-
eq per kg of ammonium nitrate N in all regions was used (Jenssen and Kongshaug, 
2003), which includes N2O emissions arising during manufacture. 
 
Determination of feed emissions: CO2 from field operations. Energy is used on-farm 
for a variety of field operations required for crop cultivation, such as tillage, prepa-
ration of the seed bed, sowing and application of synthetic and organic fertilizers, 
crop protection and harvesting. The type and amount of energy required per ha, or 
kg, of each feed material parent crop was estimated. In some countries, field opera-
tions are undertaken using non-mechanized power sources, i.e. human or animal 
labour. The energy consumption rates were adjusted to reflect the proportion of 
the  field  operations  undertaken  using  non-mechanized  power  sources.  Table  A1 
gives an indication of the average level of mechanization per region. From the level 
of mechanization, we also inferred reliance on animal draught power in the country, 
and therefore the bull to cow ratio in the herd. The emissions arising from field-
work per ha of each crop were calculated by multiplying the amount of each energy 
type consumed per ha, by the emissions factor for that energy source.

Table A1. Estimated average level of mechanization by region
Continent

Estimated rate of mechanisation (percentage)

Africa

Asia

Central and South America

Europe

North America

Oceania

Source: FAOSTAT (2009).

16

78

96

100

100

100

101

Appendix A - The Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model (GLEAM)Determination of feed emissions: CO2 from transport and processing. Pasture and 
crop  residues,  by  definition,  are  transported  minimal  distances  and  are  allocated 
zero emissions for transport. Non-local feeds are assumed to be transported be-
tween 100 km and 700 km by road to their place of processing. In countries where 
more of the feed is consumed than is produced (i.e. net importers), feed that are 
known to be transported globally (e.g. soybean meal) also receive emissions that 
reflect  typical  sea  transport  distances.  Emissions  from  processing  arise  from  the 
energy consumed in activities such as milling, crushing and heating, which are used 
to process whole crop materials into specific products. Therefore, this category of 
emissions applies primarily to feeds in the by-product category. 

Determination of feed emissions: CO2 from blending and transport of compound 
feed. Energy is used in feed mills for blending non-local feed materials to produce 
compound feed and to transport it to its point of sale. It was assumed that 186 MJ 
of electricity and 188 MJ of gas were required to blend 1 000 kg of DM, and that the 
average transport distance was 200 km.

5.4 Allocation of emissions between crop and its by-products
In order to calculate the emission intensity of the feed materials, emissions need 
to be allocated between the crop and its by-products, i.e. the crop residue or by-
products of crop processing used as feed. The general expression used is:

GHGkgDM  =  GHGha/(DMYGcrop  FUEcrop+DMYGby  FUEby)  EFA/MFA

=  emissions per ha

where:
 
GHGkgDM  =  emissions (of CO2, N2O, or CH4) per kg of dry matter
GHGha 
DMYGcrop  =  gross crop yield (kgDM/ha)
DMYGby 
FUEcrop 
FUEby 
 
EFA 
 
MFA 
 

=  gross crop residue or by-product yield (kgDM/ha)
= 
= 
 
=  economic fraction, crop or co-product value as a fraction of the  
 
=  mass fraction, crop or co-product mass as a fraction of the total 
  mass (of the crop and co-product)

feed use efficiency, i.e. fraction of crop gross yield harvested
feed  use  efficiency,  i.e.  fraction  of  crop  residue  or  by-product 
gross yield harvested

total value (of the crop and co-product) 

Dry matter yields and estimated harvest fractions were used to determine the 
mass fractions. Where crop residues were not used for feed or bedding, they were 
assumed to have a value of zero, i.e. 100 percent of the emissions were allocated to 
the crop. 

Allocation techniques of feed emissions is summarized in Table A2. Emissions 
from post-processing blending and transport are allocated entirely to feed. It should 
be highlighted that emissions that are not allocated to feed do not cease to exist. 
Rather, they are allocated to other commodities. Failure to follow this approach 
may lead to incorrect policy conclusions. 

102

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsTable A2. Summary of the allocation techniques used in the calculation of  
plant-based feed emissions 
Products

Allocation technique

Source of emissions

All feed crops and their 
by-products

N2O from manure application
N2O from synthetic fertilizer
CO2 from fertilizer manufacture
CO2 from fieldwork

Allocation between the crop and 
co-product is based on the mass 
harvested, and the relative  
economic values (using digest-
ibility as a proxy)

By-products only

CO2 from processing 
CO2 from LUC (for soybean)

Feed produced off-farm

CO2 from transportation and 
blending

Allocated to the processing  
by-products based on mass and 
economic value
100 percent to feed material

Source: Authors.

6. SySTEM ModuLE
The functions of the system module are to:

	Calculate the average energy requirement (MJ) and feed intake (kg DM) of 

each animal cohort;

	Calculate the total feed emissions and land use arising from the production, 

processing and transport of the feed;

	Calculate the CH4 and emissions arising during the management of manure; 
	Calculate enteric CH4 emissions.

6.1 Calculation of animal energy requirement 
The  system  module  calculates  the  energy  requirements  of  each  animal,  which  is 
then used to determine the feed intake (in kg of DM). The model uses the IPCC 
Tier 2 algorithms (IPCC, 2006 Volume 4, Chapter 10, Equations 10.3 to 10.13) to 
calculate energy requirements for each animal sub-category. The gross energy re-
quirement is the sum of the requirements for maintenance, lactation and pregnancy, 
animal activity, weight gain and production.13 The method estimates a maintenance 
requirement (as a function of live-weight and energy expended in feeding); a pro-
duction energy requirement influenced by the level of productivity (e.g. milk yield, 
live-weight gain, wool production); physiological state (pregnancy and lactation); 
and the stage of maturity of the animal. Based on production and management prac-
tices, the net energy and feed requirements of all animals are first calculated, taking 
into account the following parameters: 

	Weight.  Larger  animals  need  more  energy  for  maintenance  than  smaller 

ones. 

	Production. The output from animals can be milk and meat, but also non-
edible products and services. Data on production of edible and non-edible 
products is taken from literature and statistical databases. In general terms, 
a higher production or more labour per day requires more energy and thus 
more feed per day. 

13  Total production is computed on the basis of herd parameters (reproduction, mortality, etc.) and productivity 

parameters (such as milk yield and weight gain) used in the analysis. Consequently, total production may not be 
consistent with total production in the FAOSTAT database.

103

Appendix A - The Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model (GLEAM)	Production/feeding  environment  (Grazing  or  stall  feeding).  Animals  in 
ranging systems that have to search for their feed (often over long distances) 
have higher energy requirements than those in grazing systems or stall-fed 
systems. 

6.2 Calculating feed intake, total feed emissions and land use
The feed intake of each animal category (in kg DM/day) is calculated by dividing 
the animals energy requirement by the average energy content of the ration from 
the feed module:

Feed intake (kgDM/animal/day) = total energy requirements (MJ/animal/day)/feed 
energy content (MJ/kgDM)

where: feed energy content = 18.45 (MJ/kgDM)

The feed intake of each cohort is multiplied by the number of animals in each 
group to obtain the total daily feed intake for the entire herd. The feed emissions 
and land use associated with the feed production are then calculated by multiplying 
the total feed intake for the herd by the emissions or land use per kg of DM taken 
from the feed module.

6.3 Calculation of CH4 emissions arising enteric fermentation
Emissions from enteric fermentation (kg CH4/head) are a function of feed digest-
ibility (DE), i.e. the percentage of gross energy intake that is metabolized. An enter-
ic methane conversion factor, Ym (percentage of gross energy converted to methane) 
is used to calculate the methane emissions from enteric fermentation. A Tier 2 ap-
proach is applied for the calculation of enteric CH4 emissions due to the sensitivity 
of emissions to diet composition and the relative importance of enteric CH4 to the 
overall GHG emissions profile in ruminant production. The IPCC (2006) defines 
the CH4 conversion factor (Ym) as 6.51 percent, indicating that Ym is at the high 
end of the range when digestibility of feed is low and vice versa. The Ym value of 
6.5 is realized at a digestibility of 65 percent. To better reflect the wide-ranging diet 
quality and feeding characteristics globally, this assessment developed specific Ym 
values based on the following formula: 

= 9.75 - 0.05  DE
Ym Cattle  
Ym mature sheep = 9.75 - 0.05  DE
Ym lamb<1 year  = 9.75 - 0.05  DE

Ym is subsequently used in the following formula to estimate the CH4 emission factor

EFCH4 = (365  GE  (Ym / 100) / 55.65)

where: EFCH4 is the CH4 emission factor (kg CH4 head -1 yr -1); Ym corresponds 
to CH4 conversion factor; GE is the gross energy intake (MJ head-1 day-1) and the 
factor 55.65 (MJ kg CH4) represents the energy content of CH4. 

104

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chains6.4 Calculation of CH4 emissions arising during manure management
Calculating the CH4 per head from manure using a Tier 2 approach requires (a) es-
timation of the rate of excretion of volatile solids per animal, and (b) estimation of 
the proportion of the volatile solids that are converted to CH4. The volatile solids 
excretion rates are calculated using Equation 10.24 from IPCC (2006). Once the 
volatile solids excretion rate is known, the proportion of the volatile solids con-
verted to CH4 during manure management per animal per year can be calculated 
using Equation 10.23 from IPCC (2006).

The CH4 conversion factor depends on how the manure is managed. In this study, 
the manure management categories and emission factors in IPCC (2006, Volume 4, 
Chapter 10, Table 10A-7) were used. The proportion of manure managed in each 
system is based on official statistics (such as the Annex I countries National Inven-
tory Reports to the UNFCCC), other literature sources and expert judgement. 

6.5 Calculation of n2o emissions arising during manure management 
Calculating the N2O per head from manure using a Tier 2 approach requires (a) es-
timation of the rate of N excretion per animal, and (b) estimation of the proportion 
of the excreted N that is converted to N2O.

The N excretion rates are calculated using Equation 10.31 from IPCC (2006) as 
the difference between intake and retention. N-intake depends on the feed dry mat-
ter intake and the N content per kg of feed. The feed dry matter intake depends, in 
turn, on the animals energy requirement (which is calculated in the system module, 
and varies depending on weight, growth rate, milk yield, pregnancy, weight gain 
and lactation rate and level of activity) and the feed energy content (calculated in 
the feed module). N retention is the amount of N retained in, either as growth, 
pregnancy live weight gain or milk. 

The rate of conversion of excreted N to N2O depends on the extent to which the 
conditions required for nitrification, denitrification, leaching and volatilization are 
present during manure management. The IPCC (2006) default emission factors for 
direct N2O (IPCC, 2006 Volume 4, Chapter 10, Table 10.21) and indirect via volatil-
ization (IPCC, 2006 Volume 4, Chapter 10, Table 10.22) are used in this study, along 
with variable leaching rates, depending on the AEZ.

7. ALLoCATion ModuLE
The functions of allocation module are to:

	Sum up the total emissions for each animal cohort;
	Calculate the amount of each commodity (meat, milk, eggs, wool) produced;
	Allocate emissions to each commodity (meat and meat), non-edible outputs 

(fibre and manure used for fuel), draught and services; and

	Calculate total emissions and emission intensity of each commodity.

7.1 Calculation of the total emissions for each animal cohort
The system module calculates the total emissions arising from feed production, ma-
nure management and enteric fermentation. Post farmgate emissions (Appendix D) 
and direct and indirect on-farm energy use (Appendix E) are calculated separately 
and incorporated in the allocation module.

105

Appendix A - The Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model (GLEAM)7.2 Calculation of the amount of each commodity (meat, milk, fibre) produced
Milk. Total milk production was calculated based on average milk production per 
animal and number of milking animals. Total milk is then converted to fat and pro-
tein milk. Using FPCM as the basis for comparison ensures a comparison between 
milk produced by different breeds and feeding regimes. All milk was converted to 
FPCM using the following equations: 

Milk yield from cattle was corrected at 4.0 percent fat and 3.3 percent protein us-
ing the equation: FPCM (kg) = milk production, kg  [0.337+ 0.116  fat, (percent) 
+ 0.06  protein, (percent)]

Milk yield from small ruminants was corrected at 6.5 percent fat and 5.8 per-
cent protein according to Pulina, Macciotta and Nuda (2004) using the equation:  
FPCM (kg) = milk production, kg  [0.25+ 0.085  fat, (percent) + 0.035  protein, 
(percent)]

Buffalo  milk  production  was  expressed  was  corrected  at  4  percent  fat  and  3.1 
percent protein using the following equation (Di Palo, 1992): FPCM (kg) = milk 
production, kg  [1+ 0.011  {(fat, (percent)  10-40) + (10  protein, (percent)-31)}]

Meat.  Total  meat  production  is  calculated  from  the  number  of  live  animals  (per 
cohort group) that leave the farm for slaughter and the live weight at which they 
are sold. Dressing percentages for the conversion of live weight to carcass weight 
are given in Appendix B, Tables B20 and B21. Conversion of carcass to bone-free 
meat is obtained by multiplying by 0.75 and 0.70 for large and small ruminants, 
respectively. The conversion of bone-free meat (BFM) to protein is based on the 
assumption that BFM is 18 percent protein by weight. 

Natural fibre. Total fibre (wool, mohair and cashmere) is estimated by multiplying 
kg of fibre produced per animal by the number of fibre producing animals in the 
herd. 

7.3 Allocation to co-products and calculation of emission intensity
For ruminant species, emissions are allocated between the edible commodities, i.e. 
meat and milk. In reality, there are usually significant amounts of other commodities 
produced during processing, such as skin, feathers and offal. However, the values of 
these can vary markedly between countries, depending on the market conditions, 
which,  in  turn,  depend  on  factors  such  as  food  safety  regulations  and  consumer 
preferences. Allocating no emissions to these can lead to an over-allocation to meat. 
The potential effect of this assumption is explored in Appendix F. Allocation tech-
niques applied in this assessment are discussed below:

Meat and milk. Emissions related to goods and services other than meat and milk 
(e.g.  fibre,  manure  used  for  fuel,  draught  power)  were  first  calculated  separately 
and deducted from the overall system emissions, before emissions were attributed 
to meat and milk.

Within the dairy herd, some animals only produce meat (fattened surplus calves), 
while others contribute to the combined production of meat and dairy products 
(milked  cows,  adult  reproduction  male  animals  and  replacement  stock).  For  the 
latter group, we chose to allocate GHG emissions on the basis of their protein con-

106

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsTable A3. Example of allocation between edible products from dairy production

Part of herd producing milk and meat

(milking cows, adult male, replacement stock)

Part of herd producing meat only

(surplus males and females)

Total emissions (kg CO2-eq)

1 700 000

Milk: 18 000 Meat: 1 500

0.92

0.08

350 000

Meat: 2 500

NA

1

Total protein (kg)

Fraction of milk protein 

Fraction of meat protein

Emission intensity of milk 

Emission intensity of meat 

NA: Not Applicable.
Source: Authors calculations.

= (1 700 000  0.92)/18 000
= 87 kg CO2-eq/kg protein

= [(1 700 000  0.08) + 350 000]/(1 500+2 500)

122 kg CO2-eq/kg protein

tent. Table A3 provides an illustration of how the technique is applied. This method 
reflects the fact that a primary function of the livestock sector is to provide humans 
with  edible  protein.  The  advantages  of  using  protein  content  are  that  it  enables 
direct comparison with other food products and is also relatively stable in time (as 
opposed, for example, to the relative prices of meat and milk) and that it can be ap-
plied in situations where markets are absent or where they are highly localized and 
not comparable across regions. However, a disadvantage is that other nutritional 
properties, such as minerals, vitamins and energy, and essential fatty acids are not 
captured. 

Emissions related to surplus calves fattened for meat production were entirely 
attributed to meat production. However, the emissions related to the production 
of calves, i.e. the pregnancy of the dairy cows and female replacement stocks, were 
allocated to milk because they are an essential input for milk production. No emis-
sions were allocated to the other parts of the slaughtered animal (e.g. skin, horns), 
although these are utilized and represent an economic yield. This may result in a 
slight overestimation of the emissions per kg of carcass weight. In beef herds, all 
emissions were allocated to meat after the deduction of emissions related to draught 
power (in the case of cattle) and fibre (wool, cashmere and mohair) from small ru-
minants. 

Manure. Manure is another by-product of livestock production. The emissions re-
lated to manure were allocated through the subdivision of the production processes:
	Emissions  related  to  manure  storage  were  fully  allocated  to  the  livestock 

system. 

	Emission from manure applied on the land used for feed, food and cash crop 
production  were  allocated  to  livestock  in  situations  where  the  crop  as  a 
whole or in part (e.g. silage, grain, oilseeds) was used for animal nutrition. 
In  situations  where  manure  was  entirely  deposited  on  grassland  and  feed 
crops, no allocation was required because the manure remained within the 
livestock system. On the other hand, where parts of the crop (e.g. crop resi-
dues) were used for feed, emissions were allocated according to the relative 
weight of harvested products used as feed, corrected for digestibility. Due to 

107

Appendix A - The Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model (GLEAM)the absence of an economic value for crop residues, digestibility was used as 
a proxy for economic value. In cases where the crop was not used for animal 
nutrition, emissions were not allocated to livestock.

	Emissions from manure used for fuel at the household level leave the live-
stock system and therefore emissions from burning were not allocated to 
the livestock system. 

	Emissions from manure discharged into the environment were solely attrib-

uted to livestock activities. 

Fibre (wool, cashmere and mohair). Fibre is a by-product of sheep and goat produc-
tion; however in some countries these products can be considered as main products 
of production due to their price leverage and market value. In this study, the alloca-
tion of the carbon footprint to fibre was performed based on the market value of 
all system outputs  meat, milk, and fibre products. The fractions of the economic 
value of the co-product within the total economic value of all products produced 
by a given species were utilized as an allocation factor to partition GHG emissions 
between fibre and the edible products. This fraction was determined as:

Fw = (Woolkg  Pricewool)/(Meatkg  Pricemeat + Milkkg  Pricemilk + Woolkg  Pricewool)

where: Fw is the ratio of economic value of wool to the total economic value of all 
products produced. Similar calculations were performed for countries producing 
cashmere and mohair. Wool, meat and milk represent the mass of the product in kg. 
Table A4 provides an illustration of how the technique is applied. To implement the 
total economic value, producers prices averaged over five years were taken from the 
FAOSTAT price domain, reflecting prices that farmers receive at the farmgate. Sub-
sequent to the deduction of emissions for fibre production from the overall emis-
sions, protein content was then used to allocate emissions between meat and milk. 

Table A4. Example of allocation between non-edible (wool) and edible products from sheep dairy production

Part of herd producing milk, 

meat and wool

Part of herd producing 
meat and wool only

Total emissions (kg CO2-eq)

80 000

Total protein (kg)

Milk: 500

Meat: 50

Milk: 4 000 

Meat: 9 000

0.9

0.1

=80 000  [700/(4 000+9 000+700)]

= 4 088 kg CO2-eq
= 80 000  4 088

= 75 912 kg CO2-eq

20,000

Meat: 200

Wool: 700

NA

1

=20 000  [700/(4 000+9 000+700)]

= 1 022 kg CO2-eq
= 20 000  1 022

= 18 978 kg CO2-eq

Total economic value ($) 

Fraction of milk protein 

Fraction of meat protein

Total emission allocated to 
wool

Total emissions allocated to 
milk and meat
Emission intensity of milk 

Emission intensity of meat 

NA: Not Applicable.
Source: Authors calculations.

= (75 912  0.9)/500

= 138 kg CO2-eq/kg protein

= [(75 912  0.1) + 18 978]/(50+200)

= 104 kg CO2-eq/kg protein

108

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsAnimal draught power. Herd structure, and thus the emissions profile, is affected 
by the use of animals, usually oxen, for labour. The use of animals for draught pow-
er has an influence on the herds sex and age structure which skews towards higher 
ratios of male and older animals. Oxen must grow to maturity before they can be 
used for traction, and this usually takes four years, and therefore they compete with 
other stock for feed and other resources. The animals are then generally used for a 
decade before they are slaughtered. The adult male to female ratio is substantially 
higher than normal when animals are used for draught power because males are 
slaughtered at a later age.

To allocate emissions to draught power services, we first calculated total emis-
sions and meat output from draught animals alone. In a subsequent calculation step, 
emissions related to the meat produced from these animals were estimated as being 
identical to those of meat produced from non-draught animals, slaughtered at an 
earlier age. The difference (accruing from the extra lifetime and the energy require-
ments  for  the  labour  of  draught  animals)  was  then  attributed  to  draught  power 
services.

Capital functions of cattle.  In  any  cattle  production  system,  animals  constitute  a 
form of capital, and can be sold or bought according to investment and cash flow 
requirements. In many pastoral systems, the capital functions of cattle are a particu-
larly important, because they enable the accrual of savings to manage cash needs, 
insure against risk, and manage crises in the absence of adequate financial institu-
tions. Therefore, low replacement rates are often a feature in these systems, because 
cattle  are  often  kept  even  after  their  productivity  drops.  While  the  provision  of 
these capital functions affects the herd structure and emission profiles of these sys-
tems, no emissions were allocated to capital services, due to difficulties in obtaining 
relevant information. 

Slaughter by-products. In addition to the production of carcasses, slaughtering pro-
cesses also produce a whole package of by-products, organs, hide, blood, etc. that 
are utilized for other purposes, often outside the livestock food chain. Thus, the 
allocation of emissions to by-products produced at the slaughterhouse can have a 
major impact on the GHG emission intensity for meat products. This study did not 
explicitly take into account by-products from slaughter due to the lack of reliable 
information and data. However, we explored the impact of their inclusion on emis-
sion intensity of beef in a selected case study (see Appendix F). 

In terms of edible product, ruminants produce both milk and meat. The emis-
sions were allocated between these two commodities, using the following method:
	Quantify  the  total  emissions  from  animals  required  for  milk  and  meat 
production  (adult  female  and  adult  male,  replacement  stock  and  surplus 
animals).

	Deduct emissions related to draft power (for large ruminants), and manure 

used for fuel based on the approaches outlines above.

	For  the  dairy  sector,  which  produces  both  milk  and  meat,  emissions  are 
allocated on a protein basis (see Tables A3 and A4). For small ruminants, 
allocation  is  first  performed  between  the  edible  and  non-edible  products 
based on economic value and subsequently protein content is used to allo-
cate between milk and meat.

109

Appendix A - The Global Livestock Environmental Assessment Model (GLEAM)rEFErEnCE s
Di Palo, R. 1992. Produzione lattea nella bufala con diete tradizionali e con impiego 

di acidi grassi. PhD thesis, Universita di Napoli.

FAO.  2007.  Gridded  livestock  of  the  world  2007  by  Wint,  W.  and  Robinson,  T. 

FAO. Rome.

FERTISTAT. 2009. Fertilizer use statistics, FAO. http://www.fao.org/ag/agp/fer-

tistat/index_en.htm.

Haberl, H., Erb, K. H., Krausmann, F., Gaube, V., Bondeau, A., Plutzar, C., Gin-
grich,  S.,  Lucht  W.  &  Fischer-Kowalski  M.  2007.  Quantifying  and  mapping 
the global human appropriation of net primary production in Earths terrestrial 
ecosystem. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA 104: 
12942-12947.

IPCC. 2006. 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories, Vol-
ume 4: Agriculture, Forestry and Other Land Use. Intergovernmental Panel on 
Climate Change. Prepared by the National Greenhouse Gas Inventories Pro-
gramme, Eggleston, H.S., Buendia, L., Miwa, K., Ngara, T. & Tanabe K. eds. 
Published: IGES, Japan. 

Jenssen, T.K. & Kongshaug, G. 2003. Energy consumption and greenhouse gas 
emissions in fertiliser production. IFS Proceedings No.509. International Fer-
tiliser Society. York.

Pulina, G., Macciotta, N. & Nuda, A. 2004. Milk composition and feeding in the 

Italian dairy sheep. Ital. J. Anim. Sci., 4(SUPPL. 1): 5-14.

You, L., Crespo, S., Guo, Z., Koo, J., Ojo, W., Sebastian, K., Tenorio, T.N., Wood, 
S. & Wood-Sichra, U. 2010. Spatial Production Allocation Model (SPAM) 2000, 
Version 3. Release 2. Available at http://MapSPAM.info.

110

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsAPPENDIX B
Data and data sources 

This appendix presents the main data utilized in this assessment. The data can 
be  classified  into basic  input  data  and intermediate  data.  Basic  input  data  can 
be  defined  as  primary  data  such  as  animal  numbers,  herd  parameters,  mineral 
fertilizer application rates, temperature, crop yields, etc. and are data taken from 
other sources such as literature, databases, and surveys. Intermediate data are an 
output of the modelling procedure required in further calculation in GLEAM 
and may include data on growth rates, animal cohort groups, feed rations, animal 
energy requirements, feed intake, etc. 

1. Data resolution anD Disaggregation
Data availability, quality and resolution vary according to the parameter and the 
country in question. In OECD countries, where farming tends to be more regu-
lated,  there  are  often  comprehensive  national  or  regional  data  sets,  and  in  some 
cases sub-national data (e.g. for manure management in U.S. dairy). Conversely, in 
many non-OECD countries, data are unavailable, necessitating the use of regional 
default values (e.g. herd parameters). Examples of the spatial resolution of some key 
parameters are given in Table B1.

2. HerD 
Livestock distributions. Maps of the spatial distribution of each animal species and 
production systems are one of the key inputs into the GLEAM model. Total ru-
minant numbers at a national level are reported in FAOSTAT. The spatial distribu-
tions used in this study were based on maps developed in the context of FAOs 
Gridded Livestock of the World (FAO, 2007).

Herd parameters. The national herd is disaggregated into cohorts according to six 
animal classes: adult female and male, replacement female and male, and male and 
female surplus or fattening animals that are not required for maintaining the herd 
and are kept for meat production only. The key biological parameters required for 
herd modelling incorporate data on mortality, fertility and growth rate, also known 
as rate parameters.

	Fertility parameters: data on fertility are usually incorporated in the form 
of parturition rates (e.g. calving, kidding, lambing rates), and are normally 
defined as the number of births occurring in a specified female population 
in a year. For cattle, the number of births per year is assumed to be one. 
However, in the case of small ruminants, litter size is taken into account. 
The model utilizes age-specific fertility rates for adult and young replace-
ment  females.  The  proportion  of  breeding  females  that  fail  to  conceive  is 
also included.

	Mortality  rates:  data  on  mortality  are  incorporated  in  the  form  of  death 
rates. In the modelling process, age specific death rates are used; mortality 
rate in calves and mortality rate in other animal categories. The death rate of 

111

Table B1. Spatial resolution of the main input variables
Parameters

Cell1

Subnational

X

X

X

Herd 

Animal numbers

Weights

Mortality, fertility and replacement data

Manure

N losses rates

Management system

Leaching rates

Feed

Crop yields

Harvested area

Synthetic N fertilizer rate

N residues

Feed ration

X

X

X

 X3

Digestibility and energy content

N content

Energy use in fieldwork, transport and 
processing
Transport distances

Land-use change

Soybean (area and trade)

Pasture (area and deforestation rate)

Animal productivity 

Yield (milk, eggs, and fibers)

Dressing percentage

Fat and protein content

Product farmgate prices6

Postfarm

Transport distances of animals or products

Energy (processing, cooling, packaging)

Mean annual temperature

Direct and indirect energy

X

National

regional2

global

X

X

X
X

X

X

X

X

X

X
X

 X4

X

X

X

X

X

X

X5

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

X

  The spatial resolution of the variable varies geographically and depends on the data availability. For each input variable, the spatial resolution of a 

given area is defined as the finest available. 

1  Animal numbers and mean annual temperature: ~ 5 km x 5 km at the equator; crop yields, harvested area and N residues: ~ 10 km x 10 km at the 

equator. 

2  Geographical regions or agro-ecological zones.
3  For monogastrics.
4  For ruminants.
5  Ruminants: rations in the industrialized countries; Monogastrics: rations of swill and concentrates.
6  Only for allocation in small ruminants.

112

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainscalves reflects the percentage of pregnancies that end with a dead calf. This 
may occur by abortion, still birth or death in the first 30 days after birth. 

	Growth rates: the growth rate of animals is based on the age at which they 
attain adult weight. For females, this depends on the age at first parturition, 
although some growth takes place after this. The age at which animals are 
sold for slaughter is based on the defined slaughter weight and the calculated 
growth rate.

	Replacement rates: these represent the number of adult animals replaced by 
younger adult animals per year. The replacement rate of female animals is 
taken from the literature. Literature reviews did not reveal any data on the 
replacement  rate  of  male  animals,  so  the  replacement  rate  was  defined  as 
the reciprocal value of the age at first parturition, on the assumption that 
farmers will prevent in-breeding by applying this rule. For small ruminants, 
adult males are usually exchanged twice by farmers and therefore have three 
service periods.

Tables B2-B6 present input herd parameter data used in this analysis.

Table B2. Herd parameters for dairy cattle, regional averages
Parameters

n. america

e. europe nena

russian 

W. europe

Adult cow

Adult bull

Calves at birth

Slaughter female

Slaughter male

Replacement adult cow

Fertility

Death rate female calves

Death rate male calves

Death rate other animals

747

892

41

564

605

35

77

8

8

3

Fed.

500

653

33

530

530

31

83

8

8

4

e & se 
asia

oceania

south 
asia

laC

ssa

Weights (kg)

518

673

36

530

530

371

477

20

329

367

Rate (percentage)

27

84

8

8

4

15

73

20

20

6

486

326

28

256

243

28

80

15

15

6

593

771

38

534

540

31

83

8

8

4

463

601

31

410

410

22

80

10

10

4

346

502

23

87

551

325

717

454

38

20

540

274

141

540

278

21

75

22

50

8

21

80

9

9

9

10

72

20

20

6

Age at first calving (years)

2.1

2.3

2.3

2.2

3.4

2.5

2.1

3.1

2.6

4.0

Source: Input data based on literature, surveys and expert knowledge.

113

Appendix B - Data and data sources Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chains

Table B3. Herd parameters for beef cattle, regional averages
Parameters

n. america

W. europe

e. europe nena

russian 
Fed.1

e & se 
asia

oceania

south 
asia

laC

ssa

Adult cow

Adult bull

Calves at birth

Slaughter female

Slaughter male

Replacement adult cow

Fertility

Death rate female calves

Death rate male calves

Death rate other animals

649

843

40

606

565

14

93

11

11

4

Age at first calving (years)

2.0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

0

529

688

35

529

529

15

93

10

10

3

2.3

1  Based on our estimates, the Russian Federation has no specialized beef herd.
Source: Input data based on literature, surveys and expert knowledge.

Weights (kg)

530

689

35

530

530

431

563

29

445

478

501

542

33

223

218

Rate (percentage)

15

93

10

10

3

21

75

18

18

7

16

90

15

15

7

403

524

27

403

403

22

93

10

10

3

350

505

23

73

68

21

75

22

50

8

419

545

28

392

400

14

73

14

14

6

271

347

20

349

288

11

59

19

19

7

2.3

2.8

2.5

2.1

3.1

3.4

3.9

Table B4. Herd parameters for goats, regional averages
Parameters

n. america

W. europe

russian 

e. europe

Adult female

Adult male

Kids at birth

Slaughter female

Slaughter male

Replacement female

Fertility

Death rate kids

Death rate other

Age at first kidding 
(years)

64

83

6.4

36

36

30

85

18

9

1.4

Fed.

55

100

2.2

30

30

18

90

5

2

1.3

59(61)

88(91)

4.0(4.6)

26

26

17

87

4

2

1.3

Note: Numbers in brackets refer to parameters for meat animals.
Source: Input data based on literature, surveys and expert knowledge.

50

100

5.0

30

30

18

90

5

2

1.3

114

nena

e & se 
asia

oceania

south 
asia

laC

ssa

Weights (kg)

37(40)

44(34)

53(56)

60(43)

2.7(3.2)

3.9(2.1)

32

32

27

27

Rate (percentage)

19

87

31

7

1.6

24

88

37

16

1.1

50

81

3.6

38

38

21

87

12

6

1.4

32(31)

35(37)

29(31)

42(39)

50(60)

36(40)

2.7(2.4)

3.5(3.7)

2.2(2.3)

25

25

19

81

15

5

1.8

27

28

24

80

14

5

1.5

19

19

16

87

27

7

2.0

Appendix B - Data and data sources 

Table B5. Herd parameters for sheep, regional averages
Parameters

n. america

W. europe

russian 

Adult female

Adult male

Lambs at birth

Slaughter female

Slaughter male

Replacement female

Fertility

Death rate lambs

Death rate other

Fed.

49

101

3

21

21

23

95

17

2

80

108

4

27

27

21

92

19

8

e. europe nena

e & se 
asia

oceania

south 
asia

laC

ssa

Weights (kg)

44

85

3

21

21

41

55

3

26

26

Rate (percentage)

22

90

18

5

21

83

25

12

47

65

4

26

26

16

77

31

14

70

98

4

35

35

24

100

9

4

62

82

4

29

29

29

91

18

3

35

45

3

24

24

18

81

24

12

59

81

3

29

29

20

91

18

12

38

51

3

24

24

17

76

33

13

Age at first lambing (years)

2.1

1.9

1.6

1.8

1.4

1.6

1.8

1.6

2.0

1.5

Source: Input data based on literature, surveys and expert knowledge.

Table B6. Herd parameters for buffalo, regional averages
Parameters

e & se asia

e. europe

laC

n. america

russian Fed.

south asia

nena W. europe

Adult female

Adult male

Calves at birth

Slaughter female

Slaughter male

Replacement female

Fertility

Death rate female calves

Death rate male calves

Death rate others

650

900

38

400

475

10

75

7

7

2

Age at first calving (years)

3.0

380

398

24

190

190

20

57

29

28

6

4.0

559

700

38

481

380

20

68

8

8

4

3.2

Note: Based on this analysis, SSA and Oceania have no buffalo herd.
Source: Input data based on literature, surveys and expert knowledge.

115

Weights (kg)

650

800

38

350

350

650

800

38

440

440

Rate (percentage)

10

76

8

8

4

2.5

20

68

8

8

4

3.6

485

532

31

215

135

20

53

24

44

9

500

610

32

310

309

16

69

18

18

6

4.0

3.1

648

800

38

352

352

10

76

8

8

4

2.5

3. FeeD
Animal rations are generally a combination of different feed ingredients. For rumi-
nants, three broad categories of feed are considered: roughages, by-products and 
concentrates. Feed is defined by a feed ration which differs among animal categories 
as defined in the herd module. Three separate feed rations are formulated for the 
following categories: adult females; replacement males and females and adult males; 
and surplus (meat) animals for fattening. Tables B7 to B12 present the average feed 
rations and proportions of different feed materials within the feed basket by region 
and ruminant species. 

In this assessment, all plant-based feed materials are identified by three key pa-
rameters:  dry-matter  yield  per  hectare;  net  energy  content  (or  digestibility);  and 
nitrogen content. These three parameters are data input in the calculation of the 
feed ration and its nutritive value. The dry matter yield determines the type of feed 
ingredients that make up the feed ration as well as the potentially available feed in a 
region. The digestibility and N-content of feed define the quality properties of feed 
and determine the efficiency with which feed is digested and eventual GHG emis-
sions. Table B13 presents regional average feed ration digestibility values. 

Emission factors for key data inputs into feed production. Emissions of fossil CO2 
from feed production, transport and processing are dependent on the amounts and 
types of fuels used. Table B14 presents emission factor data used in the calculation 
of the feed emission intensity.

Emissions of CO2 and N2O occurring during the production of nitrogenous fertilizers. 
The most commonly occurring mineral fertilizer, ammonium nitrate, which consists 
of equal parts of ammonium- and nitrate-nitrogen, currently releases ~6.8 kg CO2-
equivalents in production (Jenssen and Kongshaug , 2003). Due to the lack of reliable 
data on these parameters, and on fertilizer trade flow, the average European fertilizer 
emissions factor of 6.8 kg CO2-eq per kg of ammonium nitrate N in all regions was 
used. 

4. Manure
There are considerable differences in emissions from MMS. Data requirements for 
the estimation of GHG emissions from MMS include: information on how manure 
is managed, the types of MMS, and the proportion of manure managed in these 
systems. Additionally, climatic information (e.g. temperature) is important because 
emission factors are climate dependent. It was thus necessary to consider the cli-
mate under which livestock is managed in each country.

On a global scale, there is limited data available on how manure is managed and 
the proportion of the manure managed in each system. Consequently, this study 
relied on various data sources such as national inventory reports, literature and ex-
pert knowledge to define the proportions of manure management systems. It uses 
the IPCC (2006) classification of MMSs (definition in Table 10.18, IPPC guide-
lines). Regional variations manure management practices are presented in Tables 
B15 to B19.

116

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsAppendix B - Data and data sources 

Table B7. Dairy cattle feed ration, regional averages

n. america

russian 

W. europe e. europe

nena

Roughage

Fresh grass

Hay

Legumes and silage

Crop residues

Sugarcane tops

Leaves

14.4

17.0

30.6

-

-

-

By-products and concentrates

Bran

Oilseed meals

Wet distillers grain

Grains

Molasses

Pulp

4.4

6.4

4.3

22.8

-

-

Fed.

23.8

23.8

34.3

1.8

-

-

2.9

4.6

-

7.2

-

1.8

e & se 
asia

oceania

south 
asia

laC

ssa

 percentage

41.4

17.8

0.3

31.7

1.6

3.6

0.6

2.3

-

0.2

0.5

-

22.4

19.2

2.7

38.4

0.6

2.3

0.5

6.7

-

7.2

-

-

22.5

22.8

33.2

1.8

-

-

3.0

5.7

-

9.1

-

1.8

33.2

16.6

22.6

2.5

-

-

2.0

8.5

-

13.2

0.1

1.3

68.3

5.6

10.4

-

-

-

2.5

1.3

-

11.8

-

-

10.7

14.2

-

60.1

3.5

6.1

0.2

5.2

-

-

-

-

54.9

15.4

-

8.7

2.6

6.5

0.4

6.4

-

4.9

0.1

-

56.8

18.1

-

17.0

1.9

3.0

0.1

3.1

-

0.1

0.1

-

Source: GLEAM based on input data from literature, national inventory reports, expert knowledge and databases (SPAM, FAOSTAT).

Table B8. Beef cattle feed ration, regional averages

n. 

america

W. europe

e. europe

nena

oceania

south asia

laC

ssa

e & se 
asia

percentage

Roughage

Fresh grass

Hay

Legumes and silage

Crop residues

Sugarcane tops

Leaves

35.2

39.4

7.8

-

-

-

By-products and concentrates

Bran

Oilseed meals

Wet distillers grain

Grains

Molasses

Pulp

0.9

0.6

1.0

15.1

-

-

36.0

14.8

23.1

3.8

-

-

1.7

7.6

-

10.6

0.7

1.7

21.0

21.9

32.3

2.1

-

-

3.5

6.6

-

10.5

-

2.1

24.9

36.7

2.1

24.2

0.1

9.2

0.3

1.9

0.0

0.6

-

-

23.6

18.7

0.7

46.2

0.8

2.8

0.2

2.7

-

4.2

-

-

63.5

6.8

10.7

-

-

-

3.8

1.5

-

13.7

-

-

8.0

12.5

-

68.0

3.6

5.9

0.1

1.9

-

-

-

-

65.1

9.4

-

10.2

2.5

4.1

0.1

3.9

-

4.7

-

-

61.1

12.6

-

19.4

3.7

1.6

-

1.4

-

0.1

-

-

Source: GLEAM based on input data from literature, national inventory reports, expert knowledge and databases (SPAM, FAOSTAT).

117

Table B9. Dairy buffalo feed ration, regional averages
e. europe

n. america

W. europe

nena

e & se asia

south asia

laC

percentage

Roughage

Fresh grass

Hay

Legumes and silage

Crop residues

Sugarcane tops

Leaves

-

15.6

34.4

5.2

-

-

By-products and concentrates

Bran

Oilseed meals

Wet distillers grain

Grains

Molasses

Pulp

4.7

10.9

7.3

15.6

-

6.2

1.7

16.1

33.7

5.0

-

-

0.8

11.5

7.0

18.2

-

6.0

38.9

25.9

17.3

-

-

-

4.6

5.2

-

8.1

-

-

3.4

10.7

-

72.8

5.8

4.0

1.6

1.6

-

-

-

-

35.7

13.7

-

39.5

2.2

2.3

3.3

3.3

-

-

-

-

5.2

20.1

-

54.8

4.7

8.1

3.6

3.6

-

-

-

-

65.3

12.2

-

8.4

2.2

5.2

3.4

3.4

-

-

-

-

Source: GLEAM based on input data from literature, national inventory reports, expert knowledge and databases (SPAM, FAOSTAT).

Table B10. Buffalo meat feed ration, regional averages

russian Fed.

nena

e & se asia

south asia

laC

Roughage

Fresh grass

Hay

Legumes and silage

Crop residues

Sugarcane tops

Leaves

By-products and concentrates

Bran

Oilseed meals

Wet distillers grain

Grains

Molasses

Pulp

41.1

27.4

18.3

-

-

-

4.7

3.3

-

5.2

-

-

percentage

37.8

12.0

-

43.5

2.1

2.5

1.1

1.1

-

-

-

-

5.9

19.8

-

60.1

4.7

7.5

1.0

1.0

-

-

-

-

38.9

27.7

-

29.8

-

2.2

0.7

0.7

-

-

-

-

Source: GLEAM based on input data from literature, national inventory reports, expert knowledge and  
databases (SPAM, FAOSTAT).

118

68.0

13.2

-

8.9

2.3

5.3

1.1

1.1

-

-

-

-

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsTable B11. Small ruminant milk feed ration, regional averages

n. america

russian 

W. europe e. europe

nena

Roughage

Fresh grass

Hay

Legumes and silage

Crop residues

Sugarcane tops

Leaves

29.7

37.5

2.6

-

-

-

By-products and concentrates

Bran

Oilseed meals

Wet distillers grain

Grains

Molasses

Pulp

5.8

2.1

-

17.2

0.2

4.9

Fed.

32.0

24.6

9.8

11.5

-

-

8.6

2.3

-

3.6

-

7.6

e & se 
asia

oceania

south 
asia

laC

ssa

percentage

32.5

25.0

10.0

11.8

-

-

8.2

2.1

-

3.3

-

7.2

46.4

7.0

0.7

38.4

2.2

0.9

2.1

1.7

-

0.2

-

0.3

23.0

33.8

-

26.9

0.3

2.1

6.9

6.9

-

-

-

-

62.2

6.9

7.8

1.1

-

-

9.8

0.6

-

5.5

-

6.1

24.9

19.3

6.6

16.4

-

-

11.3

4.3

-

5.4

0.7

11.1

23.9

6.3

-

53.9

2.3

1.6

6.0

6.0

-

-

-

-

74.9

11.9

-

8.7

2.1

0.3

1.0

1.0

-

-

-

-

58.8

4.9

-

31.1

3.9

0.2

0.6

0.6

-

-

-

-

Source: GLEAM based on input data from literature, national inventory reports, expert knowledge and databases (SPAM, FAOSTAT).

Table B12. Small ruminant meat feed ration, regional averages

n. america

russian 

W. europe e. europe

nena

Roughage

Fresh grass

Hay

Legumes and silage

Crop residues

Sugarcane tops

Leaves

34.8

44.0

3.0

-

-

-

By-products and concentrates

Bran

Oilseed meals

Wet distillers grain

Grains

Molasses

Pulp

0.2

0.5

-

17.3

0.2

-

Fed.

38.2

29.4

11.8

13.7

-

-

3.6

0.2

-

0.4

-

2.6

e & se 
asia

oceania

south 
asia

laC

ssa

percentage

34.9

22.2

0.6

37.4

1.8

2.2

0.5

0.3

-

-

-

-

19.7

32.6

-

39.2

0.3

1.5

3.3

3.3

-

-

-

-

37.0

29.0

12.0

13.9

-

-

4.3

0.3

-

0.5

-

3.1

45.4

21.6

9.7

13.0

-

-

2.8

2.2

-

0.7

1.3

3.4

75.4

7.5

9.3

1.2

-

-

4.7

0.1

-

0.9

-

1.0

25.7

6.6

-

55.9

4.2

1.7

3.0

3.0

-

-

-

-

68.9

18.8

-

9.9

1.4

0.2

0.4

0.4

-

-

-

-

57.9

8.8

-

27.9

5.2

0.2

-

-

-

-

-

-

Source: GLEAM based on input data from literature, national inventory reports, expert knowledge and databases (SPAM, FAOSTAT).

119

Appendix B - Data and data sources Table B13. Calculated feed digestibility, regional averages
region

Dairy

Beef

small ruminants

N. America

Russian Fed.

W. Europe

E. Europe

NENA

E & SE Asia

Oceania

South Asia

LAC

SSA

71.8

72.6

77.0

73.5

56.1

59.0

72.9

52.6

62.2

57.3

 percentage

68.3

-

76.1

73.8

57.7

57.4

72.9

50.7

62.7

57.2

66.2

65.4

69.7

67.4

55.5

56.3

69.8

54.1

58.9

55.5

Buffalo

73.4

70.7

75.5

72.8

52.0

56.0

-

52.1

60.5

-

Source: GLEAM based on input data from literature, national inventory reports, expert knowledge and  
databases (SPAM, FAOSTAT).

Table B14. Emissions factors for fuel consumption
Fuel

emission factor

source

Diesel

Oil

Coal

Gas

3.2 kg CO2-eq/litre diesel

Berglund et al. (2009)

5.7 kg CO2-eq/kg oil 

de Boer (2009)

17.8 kg CO2-eq/kg coal 

de Boer (2009)

7.6 kg CO2-eq/m3 gas

de Boer (2009)

Table B15. Dairy cattle manure management systems, regional averages
MMs

Burned 

Drylot

uncovered 
anaerobic 
lagoon

liquid
slurry

Pasture, 
range, pad-

dock

solid
storage

Daily
spread

for
fuel

N. America

Russian Fed.

W. Europe

E. Europe

NENA

E & SE Asia

Oceania

South Asia

LAC

SSA

-

-

-

-

3.6

1.5

-

20.0

0.4

6.9

9.5

-

2.3

1.4

-

-

1.2

-

-

-

percentage

27.2

-

0.1

-

-

-

4.6

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

39.4

29.1

-

54.4

41.5

34.8

26.3

-

41.6

10.2

-

3.1

0.1

-

-

-

11.8

22.5

26.6

17.0

46.1

30.7

94.2

23.5

53.5

39.7

25.2

77.5

29.5

71.3

10.9

35.7

-

2.0

4.7

18.5

Source: Input data from literature, national inventory reports and expert knowledge.

120

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsTable B16. Beef cattle manure management systems, regional averages
uncovered 
MMs
anaerobic 
lagoon

Daily
spread

Burned 

for
fuel

Drylot

liquid
slurry

Pasture, 
range, 
paddock

solid
storage

N. America

Russian Fed.

W. Europe

E. Europe

NENA

E & SE Asia

Oceania

South Asia

LAC

SSA

-

-

-

-

9.3

0.6

-

20.0

0.2

6.2

-

-

4.2

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

percentage

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

12.8

-

0.1

-

34.9

33.9

-

58.2

4.8

34.3

0.7

-

22.1

65.0

-

-

-

-

-

-

Source: Input data from literature, national inventory reports and expert knowledge.

Table B17. Buffalo milk production manure management systems,  
regional averages
MMs 

Drylot

Burned 

Daily
spread

for
fuel

liquid
slurry

Pasture, 
range, 
paddock

N. America 

W. Europe 

E. Europe 

NENA 

E & SE Asia 

South Asia

LAC

17.4

3.4

13.0

50.8

31.0

37.8

50.7

40.2

61.9

67.8

9.2

13.3

1.3

1.2

percentage

42.4

34.7

18.2

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

38.9

53.6

40.4

48.0

-

-

1.0

-

-

-

-

Source: Input data from literature, national inventory reports and expert knowledge.

Table B18. Buffalo meat production manure management systems,  
regional averages
MMs 

Drylot

Burned 

liquid
slurry

Daily
spread

for
fuel

Russian Fed.

NENA

E & SE Asia

South Asia

LAC

27.8

48.7

28.6

38.6

93.8

percentage

5.6

-

-

-

-

66.6

22.9

9.1

1.5

1.2

-

13.4

61.2

39.7

4.9

Source: Input data from literature, national inventory reports and expert knowledge.

121

43.2

-

25.9

2.0

12.9

37.8

-

1.4

3.2

13.0

43.4

-

47.6

33.0

42.8

27.7

100.0

20.3

91.8

46.5

solid
storage

-

-

-

1.1

2.0

19.9

-

solid
storage

-

14.5

0.8

2-

-

Appendix B - Data and data sources Table B19. Small ruminant manure management systems, regional averages
MMs

 Pasture, range, 

Drylot

solid storage

N. America

Russian Fed.

W. Europe

E. Europe

NENA

E & SE Asia

Oceania

South Asia

LAC

SSA

paddock

percentage

47.4

18.0

83.8

64.6

57.2

56.7

100.0

85.0

83.3

84.4

-

-

-

-

37.5

0.8

-

12.8

3.7

9.3

53.0

82.0

16.2

35.2

5.2

42.3

-

2.0

12.7

6.2

Source: Input data from literature, national inventory reports and expert knowledge.

Table B20. Dressing percentages for large ruminants 

n. 

america

russian 

Fed.

W. 

europe

e. 

europe

nena

e & se 
asia

oceania

south 
asia

laC

ssa

Dairy cattle

Adult and 
replacement 
females
Adult and 
replacement male
Surplus female and 
male
Beef cattle

Adult and 
replacement 
females
Adult and 
replacement male
Surplus female and 
male
Buffalo
Adult and 
replacement 
females
Adult and 
replacement male
Surplus female and 
male

50

50

52

55

55

60

49

50

55

50

50

52

55

55

60

49

50

55

50

50

52

55

55

60

49

50

55

Source: Input data from literature, surveys and expert knowledge.

percentage

50

50

52

55

55

60

49

50

55

48

48

50

50

50

55

49

50

55

122

50

50

55

50

50

55

49

50

55

50

50

52

50

50

55

49

50

55

50

50

55

50

50

55

49

50

55

50

50

52

50

50

55

49

50

55

47

47

47

47

47

47

49

50

55

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsTable B21. Dressing percentages for small ruminants 
region

goats

sheep

percentage

N. America
Russian Fed.
W. Europe
E. Europe
NENA
E & SE Asia
Oceania
South Asia
LAC
SSA
Source: Input data from literature, surveys and expert knowledge.

52
43
43
43
44
48
45
43
44
48

52
45
48
45
45
49
50
48
49
45

5. ProDuC tion anD alloCation
Dressing percentage. Dressing percentage can be defined as the percent of the live ani-
mal that ends up in the carcass. The LW:CW ratio varies substantially depending on a 
range of factor including breed, gender, diet, age, diet, cold versus warm carcass weight, 
and distance trucked. Tables B20 and B21 present the dressing percentages used for 
large and small ruminants.

Emission allocation factors. Table B22 presents a comparison of dairy and beef herds 
in total cattle population across world regions, their contribution to total beef produc-
tion and the allocation factors used in this assessment for the allocation of emissions 
between milk and meat from the dairy herd. Emission allocation factor for wool, yield 
and total economic value (for meat, milk and wool produced by sheep) are presented 
in Table B23. See Appendix A for more details on allocation techniques applied. 

Table B22. Percentage of dairy and beef herds, ratio of beef production from cattle herds and emission 
allocation factor for milk and meat from the dairy herd

Percentage 

of cattle

Ratio of 

beef production 
from dairy and 

specialized beef herd 

Allocation factor 
between milk  
and meat from 
the dairy herd

region

Dairy herd

Beef herd

Dairy herd

Beef herd

Fraction

LAC
E & SE Asia
E. Europe
N. America
Oceania
Russian Federation
South Asia
SSA
NENA
W. Europe

Source: GLEAM.

24.8
20.9
99.2
23.8
38.1
100.0
56.9
57.5
98.9
70.5

 0.31 
 0.23 
 0.99 
 0.24 
 0.38 
 1.00 
 0.60 
 0.59 
 0.98 
 0.70 

75.2
79.1
0.80
76.2
61.9
-
43.1
42.5
1.1
29.5

123

 0.69 
 0.77 
 0.01 
 0.76 
 0.62 
 - 
 0.40 
 0.41 
 0.02 
 0.30 

0.92
0.93
0.94
0.94
0.96
0.91
0.90
0.90
0.92
0.95

Appendix B - Data and data sources Table B23. Emission allocation factors for sheep
Country*

total 

economic value

(000 US$)

Wool 

allocation 

factor

Wool 

(kg/animal)

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan
Bangladesh
Belarus
Belgium
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Brazil
Bulgaria
Canada
Chile
China
Colombia
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Denmark
Ecuador
Egypt
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Finland
France
Georgia
Germany
Greece
Hungary
India
Indonesia
Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Iraq
Ireland
Israel

78 513
169 530
519 567
980 205
18 138
4 967 220
31 346
79 042
16 262
1 797
8 128
292
137 832
41 272
278 548
44 497
24 881
88 762
1 797 202
38 411
91 675
26 049
10 792
9 372
45 468
190 515
53 231
1 554
62 025
3 064
792 773
28 259
144 509
1 368 750
84 145
875 770
181 290
1 099 145
149 159
243 544
31 197

0.14
0.03
0.08
0.28
0.09
0.38
0.02
0.13
0.16
0.06
0.21
0.50
0.32
0.09
0.30
0.09
0.11
0.26
0.17
0.80
0.01
0.01
0.23
0.26
0.51
0.08
0.05
0.08
0.42
0.15
0.04
0.20
0.04
0.01
0.04
0.16
0.11
0.05
0.19
0.20
0.02

2.6
3.1
2.4
6.2
2.1
6.4
3.5
2.1
2.6
5.0
3.5
2.6
5.3
3.1
6.1
5.0
5.5
6.0
2.1
6.0
3.1
2.1
5.0
5.0
4.3
2.4
2.0
2.8
2.0
2.8
3.5
2.1
3.5
3.1
5.0
2.6
1.0
2.6
2.1
2.0
2.1

(Continued)

124

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsTable B23. (Continued)
Country*

total 

economic value

(000 US$)

Wool 

allocation 

factor

Wool 

(kg/animal)

Italy
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Macedonia
Malaysia
Mali
Malta
Mexico
Moldova, Republic of
Mongolia
Montenegro
Morocco
Myanmar
Namibia
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Norway
Pakistan
Paraguay
Peru
Poland
Portugal
Republic of Serbia
Romania
Russian Federation
Saudi Arabia
Slovakia
Slovenia
South Africa
Spain
State of Libya
Sudan

1 022 570
83 719
149 923
103 366
24 814
46 492
914
18 130
20 706
863
911
62 263
1 475
158 637
1 382
342 445
15 252
79 706
8 935
674 549
14 162
36 361
15 740
74 491
1 699 390
143 600
250 607
12 046
305 378
13 963
315 014
58 074
370 170
321 514
412 672
9 059
8 112
1 048 040
1 659 448
196 954
1 310 660

0.02
0.03
0.09
0.11
0.21
0.06
0.15
0.12
0.49
0.08
0.09
0.02
0.15
0.13
0.04
0.02
0.10
0.06
0.02
0.12
0.03
0.07
0.12
0.03
0.23
0.18
0.14
0.29
0.26
0.07
0.02
0.02
0.05
0.18
0.13
0.09
0.02
0.23
0.02
0.09
0.03

3.1
2.1
2.1
2.0
2.1
2.1
2.8
2.1
3.8
2.8
3.5
3.1
1.0
2.0
3.1
2.0
5.0
2.1
3.1
2.4
1.0
3.8
2.6
3.5
5.5
2.8
2.6
5.3
6.0
5.0
3.1
3.1
5.0
5.0
2.1
5.0
3.1
3.8
4.5
2.4
2.4

(Continued)

125

Appendix B - Data and data sources Table B23. (Continued)
Country*

Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
U.K. of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland
United Republic of Tanzania
United States of America
Uruguay
Uzbekistan
Yemen

total 

economic value

Wool 

allocation 

Wool 

(kg/animal)

(000 US$)
20 060
42 600
2 711 860
26 784
277 587
1 792 952
171 606
24 660
28 401
1 110 150

49 968
174 326
258 626
130 762
268 873

factor
0.09
0.02
0.02
0.24
0.11
0.04
0.77
0.10
0.13
0.05

0.09
0.22
0.41
0.51
0.09

2.8
3.5
2.1
2.1
2.4
2.1
2.1
5.0
2.1
2.8

2.0
4.8
6.2
2.1
2.1

* Represents 95 percent of the global sheep population.
Source: GLEAM based on input data from literature, national inventory reports, expert knowledge and databases 
(FAOSTAT).

reFerenCes
Berglund, M., Cederberg, C., Clason, C. & och Lars Torner, M.H. 2009. Jord-
brukets klimatpaverkan  underlag for att berakna vaxthusgasutslapp pa gard-
sniva  och  nulagesanalyser  av  exempelgardar.  Delrapport  i  JoKer-proJeKtet, 
Hushallningssallskapet Halland.

IPCC. 2006. 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories pre-
pared by the National Greenhause Gas Inventories Programme, Eggleston, H.S., 
Buenida, L., Miwa, K., Nagara, T. & Tanabe, K. (eds). Published: IGES, Japan.

You, L., Crespo, S., Guo, Z., Koo, J., Ojo, W., Sebastian, K., Tenorio, T.N., Wood, 
S. & Wood-Sichra, U. 2010. Spatial Production Allocation Model (SPAM) 2000, 
Version 3. Release 2. Available at http://MapSPAM.info.

Jenssen, T.K. & Kongshaug, G. 2003. Energy consumption and greenhouse gas 
emissions  in  fertiliser  production.  The  International  Fertiliser  Society,  York, 
U.K. Proceedings No. 509.

126

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsAPPENDIX C
Changes in carbon stocks related to 
land use and land-use change

1. IntroduCtIon 
This appendix discusses GHG emissions and changes in carbon stocks that result 
from  land  use  and  LUC.  Land  uses  and  LUCs  are  defined;  the  relevant  carbon 
pools and emission sources are discussed in the context of these categories; the ap-
proaches to estimating emissions and changes in carbon stocks are outlined; and 
finally, justification for and an explanation of the selected estimation methods used 
in this study is also provided. 

Land  use,  LUC  and  forestry  (LULUCF)  is  defined  by  the  United  Climate 
Change Secretariat as: a greenhouse gas inventory sector that covers emissions and 
removals of greenhouse gases resulting from direct human-induced land use, land-
use change and forestry activities. Six land use categories are defined in the 2006 
IPCC  Guidelines  for  National  Greenhouse  Gas  Inventories:  1.  Forest  Land;  2. 
Cropland; 3. Grassland; 4. Wetlands; 5. Settlements; and 6. Other Land. 

Land may remain in any of these categories or, in the case of LUC, its use may 
change  to  another  category  (e.g.  from  forest  to  grassland).  Thus,  each  land  use 
category can be further subdivided into land that is converted from one land use 
category to another, and land that remains in the same category. While this study 
focuses on the emissions from LUC, emissions from land use are also discussed. 

1.1 GHG emissions from land-use change
Most LUCs alter the soil and vegetation of the land, thus changing the amount of 
carbon stored per unit area. These changes may be positive or negative, and may oc-
cur in each carbon pool: biomass (above- and below-ground); dead organic matter 
(dead wood and litter); and soil (soil organic matter). 

LUC can significantly alter the carbon stored in biomass, by replacing the veg-
etation of the existing land use category with the vegetation of another land use 
category. Conversion of forest land to either grassland or cropland can lead to large 
and rapid losses of the typically large stores of carbon in forest vegetation, when 
this vegetation is replaced with herbaceous grasses or annual crops. 

While most of the carbon stored in forest biomass is lost following conversion, 
some carbon will be transferred from one pool to another; e.g. when trees are felled, 
a portion of the above-ground biomass is transferred to the dead organic matter 
pool, and a portion of the below-ground biomass is transferred to the soil organic 
matter pool. 

The drainage and cultivation or grazing of organic soils is also an important cause 
of the oxidation and loss of SOC for both croplands and grasslands (Armentano 
and Menges, 1986). While the most important GHG emission flux is CO2, the oxi-
dization  of  the  various  organic  carbon  pools  as  a  consequence  of  LUC  can  also 
release N2O. 

127

Land conversion often results in an abrupt change where most biomass is lost, 
followed by a longer period where biomass is oxidized at a much slower pace. The 
IPCC (2006) assumes a default 20-year transition period following conversion over 
which all losses are accounted for. 

The conversion of forest land to agricultural land may also lead to losses from the 
SOC pool. When forest land is converted to cropland, there is an average reduction 
in soil carbon of between 25 and 30 percent in the upper metre of soil (Houghton 
and Goodale, 2004).14 These soil carbon losses are due, in part, to a lower fraction 
of non-soluble material in the more easily decomposed crop residues, and to the 
breaking up of aggregates and subsequent exposure of organo-mineral surfaces to 
decomposers following tillage (Post and Kwon, 2000). On the other hand, because 
grasslands, unlike crops, are not ploughed (temporary cultivated pastures are clas-
sified to be crops), little change in soil carbon is expected following the conversion 
of forests to grasslands (Houghton and Goodale, 2004). 

When either cropland or grasslands are abandoned, there is a re-accumulation 
of carbon in vegetation as the land returns to its natural state, and the greater the 
biomass of the returning vegetation the larger is the long-term carbon sink due to 
the recovery. Post and Kwon (2000) note relatively low rates of accumulation in 
mineral soil following the abandonment of cropland. Considering all LUCs during 
the 1990s, Houghton & Goodale (2004) estimate that the average annual emissions 
from LUC were estimated to be 2.2 petagram C yr-1, with almost all of this emanat-
ing from deforestation in the tropics.

1.2 Land use and its effects on emissions and carbon stocks
Agricultural  lands  hold  substantial  carbon  stocks,  mostly  in  soil  organic  matter. 
Carbon stock changes in agricultural lands are closely tied to management practic-
es, which can either enhance or erode carbon stocks. Practices which raise (lower) 
the photosynthetic input of carbon and/or slow (accelerate) the release of stored 
carbon through respiration, erosion or fire will increase (decrease) carbon stocks 
(Smith et al., 2007). While it is possible for substantial biomass carbon to be stored 
through perennial plantings on agricultural lands (e.g. silvopastoral systems), car-
bon accumulation and losses occur mostly in the SOC pool. This below-ground 
carbon pool also has slower rates of turnover than above-ground pools, because 
most of the organic carbon in soils comes from the conversion of plant litter into 
more persistent organic compounds (Jones and Donnelly, 2004).

Smith et al. (2007) estimated that 89 percent of the agriculture sectors total miti-
gation potential is from SOC sequestration. For grasslands, practices such as the 
optimization of grazing intensities to maximize grass production, moderate inten-
sification of nutrient-poor grasslands, and the restoration of degraded pastures are 
known to improve sequestration rates (Conant and Paustian, 2002; Sousanna et al., 
2010). Conversely, the overgrazing of grasslands reduces vegetation and the amount 
of litter returned to soils, and it leads to erosion and degradation contributing to 
CO2 losses from the SOC pool. For croplands, significant changes in SOC stocks 
are  associated  with  management  practices  including  tillage,  residue  management, 
nutrient management and the use of organic amendments (Smith et al., 2007). 

14  While there is some variation around this range, it has been documented in numerous studies, and has been 

found to be broadly robust across all ecosystems (Houghton and Goodale, 2004).

128

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsHistorically, while agricultural management practices can result in either reduc-
tions or accumulations in the SOC pool, agricultural lands are estimated to have 
released more than 50 petagram C (Paustian et al., 1998; Lal, 1999, 2004), some of 
which can be restored via better management. Currently, however, the net flux of 
CO2 between the atmosphere and agricultural lands is estimated to be approximate-
ly balanced (Smith et al., 2007). For the estimation of net livestock sector GHG 
emissions, which is the main purpose of this report, measures of net CO2 current 
fluxes by region are of greater interest than the sequestration/mitigation potential.
The lack of a globally consistent and regionally detailed set of net CO2 flux es-
timates make it difficult to quantify these potential emission sources and sinks by 
region in this study, although there are some relevant studies that provide useful 
estimates of these net fluxes for specific regions and agricultural land use categories. 
For example, based on literature observations for temperate grasslands mainly from 
Western Europe, Soussana et al. (2010) estimate that grasslands SOC sequestration 
rates  averaged  5    30  gC/m2  per  year.  Nevertheless,  Soussana  et  al.  (2010)  con-
cede that the uncertainties associated with SOC stock changes following changes 
in management are very high. Further, stocks of SOC are very vulnerable to distur-
bances, including tillage, fire, erosion, and droughts that can lead to rapid reversals 
of accumulated stocks. Moreover, the authors recommend that further research is 
needed to separate the influence of management factors from other climate-related 
factors such as average temperature increase and CO2 fertilization, in order to be 
able to attribute sequestration to direct anthropogenic causes. 

There is also considerable potential to sequester carbon in croplands through a 
range of options available that include reduced and zero tillage, set-aside, perennial 
crops,  deep  rooting  crops,  more  efficient  use  of  organic  amendments,  improved 
rotations, irrigation, etc. In Brazil, for example, long-term field experiments (Costa 
de Campos et al., 2011; Dieckow et al., 2010; Vieira et al., 2009; Sisti et al., 2004) 
have evaluated the impact of conservation tillage and crop rotations on SOC. The 
results from these studies confirm that non-tillage and crop rotations can enhance 
the conservation of SOM and increase C accumulation. For example, Dieckow et 
al. (2010) who assessed the 17-year contribution of no-tillage crop rotations to C 
accumulation in subtropical Ferralsol of Brazil concluded that crop-forage systems 
and crop-based systems with legume represent viable strategies to increase soil or-
ganic C stocks. They found that the alfalfa system with maize at each three years 
showed the highest C accumulation (0.44 tonnes C/ha/yr). The bi-annual rotation 
of ryegrass (hay)-maize-ryegrass-soybean sequestered 0.32 tonnes C/ha/yr. How-
ever, an assessment of realistically achievable potentials for carbon sequestration in 
croplands needs to take into account economic, political and cultural constraints 
and other environmental impacts (such as non-CO2 GHG emissions) also need to 
be accounted for.

2. QuantIfICatIon of Carbon emIssIons and se QuestratIon
2.1 Changes of carbon stocks related to land-use change
The  most  fundamental  step  in  assessing  emissions  from  LUC  is  the  tracking  of 
changes in areas of land use and conversions from one land use category to the next. 
This requires a time series of data, or at least two points in time, to capture changes 
in the area of land for each category.

129

Appendix C - Changes in carbon stocks related to land use and land-use changeComprehensive  guidance  on  methodological  approaches  for  estimating  LUCs 
as well as emissions and removals from LULUCF is provided in the 2006 IPCC 
Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories (IPCC, 2006). Three differ-
ent approaches are suggested with differing degrees of accuracy to best ensure the 
consistent representation of LUCs for given data quality and availability. The most 
accurate of these, Approach 3, requires the use of spatially-explicit data for land use 
categories and conversions, and includes the use of gridded map products derived 
from remote sensing imagery. At the other extreme is Approach 1, which relies on 
non-spatially explicit data from census and survey data, often reported at country 
or province level, and which only permits net changes in land use categories over 
time, and cannot specify inter-category conversions. Finally, Approach 2 enables 
the tracking of conversions between land use categories without the spatially-ex-
plicit location data. Naturally, the choice among the simple and more sophisticated 
approaches involve big trade-offs between the data and analytical resource require-
ments, and the accuracy with which LUCs and their attendant emissions and car-
bon removals are estimated. 

For grassland remaining grassland, cropland remaining cropland, and conversion 
from forestland to either of these land use categories, the 2006 IPCC Guidelines 
require  that  changes  in  carbon  stocks  from  each  carbon  pool  (i.e.  above-ground 
biomass, below-ground biomass, dead wood, litter and soil organic matter), as well 
as  emissions  of  non-CO2  gases,  are  estimated.  The  guidelines  do,  however,  pro-
vide flexibility in the use of methods that range from very simple approaches that 
rely on default emission factors to more sophisticated approaches that use detailed 
location-specific data and process models that fully characterize the fluxes between 
carbon pools.

2.1.1 Biomass and dead organic matter (DOM) pools
As  mentioned,  land-use  conversions  are  often  associated  with  an  initial  abrupt 
change  and  subsequent  transition  period  following  conversion.  The  2006  IPCC 
Guidelines provide separate equations for these two phases when using Tier 2 and 
3 approaches. Where country-specific emission factors are available and compre-
hensive national data are available, country-defined Tier 3 methodologies based on 
either process models or detailed inventories, stratified by climate and management 
regime can be recommended. These methods can also use non-linear loss and ac-
cumulation response curves during the transition phase.

At the other extreme, Tier 1 methods assume that both biomass and DOM pools 
are lost immediately after conversion from forestland to agricultural land, and that 
agricultural land reaches its steady-state equilibrium in the first year following con-
version. While the IPCC provides default values to quantify biomass levels prior 
to and after conversion, there is assumed to be no accumulation in the DOM pool 
in the transition phase on agricultural land following conversion from forestland. 

The Tier 2 methods represent a compromise, better capturing the dynamics of 
land-use conversion, by specifying separate equations for the abrupt change and 
transition  phases,  accounting  for  biomass  accumulation  during  the  latter  phase. 
They  also  rely  on  some  country-specific  estimates  of  initial  and  final  biomass 
stocks, instead of relying solely on default values. 

Further, both Tier 2 and Tier 3 methods account for transfers between carbon 
pools  and  can  estimate  carbon  pool  changes  using  either  the  gain-loss  or  stock-

130

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsdifference methods. The former method includes all processes that cause changes in 
a carbon pool, including biomass growth and the transfer of carbon from one pool 
to another. Alternatively, the stock-difference method can be used where carbon 
stocks are measured at two points in time. Both methods are valid, providing they 
can  represent  disturbances  and  continuously  varying  trends,  and  can  be  verified 
with actual measurements (IPCC, 2006). 

2.1.2 Soil organic carbon (SOC) stocks
Changes in the SOC pools in both mineral and organic soils should be taken into 
account when estimating emissions and carbon accumulation resulting from LUC 
(IPCC, 2006). This requires that the areas of converted land be stratified by climate 
region, management and major soil type. Simple Tier 1 methods, which rely on de-
fault reference SOC stock change factors, can be used, or more country- or region-
specific reference C stocks and stock change factors can be combined with more 
disaggregated land use activity data to use either Tier 2 or Tier 3 methods. Some of 
the process models suited to Tier 3 methods are discussed in the following section. 
In this study, LUC emissions are estimated for each major carbon pool, including 
the biomass, DOM and SOC pools are estimated using Tier 1 methods. While Tier 2 
and Tier 3 methods are recommended, the Tier 1 approach was deemed to be appro-
priate given the global nature of the assessment combined with the absence of coun-
try-specific emission factors, inventory data and/or a suitable global process model.

2.2 Changes in carbon stocks for agricultural land remaining in the  
same land use category
As with LUCs, the estimation of emissions and carbon accumulation from man-
agement practices on land that remains in the same land use category requires that 
changes in carbon stocks from each major carbon pool (i.e., above-ground biomass, 
below-ground biomass, dead wood, litter and soil organic matter), as well as emis-
sions of non-CO2 gases, are estimated. 

For  agricultural  lands,  changes  in  these  carbon  pools  and  non-CO2  emission 
fluxes depend on management practices such as grazing, burning, pasture manage-
ment, tillage and residue management. Tier 2 and Tier 3 methods are able to es-
timate changes in each carbon pool and in emissions resulting from management 
practices, while Tier 1 methods can only be used to estimate these changes for the 
SOC pool (and non-CO2 emissions from burning), but not for the other carbon 
pools. As with the measurement of emissions and carbon storage under LUC, the 
same gain-loss and/or stock-difference methods can be employed. 

As discussed, Tier 3 methods can be used to more accurately assess changes in 
these carbon pools and non-CO2 emission sources, using dynamic process models 
and/or detailed inventory measurements to estimate carbon stock changes. Process 
model-based approaches simultaneously solve multiple equations to estimate net 
changes in carbon stocks. These models can incorporate management effects such as 
grazing intensity, fire, fertilization, tillage and residue management, and they can be 
combined with regionally representative sampling-based estimates to validate and 
extrapolate to other agricultural lands. According to IPCC (2006), important crite-
ria for selecting these models include: their ability to represent all relevant manage-
ment practices and production systems, the compatibility of models driving vari-
ables (inputs) with available country data, and validity gauged by the models ability 

131

Appendix C - Changes in carbon stocks related to land use and land-use changeto represent stock change dynamics reported in empirical assessments. Well-known 
biogeochemical models that can satisfy these criteria include the Century model 
(and the daily time-step version, Daycent), DNDC and RothC. 

The RothC (Hart, 1984; Jenkinson et al., 1987; Coleman et al., 1997; Smith et al., 
2006) and Century (Parton et al., 1987; Falloon and Smith, 2002; Kirschbaum and 
Paul, 2002) models can be used to simulate GHG gas exchange and carbon cycling 
dynamics of cropland, grassland and forestland land use categories, and both oper-
ate on monthly time-steps. Soil texture and weather data are the major input vari-
ables. While the Century model can simulate the dynamics of carbon in biomass, 
DOM and SOC pools, as well as nitrogen, phosphorous, and sulphur dynamics, 
RothC only estimates SOC stocks and CO2 losses from decomposition of SOC. 

The Daycent model is the daily time-step version of the Century model (Del 
Grosso et al., 2001; Parton et al., 1998), which is well suited to capturing N min-
eralization and N gas production in non-waterlogged soils, along with the same 
carbon pool dynamics modelled in Century. As with Daycent, the denitrification-
decomposition (DNDC) model (Li, 1996; Li et al., 1992 and 1994) simulates soil 
carbon and nitrogen fluxes using a daily time-step but, unlike Daycent, it is also 
able to represent N gas and CH4 fluxes from waterlogged soils, such as found in rice 
paddies. Both Daycent and DNDC have higher data demands than either Century 
or RothC, due their short time-steps and wider range of biogeochemical dynamics. 
Since none of these models has been validated on a global scale, they have not been 
applied in this analysis. 

3. QuantIfICatIon of Carbon stoCk CHanGes from land use 
and Land-use change in this report
In this study, LUC emissions are estimated for three major carbon pools, includ-
ing the biomass, DOM and SOC pools. It could be argued that Tier 2 and Tier 3 
methods, including process-based modelling approaches, should have been used to 
capture variability and possibly to reduce uncertainty in the emission and carbon 
accumulation estimates. However, given the global nature of the assessment, and 
the absence of country-specific EFs, carbon stock/flux inventory data and/or a suit-
able global process model (cf. previous section), the Tier 1 approach was deemed 
a suitable option to develop preliminary estimates and shed light on the potential 
magnitude of the LUC emissions for the sector.

For  the  reasons  outlined  above,  this  assessment  does  not  cover  changes  in  C 
stocks occurring under constant land use management. This may be done in future 
updates once global datasets are available and/or models have been calibrated for 
global studies. 

This section presents the approach applied in this study to quantify LUC emis-
sions, discussing the rationale for the approach chosen, and the results from the 
analysis. It also explores the implications of alternative approaches to quantifying 
LUC emission. 

3.1 approach for feed crops
The analysis focuses on one specific feed product  soybean  in specific countries 
in Latin America. This assessment is based on observed land use trends, feed crop 
expansion trends and trade flow patterns as well as findings from previous studies 
such as Wassenaar et al. (2007) and Cederberg et al. (2011). 

132

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsFigure C1. 
Net land conversion between 1990 and 2006, by region

Cropland

Pastureland

Forest

Other land

Oceania

LAC

N.  America

Europe

Asia 

Africa

-80 000

-60 000

-40 000

-20 000

0

20 000

40 000

60 000

80,000

1 000 hectares

Source: FAOSTAT (2012).

This study uses IPCC guidelines as a basis for the quantification of LUC emis-
sions. This choice is largely based on the fact that the IPCC approach meets the 
UNFCCC  requirements  for  calculating  and  reporting  of  GHG  emissions  from 
LUC. The cropland part of this assessment also relies on other guidelines such as 
the PAS 2050 (also based on IPCC guidelines) for input data. According to IPCC 
guidelines,  emissions  arising  from  LUC  are  allocated  over  a  20-year  period  (the 
amortization period). Because of data availability (forestry inventories are only 
available from 1990),15 in this assessment, the rates of LUC are taken as the average 
over the 16-year period (19902006). This practically discounts four years of emis-
sions.

Agriculture  has  been  a  major  driving  force  behind  land  transformation;  glob-
ally, the area of land used for agriculture increased by 83 million ha over the period 
19902006. In most regions, cropland has increased whereas pasture and forest land 
decreased (Figure C1). The most affected regions in terms of crop expansion are 
Latin America, Asia and Africa. Declining agricultural land (i.e. cropland and pas-
tureland) is observable in Europe and North America where agricultural land aban-
donment has resulted in reforestation. During the period considered (1990-2006), 
deforestation occurred mainly in Africa and Latin America. More recent trends in 
deforestation, in particular in Asia, and their association with feed production are 
therefore not considered in this study.

Between 1990 and 2006, crop expansion was mainly driven by major oil crops 
(e.g. soybeans, rapeseed, sunflower and oil palm) the demand for which was fuelled 
by demand for vegetable oil, feed and, more recently, biofuel policies. The expan-
sion of soybean production is argued to be one of the major drivers of LUC, par-

15  The FAOSTAT forest area dataset (based on the Global Forest Resource Assessment) used in this study is only 

available from 1990 and in order to align the C stocks assessment with the livestock input data which is based 
on 2005 statistics, land use conversion trends were assessed for the period 1990 to 2006.   

133

Appendix C - Changes in carbon stocks related to land use and land-use changeTable C1. Global area expansion for selected crops with highest area  
expansion (1990-2006)
Crop

area expansion (1 000 ha)

share of global gross crop expansion (percentage)

Soybeans

Maize

Rapeseed

Rice, paddy

Sunflower seed

Oil palm fruit

Source: FAOSTAT (2012).

38 110

15 620

9 815

8 650

7 237

7 205

22.6

9.2

5.8

5.1

4.3

4.3

ticularly deforestation (Pacheco, 2012; Nepstad et al., 2006; Fearnside, 2005; Bickel 
and Dros, 2003; Carvalho et al., 2002). The global area under cultivation of soybean 
has increased rapidly in recent decades; between 1990 and 2006, the global soybean 
area increased faster than any other crop (Table C1). Maize expansion is also im-
portant, representing 9.2 percent of global crop expansion. At the same time, crops 
such as wheat, barley and oats, have strongly declined, which explains the apparent 
discrepancies with the net land conversion trends in Figure C1.

A comparison of the two major crops driving agricultural expansion reveals key 
regional differences with regard to their importance (Figure C2). The expansion of 
soybean area has been significant in North and South America, while maize expan-
sion is more important in Africa and Asia. 

Deforestation for crop expansion has been an important LUC process in Africa, 
however crop expansion in the region has been mainly driven by sorghum and millet, 
with maize and soybeans only accounting for 5 percent and 0.5 percent of total gross 
cropland expansion respectively. In Africa, pasture expansion has also occurred large-
ly at the expense of forest area. However, due to lack of reliable data and information 
it is difficult to draw conclusions on the land-use conversion trends in this region. 

Figure C2. 
Maize and soybean area expansion between 1990 and 2006, by region

s
e
r
a
t
c
e
h

 

n
o

i
l
l
i

M

30

25

20

15

10

5

0

Maize

Soybean

Africa

Asia

Europe

N. America

LAC

Source: FAOSTAT (2012).

134

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsTable C2. Average annual land-use change rates in Argentina and Brazil  
(1990-2006)
land-use type

argentina

brazil

Agricultural area

Grasslands

Arable land & permanent crops

Soybean area

Forest area

Other land

Source: FAOSTAT (2009).

+351

-7

+358

+648

-149

-201

(1 000 ha)

+1 288

+753

+535

+534

-2 855

+1 567

In North America, soybean expansion is responsible for 37 percent of total crop 
expansion and maize 7 percent. However in this region the overall trend has been 
a decrease of total cropland (due to sharp decreases in wheat and barley areas) and 
pastures and an increase of forest area.

In Asia, soybean expansion is responsible for 7 percent of total crop expansion 
and  maize  8  percent.  At  the  same  time,  forest  land  has  increased  overall  in  Asia 
and pastureland has decreased. But the two trends occurred in different subregions 
within Asia. Pasture decrease mainly occurred in Mongolia and Iran, where maize 
and soybean expansion were null or limited. On the contrary, expansion of soy-
bean and maize area has largely occurred in India and China (77 percent of gross 
maize expansion and 96 percent of gross soybean expansion), however, forest area 
increased in these two countries. Pastures decreased in India but to a limited extent 
of 1.2 million ha, compared to the 5.8 and 3.0 million ha of soybean and maize ex-
pansion in the country, respectively.

In Latin America, most of the decrease in forest area occurred in countries with 
soybean expansion. Trends in land conversion, particularly deforestation, are there-
fore closely linked to the expansion of soybean. 

Based on these observations the scope of our assessment was narrowed to the 
soybean expansion in Latin America. Within Latin America, Brazil and Argentina 
account for 91 percent of the total soybean area. In the period 19902006, 90 per-
cent of the soybean area expansion in Latin America took place there, further nar-
rowing the scope to these two countries. An assessment of land use trends in these 
key producing countries shows that the expansion in soybean area has been largely 
gained at the expense of forest area (Table C2). 

In Argentina, the annual increase of area dedicated to soybean is much larger 
than the increase of total arable land (Table C2), indicating that there has been a 
shift in land use from other crops to soybean. According to FAOSTAT statistics, 44 
percent of the new soybean area was gained against other crops, while the rest was 
gained against forest (22 percent) and other land (31 percent). The latter category 
covers natural vegetation that does not include forest and grazed natural grasslands. 
The reported annual increase of soybean area in Brazil is 534 000 ha (Table C2). 
We assumed a simplified pattern of deforestation in the Amazon, in which cleared 
land is first used as pasture and/or crop land, and then left as fallow land. The latter, 
classified as other land in FAOSTAT, is occupied by weeds, grasses, shrubs and, 

135

Appendix C - Changes in carbon stocks related to land use and land-use changeTable C3. Net changes in area for main land-use categories (19902006)
region

arable land & permanent crops 

pasture

Africa

Asia* (South, East and SE Asia)

Europe

North America

Latin America and the Caribbean

Oceania

* Central Asia excluded due to incomplete dataset.
Source: FAOSTAT (2012).

36 025

12 149

-55 646

-20 073

15 753

-263

(1 000 ha)

8 863

-20 506

-152 441

-1 954

11 069

-28 408

forest area 

other land 

-53 700

6 855

261

5 387

-67 870

-2 112

7 001

-1 068

-96 796

23 811

37 973

30 926

partly, by secondary forest. Under this assumption, every year roughly 2.9 million 
ha are converted to arable land and grassland. At the same time, agricultural land 
is abandoned at a rate of 1.6 million ha per year. The annual net increase of arable 
land and grassland is 0.53 and 0.75 million ha, respectively. We thus assume that all 
incremental soybean area is gained at the expense of forest area. 

Rates of C loss/gain arising from specific land-use transitions were taken from 
PAS 2050 guidelines (BSI, 2008), which are based on IPCC (2006). The PAS 2050 
guidelines estimate deforestation (conversion of forest to annual cropland) releases 
in Brazil at an average 37 tonnes CO2-eq/ha, and conversion of forest and shrub 
land to annual crop in Argentina at 17 and 2.2 tonnes CO2-eq per ha, respectively. 
GHG  emissions  from  soybean-driven  LUC  were  calculated  as  the  accumulated 
emissions for one year resulting from the total area deforested during the period 
19902006 divided by the total soybean production in 2006. Based on this data, two 
LUC emission intensities were estimated for soybean cake produced in Brazil and 
Argentina, respectively: 7.69 and 0.93 kg CO2-eq/kg soybean cake. Soybeans and 
soybean cake produced elsewhere were assumed not to be associated with LUC. 

3.2 pasture expansion and land-use change
It  has  been  argued  that  while  forest  conversion  to  soybean  cultivation  is  occur-
ring, the majority of deforested area is destined to pasture formation (Morton et al., 
2006; Brown et al., 2005). Wassenaar et al. (2007) developed a spatial and temporal 
model framework to analyse the expansion of pasture into forest in Latin America. 
The analysis predicted that, on average, 76 percent of deforested land would be-
come pasture. Table C3 presents the net changes for different land use categories 
across  regions;  pasture  expansion  has  been  notable  in  Latin  America  and  Africa 
while, at the same time, forest area in Latin America and Africa during the same 
period declined substantially. 

3.2.1 Approach
The  approach  is  based  on  the  IPCC  stock-based  approach  termed  the  Stock-
Difference  Method,  which  can  be  applied  where  carbon  stocks  are  measured  at 
two  points  in  time  to  assess  carbon  stock  changes  (IPCC,  2006).  The  following 
emissions from deforestation were considered: 

136

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chains	CO2 emissions from changes in biomass stocks (above-and below-ground 

biomass);

	CO2 emissions from changes in dead organic matter (litter and deadwood); 
	CO2 emissions from changes in soil carbon stocks.

For each of the carbon pools mentioned above, several factors such as land use 
(forest, croplands, pasture), climatic zone, ecotype (tropical moist or tropical dry 
forest), soil type (mineral or organic soils), forest type, etc., were taken into con-
sideration. Since data from forestry inventories are only available from 1990, the 
changes in carbon stocks due to deforestation could only be calculated for the pe-
riod 1990-2006.

The calculations of land-use change were accomplished in two steps: first, the 
assessment of land use dynamics; and second, the carbon emissions based on land 
use dynamics and biophysical conditions. A complete assessment of carbon emis-
sions from LUC involves the quantification of several key elements including de-
forestation rates, land use dynamics, and initial carbon stocks in biomass and soil.  
Two  types  of  information  are  fundamental  to  enable  emissions  to  be  calculated: 
rates  of  deforestation  and  per  hectare  changes  in  carbon  stocks  in  the  different 
carbon pools. The following sections provide a detailed description of the applied 
methodology and assumptions made.

Determining total land area converted from forest to grassland. To accurately esti-
mate carbon fluxes from LUC, it is critical to understand LUC dynamics follow-
ing deforestation. With regard to land-use transition matrices, a simplified approach 
was adopted. Changes in land use area were estimated on the basis of the Tier 1 
approach outlined in Chapter 3 of the IPCC guidelines, which estimates the total 
change in area for each individual land use category in each country. 

FAOSTAT statistics on total land area (classified by land use category) were used 

to calculate the annual net change in the area of each land use category. 

Table C4 presents the countries in which the increase in pasture area was largely 
facilitated by a decrease in forest area, and our estimates show that about 13 million 
hectares were deforested for pasture establishment.

Table C4. Pasture expansion against forestland in Latin America (1990-2006)
Countries

pasture area change

share of regional expansion 

Brazil

Chile

Paraguay

Nicaragua

Other*

Total

(1 000 ha)

10 212.3 

1 150.0 

1 040.0 

454.3 

365.0

13 221.6

(percentage)

77.2

8.7

7.9

3.4

2.8

100

* Other category includes: Honduras, Ecuador, Panama, El Salvador and Belize.
Source: Authors calculations based on FAOSTAT data.

137

Appendix C - Changes in carbon stocks related to land use and land-use changeTable C5. Country specific estimates of above-and below-ground biomass
Countries

above-ground biomass1

Below-ground biomass

(tonnes DM/ha)

ratio of below- to  

above- ground biomass2

220
220
210
210
300
220

Brazil
Chile
Paraguay
Nicaragua
Ecuador
Other*
1  Derived from IPCC, Volume 4, Chapter 4, Table 4.4.
2  Ratio of above-below ground factors are derived from IPCC guidelines, Table 4.7.
3  Total biomass is the sum of above-and below-ground biomass.
* Other category includes: Honduras, Ecuador, Panama, El Salvador and Belize.

0.24
0.24
0.24
0.24
0.37
0.24

(tonnes DM/ha)

52.8
52.8
50.4
50.4
111
52.8

total biomass3
(tonnes DM/ha)

272.8
272.8
260.4
260.4
411.0
272.8

Changes in carbon stocks from above- and below-ground biomass. The method ap-
plied here focuses on stock changes in biomass associated with woody vegetation 
which are capable of accumulating large quantities of carbon over a long period 
of time. The Tier 1 method necessitates the estimation of biomass before and after 
conversion using IPCC equation 2.16 (Volume 4, Chapter 2). 

Biomass in forests is determined by ecological zone, type of native vegetation 
and geographical location of forests. Based on the IPCC Tier 1 approach, in the 
conversion of forest to grassland it is assumed that all biomass is cleared and there-
fore the default biomass after conversion is 0 tonnes DM ha-1. The IPCC guidelines 
(Chapter 4, Volume 4, Table 4.7) provide average default values for above-ground 
biomass  in  forests.  Due  to  the  lack  of  data  on  below-ground  biomass,  the  ratio 
of below-to-above ground biomass (root-to-shoot ratio) was used to estimate the 
below-ground component of biomass and the total biomass (tonnes DM/ha) given 
in Table C5. A default factor of 0.50 tonnes C per tonnes DM (carbon fraction for 
woody biomass was used to convert biomass into carbon stocks per hectare.

Changes in carbon stocks from dead organic matter (DOM) pools. The conceptual 
approach to estimating changes in C stocks in dead wood and litter pools is to es-
timate the C stocks in the old and new land use categories and apply this change in 
the year of conversion. Equation 2.23 (IPCC, 2006, Volume 4, Chapter 2) was used 
to estimate changes in C stocks from DOM. 

According to the IPCC Tier 1 approach, DOM pools in non-forest land catego-
ries after the conversion are zero and this is based on the assumption that all DOM 
carbon losses occur entirely in the year of land-use conversion. Tier 1 also assumes 
that carbon contained in biomass killed during the conversion of land is emitted to 
the atmosphere and none is added to the dead wood and litter pools. Tier 1 default 
factors for dead wood and litter were taken from IPCC (2006, Volume 4, Chapter 
2, Table 2.2).

Changes  in  soil  carbon  stocks.  SOC  stock  changes  do  not  occur  instantaneously 
but over a period of years to decades. The current IPCC good practice guidance 
for GHG inventories assumes a period of 20 years for a new equilibrium to occur 
after conversion (IPCC, 2006). The change in the amount of SOC depends on fac-
tors such as climate region, native soil type, management system after conversion 

138

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsFigure C3. 
Main soil classes in Latin American forested areas based on the World Reference 
Base for Soil Resources classification

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

80

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

Plinthosols

Nisols

Lixisols

Ferralsols

Acrisols

HAC soils

LAC soils

Volcanic soils

Sandy soils

Spodic Soils

Wetland soils

LAC: low activity clay; HAC: high activity clay.
Source: Authors.

and input use. The calculation of SOC losses per hectare of area transformed from 
forest to grassland is based on equation 2.25 in IPCC (2006, Volume 4, Chapter 2), 
which takes into account changes in soil carbon stocks associated with type of land 
use, management practices and input of organic matter (fertilization, irrigation, lim-
ing and grazing intensity) in the soil.

The approach makes a distinction between organic and mineral soil carbon pools, 
and the focus is on the impacts of LUC on the organic pool, because inorganic soil 
carbon is assumed to be insensitive to land-use change and management. Land con-
verted  to  grassland  was  stratified  according  to  climatic  region,  management  and 
major soil types based on country specific classifications. The starting point was 
to derive a soil type classification of areas under forest in the selected countries in 
order to determine SOCs. This was accomplished with overlays of suitable climatic 
and soil maps coupled with spatial data on forest land area16,17. Figure C3 presents 
the mapping results of country-specific soil types on forested land and provides 
information on the dominant soil groups in forested areas in Latin America.

To establish SOC stocks, the soil divisions were further aggregated into dominant 
soil type classes (Figure C3) defined in IPCC guidelines based on the World Reference 
Base (WRB) for Soil Resources classification. Based on this aggregation, at a regional 
level, soils with low activity clay cover nearly 73 percent of the forested area in the 
nine countries. The remaining forested area is made up of the other five dominant soil 
types of which the high activity clay soil types cover 17 percent of the area (Figure C3).

16  FAO/IIASA/ISRIC/ISS-CAS/JRC. 2009. Harmonized World Soil Database (version 1.1). FAO, Rome, Italy 

and IIASA, Laxenburg, Austria.

17  Arino, O., Ramos, J., Kalogirou, V., Defourny, P. & Achard, F. 2010. GlobCover 2009, Proceedings of the 
Living Planet Symposium, SP-686, June 2010. Data downloaded from http://ionia1.esrin.esa.int/ in August 
2011.

139

Appendix C - Changes in carbon stocks related to land use and land-use changeTable C6. Default soil organic C stocks for mineral soils
Climate region

high activity clay soils

Low activity clay soils

(tonnes C.ha-1 in 0-30 cm depth)

Boreal 
Cold temperate, dry
Cold temperate, moist
Warm temperate, dry
Warm temperate, moist
Tropical, dry
Tropical, moist
Tropical, wet
Tropical, montane

68
50
95
38
88
38
65
44
88

NA: Not Applicable because these soils do not normally occur in some climatic zones. 
Source: IPCC (2006).

NA
33
85
24
63
35
47
60
63

net 

 annual change
tonnes C.ha-1 yr-1

- 0.11
- 0.08
- 0.12
- 0.07
- 0.11
- 0.15
- 0.12
- 0.09
- 0.12

Table C7. Soil organic carbon pool at 0-30 cm depth
Countries

soil C stocks 
under forest

soil C stocks  
under grassland

tonnes C.ha-1

Brazil
Chile
Paraguay
Nicaragua
Honduras
Ecuador
Panama
El Salvador
Belize
Source: Authors calculations based on IPCC (2006).

60
44
65
35
56
78
65
50
65

58.20
42.68
63.05
33.95
54.32
75.66
63.05
48.50
63.05

net change in 
carbon stocks 
tonnes C.ha-1

-1.8
-1.3
-2.0
-1.1
-1.7
-2.3
-2.0
-1.5
-2.0

The 2006 IPCC guidelines provide average default SOC stocks for the dominant 
soil classes clustered by eco-region reproduced in Table C6. The default reference 
soil organic C stocks are for the top 30 cm of the soil profile because different land 
use management methods mostly affect soil carbon in the surface layer.

For Tier 1, all stock change factors (Flu, Fmg, FI) were assumed to be equal to 1 
for forest land, corresponding to the default values in IPCC guidelines. For grass-
lands, stock change factors used for land use and input (Glu, and FI) were assigned 
a value of 1. 

The  quality  of  management  of  tropical  pastures  after  conversion  is  critical  in 
understanding whether the soils under this land use represent a source or a sink of 
atmospheric carbon. Differences in management practices could significantly affect 
subsequent trends in soil carbon. Due to the limited data on management and input, 
default values were used. 

It  was  assumed  that  pastures  are  moderately  degraded  and  therefore  a  coeffi-
cient of 0.97 (IPCC, 2006 Volume 4 , Chapter 6, Table 6.2) for Fmg stock factor was 
applied, which represents overgrazed or moderately degraded grasslands with re-
duced productivity and receiving no management inputs. This assumption is based 

140

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainson the findings of studies (Hernandez et al., 1995; Murty et al., 2002; De Oliveira et 
al., 2006; Cerri et al., 2005;) which inferred that most of the pastures in LAC are in 
some process of degradation caused by poor management methods, low input fer-
tilization and no maintenance. The results (Table C7) show a net decrease in SOC 
with losses ranging between 1.1 to 2.3 tonnes C ha-1. 

3.3 sensitivity analysis and the influence of Luc method
Modelling of land use and LUC emissions is subject to great uncertainties mainly 
because of the complexity of LULUCF processes, the challenges of obtaining reli-
able global data and the absence of validated approaches to estimate carbon stock 
changes. In particular, uncertainty regarding the magnitude of LUC emissions aris-
es due to uncertainties in: (a) the rates of land use; (b) the carbon storage capacity 
of different forests, initial carbon stocks and the modes of C release; and (c) the 
dynamics of land use not normally tracked. In addition, a value judgment has to be 
made regarding what drives LUC and, consequently, how the emissions should be 
allocated. In order to explore the potential effect that different methodologies can 
have, the results obtained with the GLEAM approach are compared to three alter-
native approaches: (a) PAS 2050-1:2012; (b) One-Soy; and (c) reduced time-frame 
approach. These approaches are summarized in Table C8. 

3.3.1 Alternative approaches
PAS 2050-1: 2012 approach. Several studies suggest that deforestation is related to 
the expanding soybean sector (Fearnside, 2005; Bickel and Dros 2003; Carvalho et 
al., 2002), but others dispute this claim, and argue that soybean is expanding into 
land previously under pasture, and is not causing new deforestation (Mueller, 2003; 
Brandao et al., 2005). Due to the lack of knowledge of the origin of the converted 

Table C8. Alternative approaches for soybean LUC emissions calculations
method

Quantification of rates of Luc

spatial allocation

temporal 
allocation of 
luC emissions
20 years

GLEAM 
approach 
(current study)

To all soybean 
produced within 
the country

PAS 2050-1:2012

To all soybean 
produced within 
the country

20 years

One-Soy

To traded 
soybean

20 years

Reduced  
time-frame 

To all soybean 
produced within 
the country

20 years

Source: Authors.

FAOSTAT average LUC rates 1990-2006
Brazil: forestcrops (100%)
Argentina: other crops (44%), forest (22%) 
and other land (31%)soybean

Average rates over 20 years. LUC rates 
based on (a) or (b) - whichever results in the 
highest emission factor.
(a) from grassland forest and perennial 
arable in equal proportion
(b) from grassland, forest and perennial 
arable in proportion to their rates of change
FAOSTAT average LUC rates 1990-2006
Brazil: forestcrops (100%)
Argentina: other crops (44%), forest (22%) 
and other land (31%)soybean

FAOSTAT average LUC rates 2002-2007
Brazil: forestcrops
Argentina: other crops (44%), forest (22%) 
and other land (31%)soybean

141

Quantification of rates 
of C loss/gain

IPCC (2006) Tier 1

IPCC (2006) Tier 1

IPCC (2006) Tier 1

IPCC (2006) Tier 1

Appendix C - Changes in carbon stocks related to land use and land-use changeland, the GLEAM results were compared with PAS 2050-1:2012 (BSI, 2012), which 
provides a way of quantifying LUC emissions when previous land use is not known 
and only the crop and country are known. The PAS 2050-1:2012 calculations of 
emissions related to land-use change are accomplished in two steps. 

First, rates of land-use change need to be calculated based on the PAS 2050-1: 
2012. To calculate these, four categories of land are considered: forest, pasture, an-
nual cropland and perennial cropland. Time series data on land area for forest, pas-
ture, annual and perennial crops taken from FAOSTAT were used to: (i) determine 
whether the crop in question was associated with LUC by quantifying the rate of 
expansion over a 20-year period; and (ii) determine the share of LUC associated 
with each land category. In a second step, carbon losses based on land dynamics 
and biophysical conditions (climate, soil type, forest type, crop management, etc.) 
were computed based on the IPCC (2006) Tier 1 approach. The two sources of 
carbon taken into account in this approach are vegetation and soil. Two LUC EFs 
were calculated, based on different assumptions regarding where land for soybean 
expansion is derived from: (i) assuming that land for soybean production is gained 
in equal proportions from grassland, forest and perennial cropland; (ii) assuming 
that land for soybean is gained from other land use categories in proportion to 
their relative rates of change. The highest of the two EFs was then selected, in 
accordance with the guidelines. BSI (2012) present a detailed account of methodol-
ogy and data sources.

One-Soy approach. In this approach it is assumed that all soybeans, irrespective of 
where they have been produced, are associated with LUC. The central argument for 
this scenario is that the global demand for soybeans is largely interconnected and is 
a key driver of LUC. An average LUC emission factor associated with soybean was 
estimated by calculating the total LUC emissions attributable to globally-traded 
soybean and soybean cake and then dividing this by total global soybean cake ex-
ports. Because the emission intensity was applied to all traded soybean and soy-
bean cake, the approach equally distributes the LUC emissions across all importing 
countries irrespective of where the soybean is produced. 

Reduced time-frame approach. Annual deforestation rates are highly variable, so 
the  period  over  which  the  rates  of  LUC  are  estimated  can  therefore  have  a  sig-
nificant influence on results. Since data from forestry inventories are only available 
from 1990, this assessment was based on the average rates of LUC over the period 
1990-2006. This not only coincides with a period of high rates of deforestation but 
also high soybean area expansion. In the reduced time frame approach, the LUC 
emissions are calculated based on the average rates of LUC over the period from 
2002-07, while maintaining the underlying assumptions in the study.

3.3.2 Results
Effect  of  LUC  approach  on  soybean  LUC  emission  factor.  Table  C9  reports  the 
LUC factors for soybean cake (kg CO2-eq per kg soybean cake) calculated using 
each of the approaches. The choice of method for estimating LUC EFs can strongly 
influence the emission intensity of livestock products and illustrates the complexity 
of analysing LUC processes. 

142

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsTable C9. Summary of soybean LUC emission intensity for the four approaches
scenario

argentina

brazil

GLEAM approach (current study)

PAS 2050-1:2012

One-Soy

Reduced time-frame 

Source: Authors calculations.

(kg CO2-eq per kg soybean cake)

0.93

4.23

2.98

0.34

7.69

3.21

2.98

3.70

The PAS 2050-1: 2012 approach produces markedly different LUC emission fac-
tors due to the assumptions made regarding the land use category against which ad-
ditional land for soybean production was gained and the relative share of this gain 
(Table C10). Unlike Brazil, Argentina has a higher EF using the default assumption 
(that expanded crop areas are derived from forest, grassland and perennial crops in 
equal proportion) than using the relative rates of change. The higher proportion of 
soybean cultivated on expanded areas in Argentina (76 percent) compared to Bra-
zil (55 percent), combines with the default LUC assumptions, to give Argentina a 
higher soybean EF than Brazil under PAS 2050-1:2012.

The strength of the One-Soy approach is that it recognizes that global demand is 
a key driver of LUC. However, it penalizes those countries whose production is not 
directly associated with LUC and may not provide the right signals to producers 
and consumers of soybean. 

In  the  reduced  time-frame  approach,  the  emission  intensity  of  soybean  cake 
from Argentina and Brazil reduces by more than half. Average annual deforesta-
tion rates appear to be close over the two periods 1990-2006 and 2002-2007 (1.76 
and 1.98 million ha respectively, Figure C4), but the average annual rates of soy-
bean expansion differ and they are higher for 2002-2007: between 1990 and 2006, 
the soybean area in Brazil increased by 534 000 ha/year whereas the increase for 
the period 2002-2007 was 840 000 ha/year. The lower emission intensity for 2002-
2007 therefore results from the rate of deforestation relative to the rate of soybean 
expansion, not from the absolute change in deforestation rate. 

Table C10. Proportion of expanded soybean area derived from each land-use category
land-use category

Gleam approach

pas 2050-1:2012 approach

Forest

Grassland

Shrubland

Annual cropland

Perennial cropland

brazil

100

0

0

0

0

argentina

brazil

argentina

percentage

22

0

31

44

0

51 (33)

0 (33)

0 (0)

46 (0)

3 (33)

23 (33)

0 (33)

0 (0)

61 (0)

16 (33)

Note: Figures in brackets are the PAS 2050-1 default land use transformations.
Sources: Based on FAOSTAT (2012).

143

Appendix C - Changes in carbon stocks related to land use and land-use changeFigure C4. 
Annual forest loss in Brazil

Time period considered in this assessment

s
e
r
a
t
c
e
h
0
0
0
1

 

 

3 500

3 000

2 500

2 000

1 500

1 000

500

0

1990

1991

1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

2002

2003

2004

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

Source: INPE, 2012.

Table C11. Estimated changes in pasture area and annual carbon losses for the 
reduced time-frame approach
Country

Change in pasture area (1 000 ha)

Carbon losses (tonnes CO2/ha/year)

Brazil
Chile
Paraguay
Nicaragua
Honduras
Ecuador
Panama
El Salvador
Belize
Total/average

Source: Authors calculations.

3 563.6
1 079.3 
1 464.6 
311.6 
170.0 

No gain in pasture

60.3
45.3 
0.3
6 695.3 

- 51.0
- 51.1
- 48.8
- 48.5
- 50.8
-
- 50.8
- 50.8
- 51.1
- 50.4

For  pasture  expansion,  emissions  are  highly  sensitive  to  the  time  period  cho-
sen;  using  a  ten-year  time-frame  scenario,  annual  carbon  losses  are  50.4  tonnes 
CO2  ha-1  yr-1  (Table  C11)  while  in  the  current  study  annual  carbon  losses  were 
estimated at 32 tonnes CO2 ha-1 yr-1. Shorter periods, however, place emphasis on 
deforestation  resulting  in  higher  annual  carbon  losses  per  hectare  placing  higher 
relative weighting of near-term emissions. 

4. comparison with other studies
The emissions intensity for LUC per kg of soybean and soybean cake calculated in 
this study are compared with other studies in Table C12. The emissions intensity 
used in this study is higher than some other studies, but within the overall range.

The emissions intensity of soybean is highly dependent on the calculation meth-

od and assumptions (Flysjo et al., 2012). Variation arises from differences in:

144

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chains	Calculation of C losses in soil and vegetation (above- and below-ground).
	Quantification of land-use transitions  i.e. how much of the LUC can be 

attributed to cropping.

	Allocation of LUC arising from cropping to specific crops, e.g. emissions 
are usually allocated to one of the following: (a) soybean grown in country/
region; (b) all expanding crops grown in country region; (c) all crops grown 
globally. This leads to huge variations in the emissions per kg of crop.

	The time period over which emission are allocated.

Table C12. Soybean LUC emissions per unit of output and hectare
study

area covered by study

emissions

*Converted/all soybean /all crops

FAO (2010) 

FAO (2010)

FAO (2010)

FAO (2010)

FAO (2010)

Argentina

1.04 kg CO2-eq/kg soybean

All soybean

Brazil

Brazil

Brazil

Brazil

7.69 kg CO2-eq/kg soybean cake

All soybean

8.54 kg CO2-eq/kg soybean cake

All soybean 

12.81 kg CO2-eq/kg soybean cake Converted

14.23 kg CO2-eq/kg soybean 

Converted

Leip et al. (2010) 
grass>soybean 
Leip et al. (2010) mix>soybean  South America

South America

1.50 kg CO2-eq/kg soybean cake

3.10 kg CO2-eq/kg soybean cake

All soybean 
Cited in Flysjo et al. (2012)
All soybean 
Cited in Flysjo et al. (2012)

Leip et al. (2010) 
forest>soybean 
Sonesson et al. (2009, p13)

Audsley et al. 
(2010, p.59)
Audsley et al. 
(2010, p.59)
Castanheira & Freire (2011)

South America

Brazil

Brazil

10.00 kg CO2-eq/kg soybean cake All soybean 

1.50 kg CO2-eq/kg soybean 

5.30 kg CO2-eq/kg soybean

Cited in Flysjo et al. (2012)
All soybean 
~0.6 of this is due to LUC
All soybean 

Argentina

1.60 kg CO2-eq/kg soybean

All soybean 

Low (Argentina)

~0.5 kg CO2-eq/kg soybean

Castanheira & Freire (2011)

High (Brazil)

~15 kg CO2-eq/kg soybean

Nemecek et al. (2012)

Nemecek et al. (2012)

Brazil

Brazil

1.47 kg CO2-eq/kg soybean

5.21 kg CO2-eq/kg soybean

Reijnders & Huijbregts (2008) Brazil  cerrado

1 to 2.7 kg CO2-eq/kg soybean

Converted

Converted

All soybean 
Brazil, LUC, Ecoinvent v2.2
All soybean 
Brazil, LUC, Ecoinvent v3.0
Converted

Reijnders & Huijbregts (2008) Brazil  forest

5 to 13.9 kg CO2-eq/kg soybean

Converted

FAO (2010)

FAO (2010)

Brazil  deforestation

37.00 kg CO2-eq/ha 

Brazil  deforestation

 22.20 kg CO2-eq/ha 

Converted

All soybean 

Audsley et al. (2009)

All LUC

1.43 kg CO2-eq/ha 

Audsley et al. (2010, p.59)

Brazil  deforestation

 37.00 kg CO2-eq/ha 

Audsley et al. (2010, p.59)

Brazil  grassland

11.00 kg CO2-eq/ha 

Reijnders & Huijbregts (2008) Brazil  forest

14 to 39 kg CO2-eq/ha 

Schmidt et al. (2011)

All LUC

 8.42 kg CO2-eq/ha 

Allocates LUC to all crops 
globally
Converted

Converted

Converted

Allocates LUC to all crops 
globally

*EF for (a) converted land; (b) average over all soybean grown in country/region; or (c) all crops grown globally.

145

Appendix C - Changes in carbon stocks related to land use and land-use changeTable C13. Comparison of studies on LUC associated with pasture expansion in Brazil 
study and area

approach

scope

Current study
(Brazil)

IPCC stock-based approach  
(stock difference method)
Period: 1990-2006

Cederberg et al., 2011
(Brazil -Legal Amazon Area)

Net committed emissions approach
Period: 1986-2006

Leip et al., 2010
(Beef imported into EU from  
Brazil)

Net committed emissions approach
Period: 1986-2006

Biomass
Soil carbon
Dead organic matter
Biomass
Soil carbon
CH4 and N2O
Biomass
Soil carbon
CH4 and N2O

Carbon losses  

(tonnes CO2-eq /ha)

506.7

572

568.7

For pasture expansion, with the exception of Brazil where impacts of deforesta-
tion have been analysed to a greater degree, there are relatively few estimates of the 
impact of carbon losses the due to deforestation. We therefore compared the results 
obtained for Brazil with estimates from other studies (Table C13). 

Despite  the  difference  in  calculation  approach,  our  estimates  are  very  similar 
to those found in the literature. This may be partly coincidental because the ap-
proaches differed in many respects; for example, the period assessed, the calculation 
method and assumptions and well as emission factors. Cederberg et al. (2011) ap-
ply different carbon stock losses for the different pools and take into account the 
impacts on fire used in forest clearing on CO2 emissions. 

The estimates of LUC emissions presented in this report are still very prelimi-
nary  and  need  to  be  interpreted  with  caution.  This  is  an  important  area  for  im-
provement of GLEAM and it is planned that future developments of the model will 
include a more detailed and complete assessment of LUC emissions.

5. Land use
For the reasons explained above, this analysis could not incorporate C stock chang-
es under constant land use. This section attempts to evaluate the effect of this sim-
plification on results. Given the importance of grasslands as a potential as a C sink 
(Soussana  et  al.,  2010),  we  focus  our  case  study  on  this  land  use  rather  than  on 
feed-crops.

Furthermore, we selected the European Union for this evaluation in view of data 
availability in this region. National inventories in the European Union are indeed 
increasingly accurate because Member States are requested to maintain and moni-
tor the area of permanent grassland by the Common Agricultural Policy. Member 
States are required to report annual estimates of their total area of permanent grass-
land. 

Soussana et al. (2010) estimate an average grassland C sequestration rate of 5  30 
g C/m2/year for temperate grasslands under baseline, constant land use. This esti-
mate is derived from an exhaustive literature review, and inventories of SOC stocks 
at regional or local level, mainly from Western Europe. 

Using this estimate, we computed that permanent grasslands in the European 
Union (estimated at 62.7 million ha) represent a sink of 3.1  18.8 million tonnes 
C per year, equivalent to 11.5  69.0 million tonnes CO2-eq per year. This estimate 

146

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsTable C14. Total GHG emissions from the ruminant sector in the European 
Union and changes in C stocks in permanent pasture
systems

c sequestration

in permanent grassland

under baseline

constant management2 

total emissions 
based on a lCa ap-
proach and exclud-

ing land use1

(million tonnes CO2-eq/year)

11.5  69.0

Total ruminant sector

Cattle, grazing

Cattle, mixed

Small ruminants, grazing

Small ruminants, mixed

1  Based on GLEAM.
2  Based on Soussana et al. (2010).

390.5

25.6

322.8

4.6

37.4

is compared with the 390.5 million tonnes CO2-eq emitted yearly by the ruminant 
sector in the European Union (Table C14).

Taking into account C stock changes in permanent pastures, net emissions from 
the EU ruminant sector are therefore estimated between 310 and 448 million tonnes 
CO2-eq/year.

Net sequestration/emission of C in permanent pasture under stable management 
practices may thus be significant in the European Union, and should be included 
in the assessment of GHG emissions of the sector. The estimate computed here is 
however one order of magnitude smaller than the sum of all other emissions along 
the supply chain. Furthermore, even in a region where data availability is compara-
tively high, the uncertainty about C fluxes is such that it cannot be ascertained if 
permanent grasslands are net sequesters or emitters of carbon. 

The European Union only accounts for a limited share of total grassland area 
(about 2 percent according to FAOSTAT, 2013), so including land use sequestra-
tion/emissions  could  have  even  greater  effects  on  net  emissions  of  the  sector  in 
other regions. For example, Cerri et al. (2004) measured that brasilian pastures es-
tablished in the early 90s could store up to 330 g.m-2 of carbon in the 20 first centi-
meters of soil. This would however require a better understanding SOC dynamics 
in grasslands and the development of models and databases to monitoring and pre-
dicting changes in C stocks. 

referenCes
Armentano, T.V. & Menges, E.S. 1986. Patterns of change in the carbon balance 
of organic soil-wetlands of the temperate zone. Journal of Ecology, 74: 755774. 
Audsley,  E.,  Brander,  M.,  Chatterton,  J.,  Murphy-Bokern,  D.,  Webster,  C.  & 
Williams, A. 2009. How low can we go? An assessment of greenhouse gas emis-
sions from the UK food system and the scope to reduce them by 2050. Food Cli-
mate Research Network and WWF. UK.

147

Appendix C - Changes in carbon stocks related to land use and land-use changeAudsley, E., Angus, A., Chatterton, J., Graves, A., Morris, J., Murphy-Bokern, 
D.,  Pearn,  K.,  Sandars,  D.  &  Williams,  A.  2010.  Food,  land  and  greenhouse 
gases. The effect of changes in UK food consumption on land requirements and 
greenhouse gas emissions. London: The Committee on Climate Change.

Bickel, U. & Dros, J. M. 2003. The impacts of soybean cultivation on Brazilian eco-
systems. Bonn, AIDEnvironment-WWF): p 33. (available at http://assets.panda.
org/downloads/impactsofsoybean.pdf).

BSI. 2008. PAS 2050:2008. Specification for the assessment of the life cycle green-
house  gas  emissions  of  goods  and  services.  UK:  British  Standards  Institution 
(BSI).

BSI.  2012.  PAS  2050-1:2012.  Assessment  of  life  cycle  greenhouse  gas  emissions 
from horticultural products Supplementary requirements for the cradle to gate 
stages of GHG assessments of horticultural products undertaken in accordance 
with PAS 2050. British Standards Institution. London.

Brandao, A.S.P., Castro de Rezende, G. & Da Costa Marques, R.W. 2005. Ag-
ricultural growth in the period 19992004, outburst in soybeans area and en-
vironmental impacts in Brazil. IPEA Discussion Paper No. 1062. Instituto de 
Pesquisa Economica Aplicada. Brasilia.

Brown, J.C., Koeppe, M., Coles, B. & Price, K.P. 2005. Soybean production and 
conversion  of  tropical  forest  in  the  Brazilian  Amazon:  the  case  of  Vilhena, 
Rondonia. Ambio, 34: 4629.

Carvalho, G.O., Nepstad, D., McGrath, D., Vera Diaz. M. del C. & Barros, A.C. 
2002. Frontier expansion in the Amazon. Balancing development and sustain-
ability. Environment Sci. Policy Sustainable Dev., 44: 3242.

Castanheira, E. & Freire, F. 2011. Life-cycle greenhouse gas assessment of soybeans. 

Paper presented at Life-Cycle Management Conference, 2011. Berlin.

Cederberg, C., Persson, M.U., Neovius, K., Molander, S. & Clift, R. 2011. Includ-
ing Carbon Emissions from Deforestation in the Carbon Footprint of Brazilian 
Beef. Environmental Science & Technology, 45 (5): 17731779.

Cerri, C.C., Melillo, J.M., Feigl, B.J., Piccolo, M.C., Neill, C., Steudler, P.A., Car-
valho, M.S., Godinho, V.P., Cerri, C.E.P. & Bernoux, M. 2005. Recent history 
of the agriculture of the Brazilian Amazon Basin. Outlook on Agriculture, 34(4): 
215223.

Cerri, C.E.P., Paustian, K, Bernoux, M., Victoria, R.L., Melillo, J.M. & Cerri, 
C.C. 2004. Modelling changes in soil organic matter in Amazon forest to pasture 
conversion with the Century model. Global Change Biology, 10(5):815-832.

Coleman, K., Jenkinson, D.S., Crocker, G.J., Grace, P.R., Klir, J., Korschens, M., 
Poulton, P.R. & Richter, D.D. 1997. Simulating trends in soil organic carbon in 
long-term experiments using RothC-26.3. Geoderma 81: 2944.

Conant,  R.T.  &  Paustian,  K.  2002.  Potential  soil  carbon  sequestration  in  over-
grazed  grassland  ecosystems.  Global  Biogeochemical  Cycles,  16(4):  1143. 
doi:10.1029/2001GB001661.

Costa de Campos, B., Carneiro Amado, T. J., Bayer, C., Nicoloso, Rodrigo da 
Silveira, & Fiorin, J.E. 2011. Carbon stock and its compartments in a subtropi-
cal oxisol under long-term tillage and crop rotation systems. Rev. Bras. Cienc. 
Solo 35(3): 805-817.

148

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsDel Grosso, S.J., Parton, W.J., Mosier, A.R., Hartman, M.D., Brenner, L., Ojima, 
D.S. & Schimel, D.S. 2001. Simulated interaction of carbon dynamics and nitro-
gen trace gas fluxes using the DAYCENT model. In Shaffer, J., Liwang Ma & S. 
Hansen, eds. Modelling carbon and nitrogen dynamics for soil management, pp. 
303-332. Boca Raton, Florida, USA, CRC Press. 

Dieckow, J., Zendonadi dos Santos, N., Bayer, C., Molin, R., Favaretto, N. & 
Pauletti, V. 2010. No-tillage crop rotations, C sequestration and aspects of C 
saturation in a subtropical Ferralsol. 19th World Congress of Soil Science, Soil 
Solutions for a Changing World. Brisbane, Australia.

FAO. 2009. State of the Worlds Forests 2009. FAO publication, ISBN 978-92-5-

106057-5. Rome, Italy.

FAO-FRA. 2010. Global Forestry Resource Assessment 2010. United Nations Food 

and Agriculture Organization: Rome, 2010.

FAO. 2010. Greenhouse gas emissions from the dairy sector  A life cycle assessment, 
by Gerber, P., Opio, C., Vellinga, T., Herderson, B. & Steinfeld, H. FAO. Rome.

FAOSTAT. 2011. FAO Statistical Database. Accessed 2011.
Falloon, P. & Smith, P. 2002. Simulating SOC changes in long-term experiments 
with RothC and CENTURY: Model evaluation for a regional scale experiment. 
Soil Use and Management, 18: 101111.

Fearnside, P.M. 2005. Deforestation in Brazilian Amazonia: history, rates and con-

sequences. Conservation Biology, 19(3): 680688.

Flysjo, A., Cederberg, C., Henriksson, M. & Ledgard, S. 2012. The interaction 
between milk and beef production and emissions from LUC - critical consider-
ations in life cycle assessment and carbon footprint studies of milk. Journal of 
Cleaner Production, 28: 134142.

Hart, P.B.S. 1984. Effects of soil type and past cropping on the nitrogen supplying 

ability of arable soils. University of Reading, UK. 

Hernandez,  M.,  Argel,  P.J.,  Ibrahim,  M.A.  &  Mannetje,  L.  1995.  Pasture  pro-
duction, diet selection and liveweight gains of cattle grazing Brachiaria brizan-
tha with or without Arachis pintoi at two stocking rates in the Atlantic zone of 
Costa Rica. Trop. Grassl., 29 (3): 134-141

Houghton, R.A. & Goodale, C.L. 2004. Effects of LUC on the carbon balance 
of terrestrial ecosystems. In DeFries, R.S., Asner, G.P. & R.A. Houghton, eds. 
Ecosystems  and  Land-use  Change.  Washington,  D.C.,  American  Geophysical 
Union. 

IPCC. 2000. Land Use, Land-Use Change, and Forestry. Cambridge, UK, Cam-

bridge University Press.

IPCC. 2006. 2006 IPCC Guidelines for National Greenhouse Gas Inventories pre-
pared by the National Greenhause Gas Inventories Programme, Eggleston, H.S., 
Buenida, L., Miwa, K., Nagara, T. & Tanabe, K. (eds). Published: IGES, Japan.

Jenkinson,  D.S.,  Hart,  P.B.S.,  Rayner,  J.H.  &  Parry,  L.C.  1987.  Modelling  the 
turnover  of  organic  matter  in  long-term  experiments  at  Rothamsted.  INTE-
COL Bulletin 15: 1-8.

Jones,  M.B.  &  Donnelly,  A.  2004.  Carbon  sequestration  in  temperate  grassland 
ecosystems and the influence of management, climate and elevated CO2. New 
Phytologist, 164: 423439. 

149

Appendix C - Changes in carbon stocks related to land use and land-use changeKirschbaum, M.U.F. & Paul, K.I. 2002. Modelling C and N dynamics in forest 
soils with a modified version of the CENTURY model. Soil Biology and Bio-
chemistry, 34: 341354.

Lal, R. 1999. Soil management and restoration for C sequestration to mitigate the 

accelerated greenhouse effect. Progress in Environmental Science, 1: 307326.

Lal, R. 2004. Soil carbon sequestration impacts on global climate change and food 

security. Science, 304: 16231627.

Leip, A., Weiss, F., Wassenaar, T., Perez, I., Fellmann, T., Loudjani, P., Tubiello, F., 
Grandgirard, D., Monni, S. & Biala, K. 2010. Evaluation of the livestock sec-
tors contribution to the EU greenhouse gas emissions (GGELS) - Final Report, 
European Commission, Joint Research Centre.

Li,  C.,  Frolking,  S.  &  Frolking,  T.A.  1992.  A  model  of  nitrous  oxide  evolution 
from soil driven by rainfall events: 1. Model structure and sensitivity. Journal of 
Geophysical Research, 97(D9): 97599776.

Li, C., Frolking, S. & Harriss, R. 1994. Modeling carbon biogeochemistry in agri-

cultural soils. Global Biogeochem Cycles, 8: 237254. 

Li, C. 1996. The DNDC model. In D.S. Powlson, P. Smith & J.U. Smith, eds. Eval-
uation of Soil Organic Matter Models Using Existing, Long-Term Datasets, pp. 
263267. NATO ASI Series I, Vol. 38. Heidelberg,Springer-Verlag.

Morton, D.C., DeFries, R.S., Shimabukuro, Y.E., Anderson, L.O., Arai, E., Es-
piritu-Santo, F. del B., Freitas, R. & Morisette, J. 2006. Cropland expansion 
changes deforestation dynamics in the southern Brazilian Amazon. PNAS USA, 
103(39): 1463741. 

Mueller, C.C. 2003. Expansion and Modernization of Agriculture in the Cerrado  

The Case of Soybeans in Brazils Center-West, p. 28.

Murty,  D,  Kirschbaum,  M.U.F,  McMurtrie,  R.E  &  McGilvray,  H.  2002.  Does 
forest conversion to agricultural land change soil organic carbon and nitrogen? 
A review of the literature. Global Change Biology, 8: 105123.

Nemecek, T., Weiler, K., Plassmann, K., Schnetzer, J., Gaillard, G., Jefferies, D., 
Garcia-Suarez, T., King, H. & Mila I Canals L. 2012. Estimation of the vari-
ability in global warming potential of worldwide crop production using a mod-
ular extrapolation approach. Journal of Clean Production, 31: 10617.

Nepstad, D., Schwartzman, S., Bamberger, B., Santilli, M., Ray, D., Sschlesinger, 
P., Lefebvre, P., Alencar, A., Prinz, E., Fiske, G. & Rolla, A. 2006. Inhibition 
of Amazon deforestation and fire by parks and indigenous lands. Conservation 
Biology, 20: 6573.

Pacheco, P. 2012. Soybean and oil palm expansion in South America: A review of 
main trends and implications. CIFOR Working Paper 90. Center for Interna-
tional Forestry Research. Bogor, Indonesia.

Parton, W.J., Schimel, D.S., Cole, C.V. & Ojima D.S. 1987. Analysis of factors 
controlling soil organic matter levels in Great Plains grasslands. Soil Science So-
ciety of America Journal, 51: 11731179.

Parton,W.J.,  Hartman,  M.D.,  Ojima,  D.S.  &  Schimel,  D.S.  1998.  DAYCENT: 
its land surface submodel: description and testing. Global Planet Change, 19: 
3548.

Paustian, K., Cole, C.V., Sauerbeck, D. & Sampson, N. 1998. CO2 mitigation by 

agriculture: An overview. Climatic Change, 40: 135162.

150

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsPost, W.M. & Kwon, K.C. 2000. Soil carbon sequestration and land-use change: 

processes and potential. Global Change Biology, 6(3): 317327.

Reijnders, L. & Huijbregts, M.A.J. 2008. Biogenic greenhouse gases linked to the 
life cycles of biodiesel derived from European rapeseed and Brazilian soybeans. 
Journal of Cleaner Production, 16: 1943-1948.

Schmidt, G.A., Jungclaus, J.H., Ammann, C.M., Bard, E., Braconnot, P., Crow-
ley, T.J., Delaygue, G., Joos, F., Krivova, N.A., Muscheler, R., Otto-Bliesner, 
B.L., Pongratz, J., Shindell, D.T., Solanki, S.K., Steinhilber, F. & Vieira, L.E.A. 
2011. Climate forcing reconstructions for use in PMIP simulations of the last 
millennium (v1.0). Geoscientific Model Development, 4: 33-45.

Sisti, C.P.J. , dos Santos, H.P., Kohhann, R., Alves, B.J.R., Urquiaga, S. & Bod-
dey R.M. 2004. Change in carbon and nitrogen stocks in soil under 13 years 
of conventional or zero tillage in southern Brazil. Soil & Tillage Research, 76: 
3958.

Soussana, J.F., Tallec, T. & Blanfort, V. 2010. Mitigating the greenhouse gas bal-
ance  of  ruminant  production  systems  through  carbon  sequestration  in  grass-
lands. Animal, 4(3): 334350.

Smith, P., Smith, J., Wattenbach, M., Meyer, J., Lindner, M., Zaehle, S., Hiederer, 
R., Jones, R.J.A., Montanarella, L., Rounsevell, M., Reginster, I. & Kankaan-
paa,  S.  2006.  Projected  changes  in  mineral  soil  carbon  of  European  forests, 
19902100. Canadian Journal of Soil Science, 86: 159169.

Smith, P., Martino, D., Cai, Z., Gwary, D., Janzen, H., Kumar, P., McCarl, B., 
Ogle, S., OMara, F., Rice, C., Scholes, B. & Sirotenko, O. 2007. Agriculture. 
In B. Metz, O.R. Davidson, P.R. Bosch, R. Dave & L.A. Meyer, eds. Climate 
Change 2007: Mitigation. Contribution of Working Group III to the Fourth As-
sessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC). 
New York, Cambridge University Press.

Sonesson,  U.,  Cederberg,  C.  &  Berglund,  M.  2009.  Greenhouse  gas  emissions 
in  animal  feed  production  decision  support  for  climate  certification.  Uppsa-
la,  Sweden.  Available  online:  http://www.klimatmarkningen.se/wp-content/
uploads/2009/12/2009-2-feed.pdf

Vieira, F. C. B., Bayer, C., Zanatta, J.A., Mielniczuk, J. & Six, J. 2009. Building Up 
Organic  Matter  in  a  Subtropical  Paleudult  under  Legume  Cover-Crop-Based 
Rotations. Soil Science Society of America Journal, 73(5): 1699-1706.

Wassenaar, T., Gerber, P., Verburg, M., Rosales, M., Ibrahim, M. & Steinfeld, H. 
2007. Projecting land-use changes in the Neotropics: The Geography of Pasture 
Expansion into Forest. Global Environmental Change, 17: 86104.

151

Appendix C - Changes in carbon stocks related to land use and land-use changeAPPENDIX D
Postfarm emissions

GHG emissions accounted for in the post farmgate part of the supply chain include 
emissions related to fuel combustion and energy use in the transport, processing 
and refrigeration of products. The system boundary is from the farmgate up to the 
retail point. During this phase of the life cycle, three distinct emission streams were 
studied:  emissions  from  the  transport  and  distribution  of  live  animals,  milk  and 
meat (domestic and international); GHG emissions from processing and refrigera-
tion; and emissions related to the production of packaging material. 

The system boundary for this part of the food chain included emissions from the 
farmgate to the retail distribution centre. Excluded from the analysis were estimates 
of GHG emissions from on-site waste-water treatment facilities, emissions from 
animal  waste18  at  the  slaughter  site,  the  retail  and  consumption  part  of  the  food 
chain (household transport and preparation) and disposal of packaging and waste, 
which fall outside the scope of the system boundary studied but may warrant fur-
ther research. Due to the lack of data, emissions related to by-products (rendering 
material, offal, etc.) are therefore currently excluded. However, we investigated the 
impact of allocating emissions to slaughter by-products (Appendix F). 

1. aPProach and assumP tions
1.1 milk from ruminant species
The quantification of post farmgate emissions for milk produced by cattle, small 
ruminants and buffalo was based on a similar approach. The approach (and level 
of complexity) was largely influenced by two factors: the importance of the sub-
sectors contribution to global milk production and the availability of data. Conse-
quently, a more comprehensive approach was applied to the milk from the global 
cattle  dairy  sector,  as  outlined  in  FAOs  report  on  GHG  emissions  in  the  dairy 
sector published in 2010.19

In the estimation of post farmgate emissions for small ruminant and buffalo milk, 
a similar but simplified approach was adopted; for small ruminants, it was assumed 
that all milk that left the farm was processed into cheese. FAOSTAT production sta-
tistics on goat and sheep cheese production were used to identify countries where 
cheese production is important. In producing countries with no cheese production, 
the sheep and goat milk was assumed to be consumed on farm and hence no post 
farmgate  emissions  were  estimated  for  these  countries.  In  addition,  since  not  all 
milk is processed and traded, the proportion of small ruminant milk leaving the 
farm was estimated from the cheese production and total milk production within 
the country. 

18  In some countries, manure/slurry from the slaughterhouse is anaerobically digested and the biogas is used for 
heating and electricity. The challenge is that there insufficient information available on on-site energy genera-
tion from animal waste; thus, the resulting substituted energy and avoided GHG emissions are not considered 
in the calculations.

19  FAO. 2010. http://www.fao.org/docrep/012/k7930e/k7930e00.pdf

153

The difference in calculation approach between cows milk and buffalo milk is 
that  for  dairy  cattle  milk  six  products  were  considered  (processed  milk,  cheese, 
whey, yoghurt, skimmed milk powder and whole milk powder), while post farm-
gate emissions for buffalo milk comprised emissions related to transport and pro-
cessing of raw milk into processed milk. Emissions related to international trade of 
dairy products was only considered for the cattle dairy sector. 

1.2 meat from ruminant species
GHG emissions reported for this part of the food chain are based on the finished 
product leaving the facility and do not account for meat co-products and render-
ing products; however, in a life cycle assessment, when a system produces multiple 
products each of which have economic value, it is standard practice to assign some 
of the emissions from that process to each of the co-products. 

In this analysis, all emissions were allocated to the carcass and therefore meat 
carries the whole burden. Post farmgate emissions for meat include: emissions as-
sociated with the transport of live animals to slaughterhouses, emissions related to 
slaughter and primary processing of carcasses, refrigeration of carcasses at process-
ing plant and transport and refrigeration of product. Emissions related to interna-
tional trade of meat products (carcasses and boneless meat) are taken into account. 
Due to the complexity of tracking trade flows of live animals the related emissions 
are excluded from this analysis. 

2. EnErgy consumP tion
Energy consumption is the most important source of GHG emissions from the post 
farmgate supply food chain. Table D1 presents average regional and country CO2 
emission coefficients applied in this analysis. The CO2 intensities are determined 
by the composition of the energy sources employed and average GHG emissions 
from electricity consumption was modelled as a mix of existing electricity sources 
(e.g. coal, hydro, nuclear, oil, etc.) in different countries and regions taken from the 
International Energy Agency (IEA, 2009). 

Table D1. Average regional specific CO2 emissions per MJ from electricity and 
heat generation
region/country

co2 emissions (g CO2/MJ)

Europe 27 

North America

Australia

New Zealand

Japan

Other Pacific

Russian Federation

Latin America

Asia (excluding China)

China

Africa

Source: IEA (2009).

99

142

254

84

120

139

90

54

202

216

175

154

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsThe variation in CO2 intensity is explained by the different energy sources and 
energy mixes utilized in different regions and countries. For example, regions such 
as Asia and Africa, and countries like Australia that rely on coal as their dominant 
source of energy for electricity production, have on average higher CO2 emissions 
compared with Latin America and New Zealand with lower CO2 emissions per MJ 
produced owing to the higher proportion of electricity that is based on renewable 
resources like hydroelectric power which are recognized to be carbon neutral. 

3. Emissions rElatEd to transPort
The food sector is transport-intensive  large quantities of food are transported in 
large volumes and over long distances. This can sometimes be of significance but, 
in terms of the overall contribution to the life cycle carbon footprint of a product, 
most LCA studies have found that the contribution of transport is relatively small. 
The carbon implications of food transport is not only a question of distance; a num-
ber of other variables, such as transport mode, efficiency of transport loads and the 
condition of infrastructure (road quality), fuel type, etc., are important determi-
nants of the carbon intensity of products. 

The efficiency of different transport modes varies considerably. Transport modes 
differ significantly in energy intensity and hence GHG emissions. Air transport has 
a very high climate change impact per tonne transported, whereas sea transport is 
relatively efficient. Long-distance transport by ship is very energy efficient, with 
estimates between 10 and 70 g CO2 per tonnes-km, compared with estimates of 
20-120 and 80-250 g CO2 per tonnes-km for rail and road, respectively (Marintek, 
2008).  Poor  road  infrastructure  has  an  impact  on  the  emission  per  unit  product 
transported because it increases fuel consumption. Cederberg et al. (2009) found 
that, in Brazil, due to generally poor road conditions, the consumption of diesel 
was estimated to be 25 percent higher than under normal road conditions. Differ-
ent loads also affect the efficiency of utilization of transport per unit of product. 
Larger loads transported for longer distances are more efficient than lighter loads 
transported over shorter distances. 

During transportation, food also often requires refrigeration which increases the 
use of energy and also introduces leakage of refrigerants into the GHG emissions 
equation (refrigerants are often high in climate impact). 

Emissions related to transport were estimated for the different phases, that is, 
transportation of live animals from the farm to the slaughter plant and transporta-
tion of the processed product from plant to retail centre for distribution. In the case 
of international trade, emissions were calculated for transport from slaughter plant 
to the port of export to the retail point for distribution. In an effort to estimate the 
contribution of international freight transport to GHG emissions, we combined 
data on trade flows, transportation mode, transport EFs and distances.

The following sections provide a detailed description of the methodology and 
the assumptions used in the estimation of emissions associated with the transport of 
live animals and meat. For the approach on milk, a detailed description is provided 
in FAOs report on GHG emissions in the dairy sector published in 2010.20

20  FAO. 2010. http://www.fao.org/docrep/012/k7930e/k7930e00.pdf

155

Appendix D - Post farmgate emissions3.1 transport of live animals from the farm to slaughter plant
Due to the complexity of live animal movements and data limitations, several sim-
plifications and assumptions were made:

	Share of animals transported to slaughter plants: Not all animals produced 
are  slaughtered  in  slaughter  plants/abattoirs;  slaughtering  may  also  take 
place on-farm or may be carried out by local butchers within the vicinity 
of production and thus may not involve the transportation of live animals. 
For  industrialized  countries,  it  was  assumed  that  about  98  percent  of  the 
animals  are  slaughtered  in  slaughterhouses.  In  developing  countries,  the 
share of animals transported to slaughter plants varied between 15 and 75 
percent. A lower share was assumed for developing countries based on the 
assumption that slaughtering infrastructure is generally lacking and that ani-
mals are often slaughtered in closer proximity to where they are raised, with 
slaughter being carried out by local butchers or the household itself. Other 
factors taken into consideration include the importance of exports within 
the economy, where we assumed that key exporting developing countries 
such as Brazil, Argentina, Paraguay, Botswana and Namibia (due to phyto-
sanitary requirements of importing countries) would have a higher share of 
animals slaughtered in slaughter plants. 

	Average  distance  between  farm  and  slaughter  plant:  Data  on  distances 
between the farm and slaughter plants was taken from literature for indus-
trialized regions: an average distance of 80 km for Europe and 200 km for 
North America. In developing countries, due to poor infrastructure, slaugh-
ter  is  assumed  to  take  place  near  the  point  of  sale:  an  average  distance  of 
50 km was assumed. 

	Mode of transport: We assumed that a greater proportion of live animals was 

transported by road.

	Emission intensity per kg of carcass transported: Based on secondary data, 
two  average  coefficients  were  utilized  in  this  study  for  two  groupings  of 
countries: 0.21 and 0.38 kg CO2-eq per tonnes CW-km for industrialized 
and developing countries, respectively.

Transport emissions of livestock between the farm and the slaughter plant were 

calculated using the equation below: 

 

farm-slaughterplant 

GHGtransport 

where:

 

farm-slaughterplant

GHG transport  

= Dfarm-plant  eftransport  shlive animal
farm-plant

= GHG emission intensity, kg CO2-eq/kg CW-km

Dfarm-plant = average distance between farm and slaughter plant, km

eftransport = average EF for transport, kg CO2-eq/kg CW-km

farm-plant

 
sh live animal  = share of animals transported from farm to slaughter plant, percentage

156

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsTable D2. Emission intensity for road transport
Winther et al. 2009,

Winther et al. 2009, 

(100 percent)*

(100 percent)*

Ecoinvent, 

(100 percent)*

Ecoinvent, 
(70 percent)*

Ecoinvent, 
(90 percent)*

aEa 2008

cederberg
et al. 2009

(kg CO2-eq/tonnes CW-km)

0.11

Articulated 
lorry, max 
load 32 tonne
Lorry, chilled, 
max load 20 
tonne
Lorry, frozen, 
max load 20 
tonne

0.085

0.073

0.102

0.099

0.18

0.19

0.16

0.17

0.14

0.08-0.25

0.15

0.08-0.25

0.145

Note: Emission intensities also include emissions related to leakage of cooling agents.
* The EFs represent the percentage of the vehicle utilized and accounts for the fact that vehicles will not be fully utilized at all times.
Source: SIK (2010).

3.2 transport and distribution of meat from processing plant to retail point 
The  calculation  of  GHG  emissions  associated  with  meat  transport  included  the 
transport of meat from slaughter plant to a retail distribution point. Transport and 
distribution  emissions  sources  comprise  emissions  from  fuel  combustion  during 
transport, as well as emissions from energy consumption for refrigeration and re-
frigerant leakage from chilled vehicles or container ships. Two modes of transport 
were considered in this phase: refrigerated road transport and marine transport. 

Road  transport.  Refrigerated  road  transport  covered  here  refers  to  transport  be-
tween the processing plant and the domestic market and, in the case of international 
trade, transport from plant to port and entry port to retail distribution centre in 
importing country. Table D2 presents emission intensities for different modes of 
road transport taken from peer-reviewed studies and databases such as Ecoinvent. 
Average emission intensities were found to vary depending on the transport load 
(tonnage), transport utilization and type of product transported (chilled or frozen). 
In this study, the following average emission intensity values presented in Ta-
ble D3 below were used. Regarding the transport of meat from processing plant 
directly to the domestic retail, we assumed that the product is transported as chilled 
carcass by a small vehicle with a maximum load of 20 tonnes within a minimum 
retail distance of 50 km. 

Ocean transport. In 2005, about 6.5 and 0.97 million tonnes of beef and lamb were 
traded globally (FAOSTAT, 2012). Emissions from the international trade of meat 
were calculated on the basis of the amount and type of product traded, distances 

Table D3. Average emissions intensities associated with road transport  
from plant to retail

chilled

Frozen

(kg CO2-eq/tonnes CW-km)

Carcass

Boneless

Source: SIK (2010).

0.18

0.117

157

0.20

0.130

Appendix D - Post farmgate emissionsbetween the slaughterhouse and retail centre, and the average GHG emission per 
kg of product transported.

	Trade: A trade matrix was developed based on FAOSTAT trade flow data 
in order to determine key exporters (Table D4 as an example), destinations 
and  quantities  traded.  This  analysis  covers  almost  85  percent  of  the  total 
amount of beef and lamb traded globally. A distinction is made between the 
type of meat traded (whether carcass or boneless) because it has implications 
for the amount of energy used for refrigeration during transportation and 
consequently CO2 emissions. 

	Distance: Distances were estimated between the major exporting and import-
ing ports and it was assumed that the traded product was destined to major 
cities  which  are  key  population  and  consumption  hubs.  Emissions  were 
calculated for the average distance for transport between the exporting coun-
try and importing country (port to port) and the transit distance inside the 
importing  country  to  main  retail  centre.  Distance  matrices  were  estimated 
from http://sea-distances.com/index.htm and http://www.distances.com/. 

	Vessel  size:  It  was  assumed  that  smaller  ships  are  utilized  for  shorter  dis-
tances (e.g. transport of products within regions) and larger ships for longer 
distances such as inter-continental trade. Table D5 presents emission intensi-
ties for ocean transport taken from secondary sources and demonstrates the 
variation in emission intensity for different vessel sizes.

Table D4. International trade in beef, 2005
Key exporters

Brazil

Australia

USA

Ireland

Netherlands

New Zealand

Germany

Canada

Argentina

Uruguay

Total 

Source: FAOSTAT (2011).

tonnes

1 285 805

991 945 

439 862 

363 372 

351 757 

344 289 

335 044 

323 729 

297 091 

249 609 

6 316 672 

Table D5. Emission intensity for ocean transport
container 
ship

Winther 
et al. (2009)

aEa 
(2008)

cederberg  
et al. (2009)
(kg CO2-eq/tonnes CW-km)

Ecoinvent

Large, chilled/frozen

Small, chilled/frozen

0.037

0.056

0.018

0.014

0.061

0.011

0.043

Note: Emission intensities also include emissions include related to leakage of cooling agents.
Source: SIK (2010).

158

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsBased on secondary data, the average emission intensities applied were 0.025 and 
0.05 kg CO2-eq per tonne product (CW) transported per km for large and small 
container ships transporting carcasses, respectively and 0.014 and 0.029 kg CO2-eq 
per tonne CW per km for large and small container ships transporting bone-free 
meat. 

To manage the versatile nature and complexity of trade flows, we only accounted 

for trade from and to the most significant trading partners. 

4. Emissions rElatEd to slaughtEr and  Primary ProcEssing 
oF mEat
GHG emissions assessed here include emissions from the direct inputs of energy in 
the slaughter and primary processing of meat and milk, as well as the GHG emis-
sions related to use and leakage of refrigerants. The meat sector also produces a 
range of co-products including by-products such as bones, blood, fat, offal, feather, 
etc. Due to the lack of data on the total amount of raw material rendered, this analy-
sis does not take into account emissions associated with the co-products.

Average energy use per kg of carcass weight during slaughter was based on stud-
ies from Sweden (Anon, 2002), Denmark, Finland and Spain (Lafargue, 2007) and 
the European Union (Ramirez et al., 2006). Due to the limited data on energy use 
during  this  phase,  in  this  study  we  assumed  an  average  value  of  1.4  MJ/kg  CW 
and 4.5 MJ/kg CW for beef and lamb, respectively. Slaughterhouse emissions were 
calculated by combining this average value with the average regional specific CO2 
emissions per MJ of energy (taking into account regional/country electricity gener-
ating mixes) given in Table D1 to obtain the average GHG emissions per kg of car-
cass processed. Table D6 presents regional average emission factors for processed 
beef and lamb and mutton and illustrates the importance of energy source as well 
as the energy intensity associated with the processing of different meat. Compared 
with beef, processing of lamb and mutton on average has higher emission inten-
sity per kg product processed because of the high energy intensity of the process 
(4.5 MJ/kg CW) and, when combined with high emitting energy sources such as 
coal, the emission intensity is high as is the case in Australia (Table D6).

Table D6. Regional emission factors for processing of beef and lamb
region

Beef

lamb and mutton

(kg CO2-eq/tonnes CW-km)

EU27
North America

Australia
New Zealand

Japan
Other Pacific
Russian Federation
Latin America
Asia (excluding China)
China
Africa

Source: Authors calculations.

0.14
0.20

0.40
0.12

0.17
0.20
0.13
0.07
0.30
0.30
0.25

159

0.45
0.64
1.14

0.38

0.54
0.63
0.41
0.24
0.91
0.97
0.78

Appendix D - Post farmgate emissions5. Emissions rElatEd to  Production oF PacKaging matErials
Packaging is a fundamental element of almost every food product and a vital source 
of  environmental  burden  and  waste.  The  type  of  packaging  used  also  influences 
transport  efficiency  because  it  has  its  own  weight  but  also  because  it  affects  the 
weight/volume ratio of the product. Two types of packaging can be distinguished: 
primary packaging and secondary packaging. Primary packaging is packaging clos-
est to the product and often follows the product all the way to the consumer. Sec-
ondary  packaging  is  used  to  assemble  together  primary  packaging  to  shelter  the 
product during transport and make it possible to transport more of the product at a 
time. The climate impact of packaging is one of the least studied aspects within the 
food chain. Due to the lack of data on the global variations in packaging of meat, 
this  study  applied  0.05  kg  CO2-eq  per  kg  CW  for  both  primary  and  secondary 
packaging from slaughter-plant to retail. 

rEFErEncE s
AEA.  2008.  Comparative  Life  Cycle  Assessment  of  Food  Commodities  Produced 
for UK Consumption through a Diversity of Supply Chains. Appendix 3  Post 
Farm Gate Activity Data. Cranfield University. Report to Defra 2008.

Anon. 2002. Maten och miljon Livscykelanalys av sju livsmedel, (Food and the en-

vironment Life Cycle Assessment of seven food items). LRF, Sweden.

Cederberg, C., Meyer, D. & Flysjo, A. 2009. Life cycle inventory of greenhouse gas 
emissions and use of land and energy in Brazilian beef production. SIK Report 
No 792.

Ecoinvent.  2009.  Swiss  Centre  for  Life  Cycle  Inventories  database.  Available  at 

http://www.ecoinvent.ch/.

FAO. 2010. Greenhouse gas emissions from the dairy sector  A life cycle assessment, 
by Gerber, P., Opio, C., Vellinga, T., Herderson, B. & Steinfeld, H. FAO. Rome.

FAOSTAT. 2011. FAO Statistical Database. Accessed 2011.
FAOSTAT. 2012. FAO Statistical Database. Accessed 2012.
IEA. 2009. CO2 emissions from fuel combustion. IEA Statistics. International En-

ergy Agency. Paris.

Lafargue, P.L. 2007. LCA of Spanish meals with different protein sources. Masters 
thesis, Dept. of Energy and Environment, Chalmers University of Technology, 
Gothenburg, Sweden.

MArInTEk.  2008.  Updated  Study  on  Greenhouse  Gas  Emissions  from  Ships 
Phase 1  Preliminary results Presented to First Inter-sessional Meeting of the 
Working Group on GHG Emissions from Ships, June 24, 2008.

ramirez, C.A., Patel, M. & Blok, k. 2006. How much energy to process one pound 
of meat? A comparison of energy use and specific energy consumption in the 
meat industry of four European countries. Energy, 31(12): 20472063.

Winther, U., Ziegler, F., Hognes, E.S., Emanuelsson, A., Sund, V. & Ellingsen, 
H. 2009. Carbon footprint and energy use of Norwegian seafood products. Sintef 
Report SFH80 AH096068.

160

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsAPPENDIX E
Emissions related to energy use 

This appendix presents the approach and coefficients applied in this study for esti-
mating GHG emissions from direct on-farm energy use (non-feed related) and em-
bedded energy in farm buildings and equipment. Direct and indirect emissions were 
estimated for all ruminant species; a general approach is used for all species with a 
few modifications taking into account differences between production typologies 
and species, but also between herd (dairy and beef). 

1. indirEct (EmBEddEd  EnErgy):  Emissions rElatEd to   
caPital goods 
Capital  goods  including  machinery,  tools  and  equipment,  buildings  such  animal 
housing, forage and manure storage are a means of production. Though not often 
considered in LCAs, capital goods carry with them embodied emissions associated 
with manufacture and maintenance. These emissions are primarily caused by the 
energy used to extract and process typical materials that make up capital goods such 
as steel, concrete or wood. This assessment focuses on the quantification of embed-
ded energy in capital goods including farm buildings (animal housing, feed and ma-
nure storage facilities) and farm equipment such as milking and cooling equipment, 
tractors and irrigation systems. 

To determine the effective annual energy requirement, the total embodied en-
ergy of the capital energy inputs was discounted and we assumed a straight-line 
depreciation of 20 years for buildings, 10 years for machinery and equipment and 
30 years for irrigation systems. A simplified approach was adopted in the calcula-
tions; emission coefficients were defined for the dairy cattle sector and these were 
then extrapolated to the beef cattle, buffalo and small ruminant sector. 

1.1 Farm infrastructure
Emissions of a representative set of farm buildings were calculated from typical ma-
terial of building components, including steel, concrete and wood used in the con-
struction of animal housing, manure storage and feed storage facilities. Data related 
to the density of the building material was taken from various sources and literature. 
	Animal housing: Five different levels of housing were defined with varying 
degrees of quality and emissions related to these were calculated (Table E1). 
These five housing types were then distributed across the different produc-
tion systems (grassland and mixed), AEZs (arid, humid and temperate), and 
country  grouping  [OECD,  least  developed  countries  (LDCs)  and  other 
developing  countries]  based  on  the  level  of  economic  development.  The 
percentage allocated for the different values of housing was based on two 
criteria: (i) livestock density in the two production systems and three AEZs 
based on number of adult females; and (ii) the average milk yield per cow 
per year. Tables E2 and E3 illustrate the allocation of embedded energy in 
small ruminant housing in arid zones in OECD countries and the average 
emission factor (accounting for depreciation). 

161

Table E1. Typology of animal housing considered in this assessment 
level of investment and definition

characteristics

Floor, foundation, walls

roof, roof-frame

Supports

High: high technology and use of 
high quality materials 

Material: concrete

Material: steel

Average: intermediate level of 
technology and use of good  
quality materials 

Without walls; or 
12 walls (concrete)

- Stanchions
- Columns
- Rafters
- Stanchions
- Columns
- Rafters

Production system

- Industrial units
- Peri-urban
- Fattening units
- Peri-urban
- Fattening units
- Mixed systems

Low

Very low

No walls, floor not paved

Material: steel

Material: Steel

Mixed systems

Cement floor or unpaved 
floor (dirt)
No walls

Material: steel for 
roof

Local/hand-made 
material e.g. wood 
for columns/
rafters

- Mixed systems
- Peri-urban

Nil: situation with no housing or existing shelter such as kraals made from local materials (wood, manure) and no embedded energy 
involved.

Source: Authors.

Table E2. An example of a life cycle inventory for a high investment structure for small ruminants
material

structure

Emission intensity

gWP100 

(kg CO2-eq/25 kg LW AFSR2)

(kg CO2-eq1)

Quantity of material per unit 
(kg of material/25 kg LW - AFSR2)

Concrete

Concrete

Floor 

Support  foundation

Steel  structural

Support  stanchions

Steel  structural

Roof frame  rafters

Steel  structural

Roof frame  purlins

Bricks  concrete

Walls

Galvanized metal  shed Roof

Total

1  Data taken from Ecoinvent database. 
2  AFSR: Adult Female Small Ruminant.
Source: Authors calculations.

A

262.61

262.61

1.79

1.79

1.79

262.61

1.79

B

0.10

0.03

0.52

0.89

1.04

0.03

1.07

C= A/B

26.3

6.8

21.0

9.6

3.1

4.7

4.1

83.7

Table E3. Allocation of embedded energy in housing  an example for small ruminants in arid zones in 
OECD countries
country 
grouping

allocation 
(percentage)

(kg CO2-eq/25 kg LW AFSR1)

level of investment

Emission intensity

Emission factor

(kg CO2-eq/25 kg LW AFSR1)

High

Average

OECD

Low

Very low

Nil

Total

Depreciation (20 years)

1  AFSR: Adult Female Small Ruminant.

20

20

50

-

10

100

83.7

76.7

47.0

10.5

0.00

162

16.7

15.3

23.5

0.0

0.0

55.6

2.8

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chains	Manure  storage:  The  calculation  for  energy  embodied  in  manure  storage 
facilities was based on a similar methodology and allocation technique out-
lined above. As capital investment, only a platform of concrete was consid-
ered and calculated as a percentage of the floor-surface of the standard shel-
ter (25 percent on 90 days and 50 percent on 180 days of manure storage). 
The period of manure storage considered includes 90 days in arid and humid 
areas and 180 days in temperate days in both grassland and mixed systems. 
Although  liquid  manure  storage  plays  an  important  role  in  industrialized 
regions particularly for dairy, only solid manure storage was considered for 
this assessment. 

	Feed storage: The calculation for energy embodied in feed storage facilities 
was based on a similar methodology and allocation technique outlined for 
housing and manure storage. The period of feed storage considered includes 
90  days  in  arid  and  humid  areas  and  180  days  in  temperate  days  in  both 
grassland  and  mixed  systems.  Due  to  their  importance  in  a  majority  of 
countries, only hay and straw were used as the basis for feed density. The 
required volume of storage capacity was calculated on the basis of rough-
age requirements (based on 2 percent intake of DM) and the Bulk Specific 
Weight and Density21 for hay and straw. The quality of the feed storage was 
assumed to be similar to the animal housing infrastructure. 

1.2 Farm equipment
Emissions embodied in farm equipment were calculated on the basis of the five lev-
els of farm infrastructure (ranging from nil to high), with allocation criteria similar 
to those outlined for farm infrastructure. For these calculations, farm equipment 
was divided into three categories: tractors, tractor implements and hand tools; milk-
ing and milk storage equipment; and irrigation facilities. Emissions related to steel 
were derived from the Ecoinvent database. 

	Tractors, implements and hand tools: The calculation for energy used in the 
manufacture of tractors and tractor implements and tools is related to the 
number of tractors used per hectare; an average weight of steel per hectare 
based on Dyer and Desjardins (2005); and the stocking rate of adult females 
per hectare. It is assumed that in areas with over 1 000 ha per tractor, the 
use of hand tools is prevalent and for these situations we estimated 5kg of 
hand tools. 

	Milking  and  storage/cooling  equipment:  Equipment  taken  into  account 
includes  bulk  tanks  and  cans,  post  bars,  vacuum  pump,  pipelines,  plate 
cooler units. Table E4 presents the milking and storage/cooling equipment 
considered in this study. 

	Irrigation systems: Two basic types of irrigation systems were considered: 
border strip and spray irrigation and were applicable only to the high and 
average  level  of  investment  farm.  Due  to  the  lack  of  more  recent  data, 
the  calculation  for  energy  embodied  in  irrigation  systems  is  based  on  the 
approach used by Wells (1998). 

21  This is a measurement of a feeds mass (weight) per unit volume of space the feed occupies; the standard unit is 

kg/m3.

163

Appendix E - Emissions related to energy useTable E4. Milking, cooling and storage equipment considered in this assessment
Equipment

description

Coolers

Post bars

Pipeline

Milking vacuum  
pump
Cooling system

Source: Authors.

Medium-scale herd composed of 40 cows producing 20 l/day (milked 
twice a day); using a tank of 1600 litres
Small-scale herd composed of 14 cows producing 20 l/day (milked twice a 
day); using 10 cans of 60 litres each 

Medium-scale herd  4+4 posts steel made
Medium-scale herd  2 posts wood made

Medium-scale herd  double pipeline set suspended over the  
central corridor
Medium-scale herd  consider an average typology: 2 mobile and  
1 fixed floor
Medium-scale herd  consider an average value among low, medium, high

Table E5 presents average emission factors for embedded energy for on-farm capital 
goods in dairy cattle production. For beef cattle and buffalo, we took a simplified 
approach by applying 50 percent of the EF coefficient calculated for dairy cattle. 
Emission  factors  used  for  small  ruminant  dairy  are  presented  in  Table  E6  and  a 
similar approach of applying 50 percent of the EFs to small ruminant meat herds 
was adopted. 

2. dirEct EnErgy:  Emissions rElatEd to on- Farm EnErgy usE  
On-farm energy in ruminant production relates to the use of energy for milking, 
milk  pumping,  on-farm  cooling  of  milk,  ventilation,  heating  and  lighting,  water 
heating, watering and feeding of animals.

Various studies have estimated the amount of direct energy used on farm (Bar-
rington et al., 1999; Dalgaard et al., 2000; Cederberg and Mattsson, 2000; ADAS, 
2000;  Haas  et  al.,  2001;  Wells,  2001;  Ludington  and  Johnston,  2003;  Barber  and 
Pellow, 2005; Casey and Holden, 2005; Dyer and Desjardins, 2006; Saunders and 
Barber,  2007;  DEFRA,  2007a,  2007b;  Schils  et  al.,  2007;  FEC,  2008;  Horndahl, 
2008; DairyCo, 2009; Thomassen et al., 2008; CAFRE, 2009; Bestfootforward (per-
sonal communication, 2010); ATTRA, 2010; Williams et al., 2010; Rotz et al., 2010). 
Based on these studies, it is estimated that the average energy use is 0.219 kWh/kg 
raw milk. 

It is however difficult to make an accurate estimate of the average energy use for 
these individual farm processes as well as the type of energy used because of the lack 
of disaggregated data. However, four studies (Bestfootforward (personal communi-
cation, 2010); Ludington and Johnston, 2003; DEFRA, 2007b); and Thomassen et 
al., 2009) provide a breakdown by source, which indicates that 38 percent of total 
direct energy consumed on-farm is electricity and 62 percent non-electricity. Using 
the results above (i.e. total direct energy use is 0.219 kWh/kg raw milk, which is 
split 38:62 electricity: non-electricity) and assuming that the main non-electricity 
use  is  diesel,  the  emissions  can  be  calculated,  see  Table  E7.  The  two  coefficients 
(0.083 and 0.135 kWh/kg milk) are used in the calculation of the EFs for on-farm 
direct energy use.

Countries were ranked by milk yield, then categorized into five groups (repre-
senting the five categories of dairy farm mechanisation: High, Average, Low, Very 
low, Nil). Energy use will vary between these five levels. It was assumed that the 

164

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsTable E5. Average emission factors for embedded energy for dairy cattle 
grouping

capital goods

system

arid

Buildings

Grassland based

Machinery & Implements

OECD

Mixed based1

Buildings

Machinery & Implements

Buildings

Grassland based

Machinery & Implements

LDC countries

Mixed based1

Buildings

Machinery & Implements

Buildings

Non-OECD

Grassland based

Machinery & Implements

Mixed based1

Buildings

Machinery & Implements

1 Includes landless systems
Source: Authors calculations.

(kg CO2-eq/ 
100 kg LW)

4.42

13.78

4.89

16.22

0.68

1.35

1.33

1.98

1.71

2.94

2.38

3.56

humid

(kg CO2-eq/ 
100 kg LW)

temperate
(kg CO2-eq/ 
100 kg LW)

4.72

16.22

5.08

19.03

0.68

1.35

1.33

1.98

2.31

5.85

3.04

6.62

9.03

28.16

9.55

30.23

0.83

1.35

1.89

1.98

3.32

4.04

6.64

18.55

Table E6. Average emission factors for embedded energy for dairy sheep and goats 
grouping

Production system

kg CO2-eq/100 kg LW

kg CO2-eq/25 kg LW

LDC

OECD

Other developing

Arid
Humid
Temperate
Arid
Humid
Temperate
Arid
Humid
Temperate

Source: Authors calculations.

1.00
0.82
0.73
5.65
5.05
6.76
2.01
2.62
6.01

0.04
0.03
0.03
0.23
0.20
0.27
0.08
0.11
0.24

Table E7. Total on-farm direct energy use and associated emissions for  
high level dairy farms
category

rate of energy use  

Emissions 

Emissions 

Electricity
Non-electricity
Total

Source: Authors calculations.

(kWh/kg milk)

(kg CO2-eq/kWh)

(kg CO2-eq/kg milk)

0.08
0.14

0.54
0.27

0.05
0.04
0.08

165

Appendix E - Emissions related to energy useTable E8. Emissions from direct energy for different levels of mechanization
category

Emissions from  

rate of  

rate of 

electricity use

non-electricity

electricity

Emissions from 
non-electricity

total emissions from 

direct energy

High
Average
Low
Very low
Nil

0.08
0.08
0.08
0.00
0.00

Source: Authors calculations.

(kWh/kg milk)

(kg CO2-eq/kg milk)

0.14
0.07
0.03
0.01
0.00

0.05
0.05
0.05
0.00
0.00

0.04
0.02
0.01
0.00
0.00

0.08
0.06
0.05
0.00
0.00

Table E9. Emission factors for direct on-farm energy use for dairy cow milk production in OECD and 
non-OECD countries
region 

Electricity 

grassland

mixed

EF1

default 
global EF

(kgCO2/kWh)

Unadjusted EF
Europe (Unadjusted EF)
Developing countries
Non-OECD
Adjusted emission factors
EU-27
OECD-Europe
USA
Canada
OECD North America
Australia
Japan
South Korea
New Zealand

1  IEA (2010).
Source: Authors calculations.

0.36
0.34
0.54
0.19
0.50
0.90
0.44
0.46
0.21

Arid
0.071
0.020
0.038

0.059
0.058
0.071
0.048
0.068
0.094
0.064
0.066
0.049

Humid
0.072
0.020
0.044

0.060
0.059
0.072
0.049
0.069
0.095
0.065
0.067
0.050

Temperate

0.074
0.020
0.05

0.061
0.060
0.074
0.050
0.071
0.098
0.067
0.068
0.051

Arid
0.072
0.027
0.045

0.060
0.059
0.072
0.049
0.069
0.095
0.065
0.067
0.050

Humid
0.074
0.027
0.054

0.061
0.060
0.074
0.050
0.071
0.098
0.067
0.068
0.051

Temperate

0.074
0.027
0.062

0.061
0.060
0.074
0.050
0.071
0.098
0.067
0.068
0.051

0.54
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.54
0.54

rate of electricity use would be the same for high, average and low systems, where 
milking activities are largely mechanized. It was further assumed that no electricity 
is used in very low and nil level systems. For the allocation across the five catego-
ries, the median adult female (ADF) weight and milk yield were used and the milk 
yield per kg of ADF calculated for each category. Table E8 presents the emission 
intensity of milk from direct on-farm energy use for the different levels of mecha-
nization. 

On-farm energy use was then adjusted to reflect the variations across farming 
systems in terms of level of mechanisation and energy use efficiency. It was assumed 
that 50 percent of OECD emissions are from electricity. The EFs for OECD coun-
tries were adjusted to take into account variations in the amount of CO2 emitted 
per kWh electricity. It was assumed that non-OECD countries do not use mains 
electricity, and standard emission factors are used for diesel/petrol (which means 

166

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsTable E10. Regional emission factors for direct on-farm energy use
region

Beef: grassland based

Beef: mixed

sheep and goats: meat

Europe
EU27
OECD-Europe
Non-OECD Europe
north America
USA
Canada
Other
Pacific
Australia
Japan
South Korea
New Zealand
OECD Pacific
Pacific average
Non-OECD Pacific
Former Soviet Union
Latin America
Brazil
Other
Asia
India
China
Thailand
Other
Africa 
Middle East

Source: Authors calculations.

0.18
0.17
0.07

0.24
0.12
0.22

0.36
0.20
0.21
0.12
0.22
0.00
0.00
0.07

0.07
0.07

0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07
0.07

kg CO2-eq/kg LW

0.21
0.21
0.09

0.29
0.15
0.27

0.42
0.24
0.25
0.16
0.27
0.00
0.00
0.09

0.09
0.09

0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09
0.09

0.33
0.33
0.19

0.34
0.31
0.34

0.38
0.33
0.34
0.31
0.34
0.34
0.17
0.16

0.15
0.16

0.19
0.18
0.17
0.18
0.18
0.18

that emissions in some countries, e.g. Brazil, will be overestimated). Table E9 pres-
ents the adjusted EFs for direct on-farm energy use for milk production in OECD 
countries and EFs for non-OECD countries. 

Direct on-farm energy for non-dairy herd (beef cattle, buffalo, small ruminant 
meat herd/flock): Direct energy use is associated primarily with the handling of ma-
nure, bedding and feed, which are dependent on the system (i.e. grass or mixed) and 
the level of mechanization, rather than the climate. Therefore it was assumed that 
the energy use for a given mechanization level and system is independent of climate. 
We assumed that minimal direct energy use is associated with meat production was 
assumed in developing regions - low levels housing and mechanized feed, bedding 
manure handling. Table E10 presents regional EFs for direct on-farm energy use for 
ruminant meat production used in this assessment. 

167

Appendix E - Emissions related to energy userEFErEncE s
ADAS. 2000. Energy use in organic farming systems OF0182. ADAS Consulting 

Ltd. Terrington, UK. Available at http://orgprints.org/8169/

ATTrA.  2010.  Dairy  Farm  Energy  Efficiency.  Available  at  www.attra.ncat.org/

attra-pub/PDF/dairyenergy.pdf

Barber, A. & Pellow, G. 2005. Energy Use and Efficiency Measures For the New 

Zealand Dairy Farming Industry. AgriLINK New Zealand Ltd.

Barrington, S., Choiniere, D. & Clarke, S. 1999. COWPOWER, a computer sys-
tem to optimize standby power units for dairy operations. ASAE/CSAE Meet-
ing PresentationPaper No. 993014.

CAFrE. 2009. Report of Pilot Energy Benchmarking Project 2007/2008.
Casey, J.W. & Holden, n.M. 2005 Analysis of greenhouse gas emissions from the 

average Irish milk production system, Agricultural Systems, 86(1): 97-114.

Cederberg, C. & Mattsson, B. 2000. Life cycle assessment of milk production  a 
comparison of conventional and organic farming. Journal of Cleaner Produc-
tion, 8(1): 4960.

DairyCo. 2009. Energy efficiency on farm  a practical guide. Agriculture and Hor-

ticulture Development Board. Kenilworth, UK.

Dalgaard, T., niels Halberg, n. & Porter John, r. 2001. A model for fossil energy 
use in Danish agriculture used to compare organic and conventional farming. 
Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, 87(1): 5165.

DEFrA. 2007a. The Environmental, Social and Economic Impacts Associated with 
Liquid Milk Consumption in the UK and its Production. A Review of Litera-
ture and Evidence. DEFRA Project Code EVO 2067. Department for Environ-
ment, Food and Rural Affairs. London.

DEFrA. 2007b. Direct energy use in agriculture: opportunities for reducing fossil 
fuel inputs.DEFRA Project Code AC0401. Department for Environment, Food 
and Rural Affairs. London.

Dyer, J.A. & Desjardins, r.L. 2006. An integrated index of electrical energy use 
in Canadian agriculture with implications for greenhouse gas emissions. Biosys-
tems Engineering, 95(3): 449460.

Ecoinvent.  2009.  Swiss  Centre  for  Life  Cycle  Inventories  database.  Available  at 

http://www.ecoinvent.ch/

FEC Service. 2008. Dairy Technology Powerpoint Presentation. FEC Services Ltd. 

Available http://www.dardni.gov.uk/ruralni/energy_efficiency_dairy.pdf

Haas, G., Wetterich, F. & kopke, U. 2001 Comparing intensive, extensified and or-
ganic grassland farming in southern Germany by process life cycle assessment. 
Agriculture, Ecosystems & Environment, 83(1-2): 4353.

Horndahl, T. 2008. Energy Use in Farm Buildings Swedish University of Agricul-

tural Sciences Report 2008:8.

IEA. 2009. CO2 emissions from fuel combustion. IEA Statistics. International En-

ergy Agency. Paris.

IEA. 2010. CO2 emissions from fuel combustion Highlights, p. 107. International 

Energy Agency. Paris.

Ludington, D. & Johnson, E.L. 2003 Dairy farm energy audit summary report. 

Nyserda, Albany.

Rotz, C.A., Montes, F. & Chianese, D.S. 2010. The carbon footprint of dairy pro-
duction systems through partial life cycle assessment. J. Dairy Sci., 93: 12661282.

168

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsSaunders, C. & Barber, A. 2007. Comparative energy and greenhouse gas emis-
sions of New Zealands and the UKs dairy industry. Research Report No. 297 
Lincoln University. Christchurch, New Zeeland.

Schils, r.L.M., de Haan, M.H.A., Hemmer, J.G.A., van den Pol-van Dasselaar, 
A.,  de  Boer,  J.A.,  Evers,  A.G.,  Holshof,  G.,  van  Middelkoop,  J.C.  &  Zom, 
r.L.G. 2007. DairyWise, a whole-farm dairy model. J. Dairy Sci., 90: 53345346.
Thomassen, M.A., Dalgaard, r., Heijungs, r. & de Boer, I. 2008. Attributional and 

consequential LCA of milk production, Int. J. Life Cycle Assess., 13: 339349.

Wells, C. 2001. Total energy indicators of agricultural sustainability: dairy farming 
case study. Technical Paper 2001/3. Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry. Wel-
lington, New Zealand.

Williams, A., Pearn, k., Sandars, D.L., Audsley, E., Parsons, D. & Chatterton, 
J. 2010. Analysis of the 2007/8 DEFRA Farm Business Survey Energy Mod-
ule DEFRA Project Code RMP 5465 Natural Resources Management Centre, 
Cranfield University. 106 pp.

169

Appendix E - Emissions related to energy useAPPENDIX F
relative value of slaughter  
by-products and effect on allocation  
of emissions

The main edible product from slaughtered animals is meat, but slaughterhouses also 
produce a whole range of by-products (organs, hide, blood, etc.). Between 30 and 
60 percent of animal weight, depending on the species, does not end up as meat for 
human consumption.

Little documented information is usually available on the marketing of by-prod-
ucts from abattoirs but it is generally considered that they constitute a crucial part 
of profitability, with a more than significant share of the margin. They are subdi-
vided into edible and non-edible materials.

1. EdiBlE  By-Products
The main edible by-products of a slaughtered animal are offal, also known as va-
riety meat or organ meat. Offal is divided into red (heart, livers, kidneys, lungs, 
tongue, cheek meat and deboned head trimmings) and white (intestine, stomachs, 
sweetbread [thymus and pancreas] and brain). Edible by-products can also be blood 
and fats that are fit for human consumption, and used in further processed products 
such as sausages. 

According to a survey in the French meat industry, all edible materials from the 
carcass, including meat and offal, account for 45 percent of the live weight of an 
adult cattle (see Table F1). By-products are therefore 55 percent of the animal live 
weight. This is consistent with the results of a study on yields of by-products in 
various breeds of cattle slaughtered in Texas in 1989 (Terry et al., 1990). It is also 

Table F1. Beef cattle products and by-products, by type of use
use of animal products and by-products (aBP)

Beef (percentage of LW)

EDIBLE

Meat, offal, blood and fats for human consumption

InEDIBLE

ABP withdrawn for sanitary reasons, SRM*, wastes

Protein, blood and fats (pet food, animal feed, drug industry)

Bones (feed industry, glue, gelatine)

Skins & hides (leather)

Digestive tract content (compost/fertilizers)

Lost due to carcass chilling and drying

45

10

20

8

6

10

1

* Specified risk material with regard to BSE (brain, eye, medulla, etc.).
Source: FranceAgriMer. 2012. Observatoire des coproduits (based on a survey of 40 meat plants in France).

171

consistent with the results of a more recent USDA study (Marti et al., 2011), that 
estimated total by-products at 44 percent of total live weight, but did not include 
the digestive tract content (approximately 10 percent).

Edible by-products, mainly offal, account for around 12 percent of adult cattle 
live  weight  (Ockerman  and  Hansen,  2000).  Human  consumption  of  offal  varies 
by culture and region, but can be found almost everywhere, in developed as well 
as in developing countries. Following animal health crises, such as the outbreak of 
bovine spongiform encephalopathy (BSE) in 1996, and the ban on the use of these 
products by a number of countries, the global offal market accounts for 15 to 20 
percent of production.

World trade of bovine offal is estimated at one million tonnes per year. Asia (in 
particular China and Japan) is the main outlet for bovine offal, and is far from be-
ing self-sufficient, with 40 percent of global imports. Russian Federation doubled 
its imports in the past ten years, importing more than 100 000 tonnes of beef offal 
today, despite the ban on U.S. beef in 2004 due to BSE. Other significant importers 
include Egypt and Central Africa.

Offal exporters are the main beef exporters: United States (27 percent), Australia 
(14 percent), Argentina (12 percent) and Brazil (9 percent). In other countries, offal 
is often sold locally.

2. non-EdiBlE  By-Products
For adult cattle, non-edible by-products represent on average 55 percent of the total 
live weight. Material to be eliminated, such as by-products withdrawn for sanitary 
reasons (e.g. liver with flukes), specified risks materials and wastes from the first 
water treatment, account for 10 percent of the animal weight and are a cost for the 
meat plant.

Hides and skin constitute the most profitable non-edible by-products of the meat 
industry, with about 6 percent of the animal weight and sometimes up to 75 percent 
of the by-products value (Marti et al., 2011). They are also the most internationally 
traded by-products, with Italy and Turkey as major outlets for many exporters.

In terms of weight, the most important group of non-edible by-products (ac-
counting  for  20  percent  of  total  live  weight)  is  constituted  by  floor  trimmings, 
blood and fats used mostly for pet food but also for animal feed (processed animal 
protein, like meat and bone meal), or in the drug or cosmetic industry. Bones (8 
percent of the weight) often go through rendering with this category to produce 
processed animal protein. They can also be used to produce glue or gelatine that go 
back into the human consumption chain.

Digestive tract content is usually about 10 percent of the animal weight and is 

used as fertilizer or as biogas material on the meat plant to produce energy.

3. ValuE oF By-Products
Edible  and  non-edible  by-products  accounted  for  11  percent  of  the  total  value 
of the carcass sold by slaughterhouses in 2011, according to a survey of 10 cattle 
slaughterhouses in France (Observatoire des prix et des marges, 2012). The share 
of by-products in the total value tends to increase over time (it was only 6 percent 
in 2005).

This result is consistent with a study by Terry et al. (1990) that estimates the val-
ue of edible and inedible by-products from cattle at 9 to 12 percent of the total live 

172

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsTable F2. Total revenue from one adult cattle sold by the slaughterhouse and share of by-products 
year

 Edible by-products 

Edible by-products 

 non-edible by-products 

total revenue 

all by-products 

all by-products 
(percentage)

value (/kg)

(percentage)

(percentage)

(/kg)

value (/kg)

2005

2006

2007

2008

2009

2010

2011

4.19

4.39

4.39

4.5

NA

4.69

4.96

0.28

0.29

0.38

0.26

NA

0.4

0.53

6 

6 

9 

6 

NA

9 

11 

0.14

0.15

0.15

0.16

0.17

0.16

0.16

3 

3 

4 

4 

NA

4 

3 

3 

3 

5 

2 

NA

5 

8 

NA: Not Applicable.
Source: Observatoire des prix et des marges, 2012; Service de Nouvelles des Marches.

Table F3. Emissions intensity of beef with and without allocation to slaughter 
by-products in Western Europe

No allocation to by-products

With allocation to by-products

Source: Authors calculations.

kg CO2-eq/kg LW

18.8

17.7 

value. It is also consistent with Marti et al. (2011), who estimated that by-products 
added value to one steer at 10 percent in average over the period 2000 to 2011.

Nevertheless, because of consumption habits, value for edible by-products can 
be  very  different  from  one  country  to  another.  For  example,  offal  like  hearts  or 
stomach has greater value on the Chinese market than on any other market. 

According to data from the Rungis Wholesale Market in France, total value of 
offal for one adult cattle was  52.2 in 2011, that is to say 0.16 cents per kg of total 
products for one animal. Offal market prices were lower in 2005, and the market is 
very sensitive to sanitary crises, but the contribution of edible by-products in the 
total revenue from slaughtered adult cattle is generally stable at about 3 to 4 percent. 
We estimate that the value of other edible by-products is not significant compared 
with edible offal.

Non-edible by-products therefore account for the rest of the revenue from by-
products; about 8 percent of the total revenue in 2011, a share that has increased by 
5 percent since 2005.

The global value of non-edible by-products is quite volatile and this is mainly 
driven by the value of hides and skins. The world skin markets drop of 2008 and 
2009 is reflected in Table F2 with a decrease of non-edible by-products in 2008.

This case study in France is one of the few examples available. Results appear to 
be consistent with a similar study by USDA but they cannot be seen as representa-
tive on a global scale since the categories and actual uses of slaughter by-products 
varies greatly from region to region and in time. Furthermore, alternative types of 
allocation  (e.g.  dry  mass)  could  be  used  however  these  require  further  develop-
ments.

Nevertheless, because of the similarities among Western European breeds and 
among European markets of animal products, we can extrapolate the results of the 
French  case  study  to  Western  Europe.  Table  F3  presents  the  effect  of  allocation 

173

Appendix F - Relative value of slaughter by-products and effect on allocation of emission intensityemissions to by-products using 6 percent as the allocation value of emissions to 
slaughter by-products in Western Europe. 

Due to the lack of a comprehensive global data on by-products in the meat sec-
tor, the allocation of emissions to slaughter by-products could not be performed 
in this assessment. This may be improved in a future assessment depending on in-
formation shared by the industry and the development of harmonized methods to 
allocate by-products at slaughterhouses. 

rEFErEncE s
Lapasin, C., Gac, A., Scislowski, V., Chevillon, P., & Guardia, S. 2012. Recherche 
de  methode  devaluation  de  lexpression  de  lempreinte  carbone  des  produits 
viande. France Agrimer, Paris. http://idele.fr/domaines-techniques/elevage-en-
vironnement-et-territoires/evaluation-environnementale/publication/idelesolr/
recommends/recherche-de-methodes-devaluation-de-lexpression-de-lem-
preinte-carbone-des-produits-viande.html

Marti, D.L., Johnson, r.J. & Mathews, k.H. 2011. Wheres the (Not) Meat? By-
products From Beef and Pork Production. A Report from the Economic Re-
search Service, USDA. http://www.ers.usda.gov/media/147867/ldpm20901.pdf
Observatoire des prix et des marges.  2012.  http://agriculture.gouv.fr/IMG/pdf/

Rapport_parlement_2012_v8_cle01dc4d.pdf.

Ockerman, H.W. & Hansen, C.L. 2000. Animal By-product Processing and Utili-

zation, First edition, Lancaster, PA. Technomic.

Terry, C.A., knapp, r.H., Edwards, J.W., Mies, W.L., Savell, J.W. & Cross, H.r. 
1990. Yields of by-products from different cattle types. Journal of Animal Sci-
ences, 68: 42004205.

174

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsAPPENDIX G
Maps

1.  Distribution of dairy cattle populations 

2.  Distribution of beef cattle populations 

3.  Distribution of buffalo populations 

4.  Distribution of goat populations 

5.  Distribution of sheep populations 

6.  Proportion of milk protein in total protein from cattle dairy herds 

7.  Average feed digestibility for dairy cattle 

8.  Average feed digestibility for beef cattle 

9.  Manure methane conversion factor for dairy cattle 

10.  Manure methane conversion factor for beef cattle 

11.  Proportion of feed N retained in product  dairy cattle herds 

12.  Proportion of feed N retained in product  beef cattle herds 

176

177

178

179

180

181

182

183

184

185

186

187

175

 

 

 

 

 

m
k
e
r
a
u
q
s
 
r
e
p
d
a
e
h
1
<
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
e
tt
a
c
 
y
r
i
a
D

l

 

0
5
2
-
0
0
1

0
5
2
>

 

0
5
-
5
2

0
0
1
-
0
5

5
2
-
0
1

0
1
<

 

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
d
e
x
i
M

0
5
2
-
0
0
1

0
5
2
>

 

0
5
-
5
2

0
0
1
-
0
5

0
1
<

 

5
2
-
0
1

.
)
1
1
0
2

 
;

7
0
0
2
(
 

 

O
A
F
m
o
r
f
 
d
e
v
i
r
e
d

 
:
e
c
r
u
o
S

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
d
e
s
a
b
-
d
n
a
l
s
s
a
r
G

 

m
k
e
r
a
u
q
s
 
r
e
p
 
s
d
a
e
H

176

s
n
o

i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p
 
e
l
t
t
a
c
 
y
r
i
a
d
 
f
o
n
o
i
t
u
b

 

i
r
t
s
i

D

 

1
p
a
M

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chains 

 

m
k
e
r
a
u
q
s
 
r
e
p
d
a
e
h
1
<
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
e
tt
a
c
 
f
e
e
B

l

 

 

 

 

0
5
2
-
0
0
1

0
5
2
>

 

0
5
-
5
2

0
0
1
-
0
5

5
2
-
0
1

0
1
<

 

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
d
e
x
i
M

0
5
2
-
0
0
1

0
5
2
>

 

0
5
-
5
2

0
0
1
-
0
5

0
1
<

 

5
2
-
0
1

.
)
1
1
0
2

 
;

7
0
0
2
(
 

 

O
A
F
m
o
r
f
 
d
e
v
i
r
e
d

 
:
e
c
r
u
o
S

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
d
e
s
a
b
-
d
n
a
l
s
s
a
r
G

 

m
k
e
r
a
u
q
s
 
r
e
p
 
s
d
a
e
H

177

s
n
o

i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p
 
e
l
t
t
a
c
 
f
e
e
b
 
f
o
n
o
i
t
u
b

 

i
r
t
s
i

D

 

2
p
a
M

Appendix G - Maps 

m
k
e
r
a
u
q
s
 
r
e
p
d
a
e
h
0
=
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
o
a
ff
u
B

l

 

 

 

 

 

0
5
2
-
0
0
1

0
5
2
>

 

0
0
1
-
0
5

0
5
-
5
2

5
2
-
0
1

0
1
<

 

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
d
e
x
i
M

0
5
2
-
0
0
1

0
5
2
>

 

0
5
-
5
2

0
0
1
-
0
5

5
2
-
0
1

0
1
<

 

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
d
e
s
a
b
-
d
n
a
l
s
s
a
r
G

 

m
k
e
r
a
u
q
s
 
r
e
p
 
s
d
a
e
H

.
)
1
1
0
2

 
;

7
0
0
2
(
 

 

O
A
F
m
o
r
f
 
d
e
v
i
r
e
d

 
:
e
c
r
u
o
S

178

 

s
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p
o
l
a
f
f
u
b
 
f
o
n
o
i
t
u
b

 

i
r
t
s
i

D

 

3
p
a
M

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chains 

 

 

m
k
e
r
a
u
q
s
 
r
e
p
d
a
e
h
1
<
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
 
s
t
a
o
G

 

 

0
5
2
-
0
0
1

0
5
2
>

 

0
5
-
5
2

0
0
1
-
0
5

5
2
-
0
1

0
1
<

 

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
d
e
x
i
M

0
5
2
-
0
0
1

0
5
2
>

 

0
5
-
5
2

0
0
1
-
0
5

0
1
<

 

5
2
-
0
1

.
)
1
1
0
2

 
;

7
0
0
2
(
 

 

O
A
F
m
o
r
f
 
d
e
v
i
r
e
d

 
:
e
c
r
u
o
S

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
d
e
s
a
b
-
d
n
a
l
s
s
a
r
G

 

m
k
e
r
a
u
q
s
 
r
e
p
 
s
d
a
e
H

179

s
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p
 
t
a
o
g

 

 
f
o
n
o
i
t
u
b

i
r
t
s
i

D

 

4
p
a
M

Appendix G - Maps 

 

m
k
e
r
a
u
q
s
 
r
e
p
d
a
e
h
1
<
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
p
e
e
h
S

 

 

 

 

0
5
2
-
0
0
1

0
5
2
>

 

0
5
-
5
2

0
0
1
-
0
5

5
2
-
0
1

0
1
<

 

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
d
e
x
i
M

0
5
2
-
0
0
1

0
5
2
>

 

0
5
-
5
2

0
0
1
-
0
5

0
1
<

 

5
2
-
0
1

.
)
1
1
0
2

 
;

7
0
0
2
(
 

 

O
A
F
m
o
r
f
 
d
e
v
i
r
e
d

 
:
e
c
r
u
o
S

m
e
t
s
y
s
 
d
e
s
a
b
-
d
n
a
l
s
s
a
r
G

 

m
k
e
r
a
u
q
s
 
r
e
p
 
s
d
a
e
H

180

 

s
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
p
o
p
p
e
e
h
s
 
f
o
n
o
i
t
u
b

 

i
r
t
s
i

D

 

5
p
a
M

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chains 

 

 

 

 

m
k
e
r
a
u
q
s
 
r
e
p
d
a
e
h
1
<
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
e
tt
a
c
 
y
r
i
a
D

l

 

 

s
d
r
e
h
y
r
i
a
d
 
e
l
t
t
a
c
 
m
o
r
f
 
n
i
e
t
o
r
p

 
l
a
t
o
t
 
n
i
 
n
i
e
t
o
r
p
k
l
i

 

m

 
f
o
n
o

 

i
t
r
o
p
o
r
P

 

6
p
a
M

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

181

.

5
7
8
-
0
5
8

.

.

5
7
8
>

 

.

5
2
8
-
0
0
8

.

.

0
5
8
-
 
5
2
8

.

.

0
0
7
-
0
0
6

.

.

0
0
8
-
0
0
7

.

.

0
0
6
-
0
0
5

.

.

0
0
5
<

 

.
)
1
1
0
2

 
;

7
0
0
2
(
 

 

O
A
F
m
o
r
f
 
d
e
v
i
r
e
d

 
:
e
c
r
u
o
S

Appendix G - Maps 
.
)
1
1
0
2

 
;

7
0
0
2
(
 

O
A
F

 
;
)
7
0
0
2
(
 
.
l
a
 
t
e
 
.

H

 
,
l
r
e
b
a
H

 
;
)
0
1
0
2
(
 
.
l
a
 
t
e
 
.

L

 
,

u
o
Y

 

 
.

 
:
e
c
r
u
o
s
 
a
t
a
d
S
I
G
y
g
o
o
d
o
h
t
e
m
 
e
h
t
 
r
o
f
 

l

 

A
x
i
d
n
e
p
p
A
 
e
e
s
 
,

 

 

 

 

 

m
k
e
r
a
u
q
s
 
r
e
p
d
a
e
h
1
<
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
e
tt
a
c
 
y
r
i
a
D

l

 

8
7
-
3
7

8
6
-
3
6

3
7
-
8
6

7
5
-
2
5

3
6
-
7
5

n
o
i
t
a
l
u
c
l
a
c
 

M
A
E
L
G

 
:
e
c
r
u
o
S

7
4
-
2
4

2
5
-
7
4

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

182

e
l
t
t
a
c
 
y
r
i
a
d
 
r
o
f
 
y
t
i
l
i
b
i
t
s
e
g
i
d
d
e
e
f
 
e
g
a
r
e
v
A

 

 

7
p
a
M

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chains 
.
)
1
1
0
2

 
;

7
0
0
2
(
 

O
A
F

 
;
)
7
0
0
2
(
 
.
l
a
 
t
e
 
.

H

 
,
l
r
e
b
a
H

 
;
)
0
1
0
2
(
 
.
l
a
 
t
e
 
.

L

 
,

u
o
Y

 

 
.

 
:
e
c
r
u
o
s
 
a
t
a
d
S
I
G
y
g
o
o
d
o
h
t
e
m
 
e
h
t
 
r
o
f
 

l

 

A
x
i
d
n
e
p
p
A
 
e
e
s
 
,

 

 

 

 

 

m
k
e
r
a
u
q
s
 
r
e
p
d
a
e
h
1
<
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
e
tt
a
c
 
f
e
e
B

l

 

8
7
-
3
7

8
6
-
3
6

3
7
-
8
6

8
5
-
3
5

3
6
-
8
5

n
o
i
t
a
l
u
c
l
a
c
 

M
A
E
L
G

 
:
e
c
r
u
o
S

8
4
-
3
4

3
5
-
8
4

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

183

e
l
t
t
a
c
 
f
e
e
b
 
r
o
f
 
y
t
i
l
i
b
i
t
s
e
g
i
d
d
e
e
f
 
e
g
a
r
e
v
A

 

 

8
p
a
M

Appendix G - Maps 

 

 

 

 

m
k
e
r
a
u
q
s
 
r
e
p
d
a
e
h
1
<
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
e
tt
a
c
 
y
r
i
a
D

l

 

.

0
0
4
-
0
5
2

.

.

0
0
1
-
0
5

.

.

5
2
-
5
1

.

.
)
1
1
0
2
(
 

O
A
F

 
;
)
5
0
0
2
(
 
.
l
a

 
t
e
 
.
J
.
R

 
,
s
n
a
m

j
i

H

 
;
)
6
0
0
2
(
 

C
C
P
I
 
:
a
t
a
d
 
t
u
p
n

i
 

n
i
a

l

 
.

M
y
g
o
o
d
o
h
t
e
m
 
e
h
t
 
r
o
f
 

 

A
x
i
d
n
e
p
p
A
 
e
e
s
 
,

n
o
i
t
a
l
u
c
l
a
c
 

M
A
E
L
G

 
:
e
c
r
u
o
S

.

2
0
6
-
0
0
4

.

.

0
5
2
-
0
0
1

.

.

0
5
-
5
2

.

.

5
1
-
0
1

.

e
l
t
t
a
c
 
y
r
i
a
d
 
r
o
f
 
r
o
t
c
a
f
 
n
o
i
s
r
e
v
n
o
c
 
e
n
a
h
t
e
m
 
e
r
u
n
a
M

 

9
p
a
M

)
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p
(
 
r
o
t
c
a
f
 
n
o
i
s
r
e
v
n
o
c
 
e
n
a
h
t
e
M

184

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chains 

 

 

 

 

m
k
e
r
a
u
q
s
 
r
e
p
d
a
e
h
1
<
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
e
tt
a
c
 
f
e
e
B

l

 

.

0
0
1
-
0
5

.

.

0
5
2
-
0
0
1

.

.

5
2
-
0
2

.

.

0
5
-
5
2

.

.
)
1
1
0
2
(
 

O
A
F

 
;
)
5
0
0
2
(
 
.
l
a

 
t
e
 
.
J
.
R

 
,
s
n
a
m

j
i

H

 
;
)
6
0
0
2
(
 

C
C
P
I
 
:
a
t
a
d
 
t
u
p
n

i
 

n
i
a

l

 
.

M
y
g
o
o
d
o
h
t
e
m
 
e
h
t
 
r
o
f
 

 

A
x
i
d
n
e
p
p
A
 
e
e
s
 
,

.

5
1
-
0
1

.

.

0
2
-
5
1

.

n
o
i
t
a
l
u
c
l
a
c
 

M
A
E
L
G

 
:
e
c
r
u
o
S

e
l
t
t
a
c
 
f
e
e
b
 
r
o
f
 
r
o
t
c
a
f
 
n
o
i
s
r
e
v
n
o
c
 
e
n
a
h
t
e
m
 
e
r
u
n
a
M

 

0
1
p
a
M

)
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p
(
 
r
o
t
c
a
f
 
n
o
i
s
r
e
v
n
o
c
 
e
n
a
h
t
e
M

185

Appendix G - Maps 

 

 

m
k
e
r
a
u
q
s
 
r
e
p
d
a
e
h
1
<
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
e
tt
a
c
 
y
r
i
a
D

l

 

 

 

s
d
r
e
h
 
e
l
t
t
a
c
 
y
r
i
a
d


 

 

 
t
c
u
d
o
r
p
n
i
 
d
e
n
i
a
t
e
r
 

 

N
d
e
e
f
 
f
o
n
o

 

i
t
r
o
p
o
r
P

 

1
1
p
a
M

)
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p
(
 
n
o
ti
n
e
t
e
r
 
n
e
g
o
r
t
i
N

186

.

8
2
2
-
7
8
1

.

.

0
0
3
-
8
2
2

.

.

9
7
1
-
8
1
1

.

.

7
8
1
-
9
7
1

.

.

l

y
g
o
o
d
o
h
t
e
m
 
e
h
t
 
r
o
f
 

 

A
x
i
d
n
e
p
p
A
 
e
e
s
 
,

.

1
8
-
3
4

.

.

8
1
1
-
1
8

.

n
o
i
t
a
l
u
c
l
a
c
 

M
A
E
L
G

 
:
e
c
r
u
o
S

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chains 

 

 

m
k
e
r
a
u
q
s
 
r
e
p
d
a
e
h
1
<
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
e
tt
a
c
 
f
e
e
B

l

 

 

 

s
d
r
e
h
 
e
l
t
t
a
c
 
f
e
e
b


 

 

 
t
c
u
d
o
r
p
n
i
 
d
e
n
i
a
t
e
r
 

 

N
d
e
e
f
 
f
o
n
o

 

i
t
r
o
p
o
r
P

 

2
1
p
a
M

)
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
p
(
 
n
o
ti
n
e
t
e
r
 
n
e
g
o
r
t
i
N

187

.

8
0
1
-
2
9

.

.

6
6
1
-
8
0
1

.

.

3
8
-
8
6

.

.

2
9
-
3
8

.

.

6
5
-
6
3

.

.

8
6
-
6
5

.

.

l

y
g
o
o
d
o
h
t
e
m
 
e
h
t
 
r
o
f
 

 

A
x
i
d
n
e
p
p
A
 
e
e
s
 
,

n
o
i
t
a
l
u
c
l
a
c
 

M
A
E
L
G

 
:
e
c
r
u
o
S

Appendix G - MapsRefeRences
FAO.  2007.  Gridded  livestock  of  the  world  2007  by  Wint,  W.  &  Robinson,  T.P. 

FAO. Rome.

FAO. 2011. Global livestock production systems, by Robinson, T.P., Thornton, P.K., 
Franceschini, G., Kruska, R.L., Chiozza, F., Notenbaert, A., Cecchi, G., Her-
rero, M., Epprecht, M., Fritz, S., You, L., Conchedda,G., & See, L. FAO. Rome.
Haberl,  H.,  Erb,  K.-H.,  Krausmann,  F.,  Gaube,  V.,  Bondeau,  A.,  Plutzar,  C., 
Gingrich, S., Lucht W. & Fischer-Kowalski M. 2007. Quantifying and mapping 
the global human appropriation of net primary production in Earths terrestrial 
ecosystem. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA. 104: 
12942-12947.

Hijmans, R.J., Cameron, S.E., Parra, J.L., Jones P.G. & Jarvis A. 2005. Very high 
resolution interpolated climate surfaces for global land areas. International Jour-
nal of Climatology, 25: 1965-1978.

IPCC.  2006.  IPCC  guidelines  for  national  greenhouse  gas  inventories.  Prepared 
by the National Greenhouse Gas Inventories Programme, H. S. Eggleston, L. 
Buendia, K. Miwa, T. Ngara & K. Tanabe K. eds. IPCC. Kanagawa.

You, L., Crespo, S., Guo, Z. Koo, J., Ojo, W., Sebastian, K., Tenorio, T.N., Wood, 
S. & Wood-Sichra, U. 2010. Spatial Production Allocation Model (SPAM) 2000, 
Version 3. Release 2. Available at http://MapSPAM.info.

188

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsAPPENDIX H
country list

The country grouping used in this assessment is based on the FAO Global Admin-
istrative Unit Layers (GAUL). The GAUL aims at compiling and disseminating the 
most reliable spatial information on administrative units for all the countries in the 
world providing a contribution to the standardization of the spatial dataset represent-
ing administrative units. Country classification is done on a purely geographic basis. 
For further information: http://www.fews.net/docs/special/GAUL_Disclaimer.pdf

latin aMeRica and the caRibbean 
(LAC)
Anguilla
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Aruba
Bahamas
Barbados
Belize
Bolivia
Brazil
British Virgin Islands
Cayman Islands
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Cuba
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Falkland Islands (Malvinas)
French Guiana
Grenada
Guadeloupe
Guatemala
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Jamaica
Martinique
Mexico
Montserrat
Netherlands Antilles
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Puerto Rico
Saint Kitts and Nevis

Saint Lucia
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Suriname
Trinidad and Tobago
Turks and Caicos Islands
United States Virgin Islands
Uruguay
Venezuela

Sub-SAhArAn AfriCA  (SSA)
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cote dIvoire
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Comoros
Congo
Democratic Republic of the Congo
Djibouti
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania

189

Mauritius
Mayotte
Mozambique
Namibia
Niger
Nigeria
Rwanda
Reunion
Saint Helena
Sao Tome and Principe
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
Swaziland
Togo
Uganda
United Republic of Tanzania
Zambia
Zimbabwe

neAr eASt And north AfriCA (nenA)
Algeria
Armenia
Azerbaijan
Bahrain
Cyprus
Egypt
Gaza Strip
Georgia
Iraq
Israel
Jordan
Kazakhstan
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan
Lebanon
Morocco
Oman
Qatar
Republic of Sudan
Saudi Arabia
South Sudan
State of Libya
Syrian Arab Republic
Tajikistan
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
United Arab Emirates
Uzbekistan
West Bank
Western Sahara
Yemen

south asia
Afghanistan
Bangladesh
Bhutan
British Indian Ocean Territory
India
Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Maldives
Nepal 
Pakistan 
Sri Lanka

easteRn euR ope
Belarus
Bulgaria
Czech Republic
Hungary
Moldova, Republic of
Poland
Romania
Slovakia
Ukraine

Russian fedeRation
Russian Federation

east asia and southeast asia
Brunei Darussalam
Cambodia
China
Christmas Island
Democratic Peoples Republic of Korea
Hong Kong
Indonesia
Japan
Lao Peoples Democratic Republic
Macau
Malaysia
Mongolia
Myanmar
Philippines
Republic of Korea
Singapore
Thailand
Timor-Leste
Viet Nam

oceania
American Samoa
Australia
Cook Islands
Fiji
French Polynesia
Guam
Kiribati

190

Greenhouse gas emissions from ruminant supply chainsMarshall Islands
Micronesia (Federated States of)
Nauru
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Niue
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Pitcairn
Saint Pierre et Miquelon
Samoa
Solomon Islands
Tokelau
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Wake Island
Wallis and Futuna

WesteRn euR ope
Albania
Andorra
Austria
Belgium
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Croatia
Denmark
Estonia
Faroe Islands
Finland
France
Germany
Greece
Guernsey
Iceland
Ireland
Isle of Man
Italy
Jersey
Latvia
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Madeira Islands
Malta
Monaco
Montenegro
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Republic of Serbia
San Marino
Slovenia
Spain

Appendix H - Country list

Svalbard and Jan Mayen Islands
Sweden
Switzerland
The former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
United Kingdom of Great Britain and 
Northern Ireland

noRth aMeRica
Bermuda
Canada
Greenland
United States of America

191

I3461E

