W I S C O N S I N

Office of Privacy Protection
Safeguarding Information for Your Future

Computer Protection Tips
In today’s day and age, we use computers for everything. BUT….what happens when your computer
is hacked? Here are some simple, yet very important steps you can take to help prevent hackers from
accessing your computer and personal information.

Back up your information often. You can save your data to a CD, DVD, USB device or
an external hard drive. That way, if your computer ever crashes or is hacked, you will not lose
all of your information.

Never give someone remote access to your computer. If you receive a call from
someone claiming to be from Microsoft or any other company stating you have a virus, hang
up immediately. Scammers will try to convince you to pay for unnecessary services and get
access to your computer to obtain persona l information or install malicious software.

Update your operating system regularly. Computer operating systems are
periodically updated to stay current with technology requirements and to fix weak spots that
may be targeted by hackers. Be sure to install the updates to make sure your computer has
the latest version.

Use strong passwords and change them often. Do not use the same password for
multiple accounts. Use passwords that contain upper and lower case letters, numbers, and
punctuation. Change your password every three months and do not reuse passwords. This is
especially true for passwords that are used to access your email and bank accounts.

Do not click on pop-ups. Pop-up windows on the internet are quick advertising tools, but
beware of “too good to be true” offers. Not only can these pop-ups slow your computer and
internet speed down, but by clicking on these you can accidentally be signed up for
unauthorized services. Set your browser’s information bar to not allow pop-ups.

Be careful what you download. Some of the most destructive viruses have been
hidden in internet programs and applications or e-mail attachments. Be sure you download
only from a trusted source. As for e-mails, never click on links or attachments if you do not
recognize the sender. Even if you do know the sender, beware! Because it is possible their
computer was hacked and is sending out infected e-mails.
Department of Agriculture, Trade and Consumer Protection, 2811 Agriculture Drive, PO Box 8911, Madison, WI 53708-8911
(608) 224-5163 • (800) 422-7128 • privacy.wi.gov

Do not send sensitive or private information via email. Email is not usually
encrypted, or in other words not in a “secret code,” and can be intercepted and read by
hackers.

Use antivirus software and set it to update itself daily. There are many
commercial products that can help you protect your computer from various viruses. Most virus
protection software has a feature that will scan downloaded files automatically and some will
even scan incoming emails by default.

Avoid installing unnecessary, unfamiliar, or untested software. This could
include games, toolbars or screensavers that could leave your computer open to attacks.
Spyware and viruses are often installed by downloading unfamiliar programs.

Use a personal firewall. A firewall acts as a barrier between you and the internet. It helps
keep hackers out and helps prevents malicious software from sending your personal
information to criminals. There are free and retail versions available and firewalls can come in
the form of both software and hardware.

Be careful of wireless networks. For your home network, make sure your router is
password protected. For public wireless access (such as at restaurants, libraries or cafes), be
aware if the network is unsecured. Cyber criminals take advantage of these unsafe networks to
hack into your computer and access your personal data.

Turn your computer off when not in use. Leaving your computer on and unattended
could leave it open for an attack by hackers. Protect your computer, and save energy by
turning your computer off when you are not using it.
If your computer has been hacked into and you feel your safety is in jeopardy, or think that the hacker
is someone you know, you should call your local police.
Technology continues to change and evolve. You may not be able to prevent all hacking, but you can
help equip yourself with the tools and knowledge to protect your computer from cyber criminals.
You may also find more helpful tips on our publication “Social Networking.”
For more information or to file a complaint, visit our website or contact the Office of Privacy Protection.
Bureau of Consumer Protection
Office of Privacy Protection
2811 Agriculture Drive
PO Box 8911
Madison WI 53708-8911
E-MAIL:
DATCPWisconsinPrivacy@Wisconsin.gov

WEBSITE: privacy.wi.gov
Toll-free in WI: (800) 422-7128
(608) 224-5163
FAX: (608) 224-4677
TTY: (608) 224-5058
I:\cpcic\facts\IDTheftComputerProtection643

04/14

