Global Warming Impacts 

NEPAL 

 

Melting Glaciers, Flooding, and Destruction 

 
 
Glacial melting in the Himalayas is currently 
occurring at rates as high as 50 feet per year. As a 
result, the icy base camp where Sir Edmund 
Hillary and Tenzing Norgay started their ascent of 
Mount Everest in 1953 is covered in mud. It 
would take an extra two hours today for climbers 
to reach the glacier where the first ascent of 
Mount Everest began 53 years ago.  
 
As a result of global warming, Nepals annual average temperature has risen by about 
one degree Fahrenheit. But the temperature in the Himalayas is increasing twice as fast, 
causing rapid glacial melting. 
 
Sagarmatha National Park, where Everest is located, is an area of exceptional natural 
beauty with dramatic mountains, glaciers, and deep valleys. But climate change seriously 
threatens the parks ecosystems. Glacial melting will eventually leave Sagarmatha 
National Park snowless, and will destroy the habitats of the endangered species in the 
park, such as the snow leopard and the lesser panda.  
 

Melting glaciers also pose a great risk to 
human lives and livelihoods because of the 
possibility of glacial lake outburst 
floods. Glacial lake outburst floods occur 
when glacial lakes fill past their breaking 
points and burst, causing extensive 
damage to roads, bridges, trails, and villages. They also put peoples lives at risk. 
 
Forty of Nepals 2,300 glacial lakes are identified as potentially dangerous for glacial 
lake outburst floods, and 20 of those are considered likely to burst.  But among these 
lakes, only one has mitigation measures in place to protect people downstream. 
 
Another worry from the melting glaciers is that, in a few decades, when the glaciers have 
melted, water level in the glacier-fed rivers around the region will decline.  One billion 
people in Western China, Nepal, and Northern India  a sixth of the worlds population  
are dependent on the water in these rivers for fresh drinking water. The loss of this water 
supply will cause massive economic and environmental problems. 
 

Look for news and activities to help stop global warming at 

www.foe.org/globalwarming. 

1717 Massachusetts Ave NW Suite 600 Washington, DC 20036-2008 

202.783.7400 202.783.0444 fax www.foe.org 

 
 

