 

Summary: DNS-based DDoS attacks are constantly evolving, and attackers employ a wide range of techniques 
from basic methods like amplification/reflection and floods to NXDOMAIN attacks that vary from classic to 
highly sophisticated attacks involving client and CPE botnets, chain reactions, and misbehaving servers. An 
NXDOMAIN attack can overwhelm server resources and impact performance. It can affect internal recursive 
servers as well as external authoritative servers.

NXDOMAIN Attack on Recursive Servers

In the classic NXDOMAIN attack, the attacker sends a flood of queries to a Domain Name System (DNS) server to 
resolve a non-existent domain name. The DNS server tries to resolve the domain but cannot find it. In the process, its 
cache gets filled up with NXDOMAIN results, slowing response for legitimate requests. Many DNS server administrators 
fail to realize that what they think are performance problems are actually NXDOMAIN attacks on their DNS server. 
NXRRSET is another form of NXDOMAIN attack in which, for instance, the A record exists, but the AAAA or MX record 
does not, and those are being queried against.

In the random subdomain attack (which can also be a phantom domain attack, described a little later), the attacks are 
generated from a series of clients that prepend randomly generated subdomain strings to DNS requests to resolve 
non-existent domains names within the target domainfor example: http://6ctIoyPiVsHsd.targetsite.com or http://
kT51epKLGkN.targetsite.com. 

The DNS recursive servers try to resolve the fake domains through recursion out to the Internet, but cannot. This 
recursion consumes central processing unit (CPU) cycles and other resources. Meanwhile, the servers cache is being 
filled up with NXDOMAIN results, slowing DNS server response time for legitimate requests (cache pollution). When 
the cache gets filled up with NXDOMAIN/NXRRSET responses, valid cache entries get pushed out, leading to further 
service degradation. 

The eventual target of the attack can be the authoritative server of the targetsite.com, but it can impact all recursive 
servers between the client and the authoritative server.

What distinguishes a phantom domain attack is that the zone/authoritative targetsite.com server is specifically set up 
for the attack, and may in fact impact the recursive server by deliberately being slow to respond, returning TRUNC 
responses to elicit a Transmission Control Protocol (TCP) connectionall in the endeavor to consume available 
resources of the recursive server.

NXDOMAIN Attack on Authoritative Servers 

NXDOMAIN attacks can affect authoritative servers as well. When the attacker sends requests for non-existing domains, 
such as http://6ctIoyPiVsHsd.targetsite.com, to the authoritative server of targetsite, targetsites authoritative server 
doesnt have the IP address for which it is authoritative in its memory.  This impacts older DNS servers not running the 
most recent releases of BIND, and can reduce performance for DNS servers that have inadequate memory resources or 
that have to query the disk. 

The slow-drip random subdomain attack is performed as described in the previous section, but by very large numbers 
of clients (in a botnet), each of which sends a slow stream of DNS queries. This results in a significant volume of traffic 
arriving on incoming network links of the target domain.

If the authoritative server is well protected by something like Infoblox External DNS Security, then the most likely form of 
outage is the flooding of the incoming network links. This is the kind of situation in which the use of anycast (as used by 
the root servers) can blunt many attacks.

1

 2015 Infoblox, Inc. All rights reserved. Infoblox-SN-0073-00 : NXDOMAIN Attack Methods and Mitigation Sept2015NXDOMAIN Attack Methods and MitigationSOLUTION  NOTEs
k
r
o
w
 
k
c
a
t
t
a
 
e
h
t
 

w
o
H

DNS 
Recursive 
Servers

Queries with random strings 
prefixed to victims domain

Flood of queries for 
non-existent subdomains

Victims Domain
e.g. Targetsite.com

Resource exhaustion 
on recursive servers

DDoS on target victim

Mitigating NXDOMAIN Attacks

Infobloxs DNS security portfolio consists of:

 

 

Infoblox External DNS Security, which can shield networks from many attacks, including NXDOMAIN, that target the 
external Internet facing server
Internal DNS Security, which can protect internal recursive servers from NXDOMAIN attacks, advanced persistent 
threats (APTs), malware, and data exfiltration 

Running on purpose-built DNS appliances, these solutions effectively protect both your external and internal DNS and 
Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol (DHCP) infrastructure. In addition, Infoblox security products leverage continual, 
automatic updates to protect against new and evolving attacks and emerging malicious domains and networks.

Security from the Ground Up
 
Protection starts with the hardwareInfoblox purpose-built appliances are hardened for security during the 
manufacturing process and certified for Common Criteria Level EAL-2. One-click enablement and automatic key  
refresh eliminate the usual complexity of implementing DNS Security (DNSSEC).

Automatic Blackholing, Adjustable Recursive Timeouts, and Cache Pollution Prevention 

Infoblox External DNS Security and Internal DNS Security have specific capabilities built in to mitigate all known types of 
NXDOMAIN attacks: 

  Automatic blackholing of bad and misbehaving domains/servers, and the application of rate limiting on traffic going 

to miscreant or overwhelmed servers, result in SRVFAIL being returned to the clients, telling them that their DNS 
request failed.

  Client-based mitigation techniques include looking at the behavior of a client, andif a client generates a high rate 

of NXDOMAIN, NXRRset, or SRVFAIL responsesblocking requests from that clients IP address for a configurable 
period of time.

2

 2015 Infoblox, Inc. All rights reserved. Infoblox-SN-0073-00 : NXDOMAIN Attack Methods and Mitigation Sept2015NXDOMAIN Attack Methods and MitigationSOLUTION  NOTE  Even during an attack, the solution doesnt allow NXDOMAIN responses to push out valid cache entries, and it 

 

 

ensures that the needed cache refresh takes place to allow for continuous service.
For authoritative servers, Infoblox servers now have the list of authoritative IP addresses in memory, which improves 
performance when NXDOMAIN attacks hit them.
If a distributed denial of service (DDoS) attack is constantly being experienced, the timeout for recursive name 
lookup can be lowered to quickly free up the resources in the DNS resolver and prevent the concurrent number of 
outstanding DNS queries from maxing out.

Guarding against Outside-in Attacks
 
Infoblox External DNS Security provides defense against the widest range of DNS-based attacks such as volumetric 
attacks, NXDOMAIN, exploits, and DNS hijacking for external authoritative servers. This provides secure, highly 
available, and trustworthy DNS services even when your network is under attack. Through comprehensive reports, the 
solution gives you a centralized view of attacks that are happening on your network. 

Guarding against Inside-out Attacks 

Infoblox Internal DNS Security is an easy-to-deploy, appliance-based solution that protects mission-critical DNS and 
DHCP infrastructure from attacks such as NXDOMAIN, stops APT and malware communications, and prevents data 
exfiltrationwithout the need for endpoint agents or changes to your network architecture. 

Dont Let NXDOMAIN Attacks Bring Your Servers Down
 
Any attack on your DNS server means downtime and disruption to your business, not to mention brand damage, customer 
defection, and lost revenue. Intelligently mitigate NXDOMAIN and other DNS DDoS attacks with DNS solutions that are 
purpose built with security in mind. 

Contact us today to find out more about how you can defend against NXDOMAIN and other such DNS attacks on your critical 
infrastructure. 

About Infoblox

Infoblox delivers critical network services that protect Domain Name System (DNS) infrastructure, automate cloud deployments, and 
increase the reliability of enterprise and service provider networks around the world. As the industry leader in DNS, DHCP, and IP 
address management, the category known as DDI, Infoblox (www.infoblox.com) reduces the risk and complexity of networking.

Corporate Headquarters: 

+1.408.986.4000 

1.866.463.6256 (toll-free, U.S. and Canada) 

info@infoblox.com 

www.infoblox.com

3

 2015 Infoblox, Inc. All rights reserved. Infoblox-SN-0073-00 : NXDOMAIN Attack Methods and Mitigation Sept2015NXDOMAIN Attack Methods and MitigationSOLUTION  NOTE