Ethical Issues in Cyberspace and IT Society
Hary Gunarto
Ritsumeikan Asia Pacific University

ABSTRACT: Ethics is a branch of philosophy that deals with what is considered to be right or wrong. As
information in cyberspace can be accessed globally, a research field of "computer ethics" is needed to examine
what is right and wrong for Internet users can do, and what are the social impacts of Information Technology (IT)
in general. Such research will underpin action that must be taken not only to harness the power of the IT itself, but
also to survive its revolution.
It is especially important to understand security, privacy issues, and major negative impacts of IT on cyberspace.
Although some technical approaches such as: encryption, digital ID, and firewall methods have been developed to
overcome some of the problems, legal actions must also be enforced worldwide which will address a growing
number of ethical problems resulting from the negative impacts of IT in our global society.
As data, information, and computer networks can be threatened by many internal and external hazards
internationally, computer ethics should be the concern of everyone. Governments in every country, public policy
makers, computer professionals, organizations and private citizens must all take an interest and make their
contributions, so that this global information can be exploited in a socially and ethically sensitive way for our
future benefit and applications.

1. INTRODUCTION

Ethics is a branch of philosophy that deals with what is considered to be right or wrong. Definitions of ethics have
been widely proposed, such as “codes of morals of a particular profession”, “the standards of conduct of a given
profession”, “agreement among people to do the right and to avoid wrong”. Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary
defines ethics as “the discipline dealing with what is good and bad and with moral duty and obligation”. In more
simple words, it is the study of what is right to do in a given situation, and what we ought to do.
It is important to note that what is unethical is not necessarily illegal. In our everyday life, many individuals and
organizations faced with common ethical problems. For example, the issue of a company legally monitoring
employees’ e-mail is very controversial issues. According to the American Civil Liberties Union, tens of millions
of computer users are monitored, most without their knowledge, by their employers. Employees have limited
protection against employers’ electronic surveillance. Although several legal challenges are now underway, the
law appears to support employers’ rights to read electronic mail and other electronic documents of their employees.
In this matter, the definitions of “right” and “wrong” are not clear. Also, the distinction between what is illegal and

1

what is unethical is not always obvious (Stephan, 2002).
With the advanced computer technology, it is important to understand computer ethics related to security,
privacy issues, and major negative impacts of IT (Information Technology). Strategies must be developed which
address a growing number of global ethical questions resulting from these negative impacts of IT in Cyberspace
and IT society. Here are some of the questions that need to be addressed:
•

What information about individual can be revealed to others?

•

What information about individuals should be kept in databases, and how secure is the information in the
computer systems?

•

How should one handle data piracy on the computer networks?

•

Who is allowed to access the data and information?

•

How can safeguards be introduced to ensure that the information can be accessed only by the right person
or organizations?

2. ETHICAL ISSUES IN COMPUTING

Information Technology (IT) has a central role in commerce, industry, government, medicine, education,
entertainment and society at large. Its economic and social benefits hardly need explanation. But like any other
technologies, IT also has problematic implications, and some negative impacts on our society. It poses and creates
some problems related to ethics, and contains in general three main types of ethical issues: personal privacy, access
right, and harmful actions. Let us look more closely at these issues, exploring in each case the ways in which they
affect the public reactions to this technological change.
In terms of personal privacy, IT enables data exchange of information on a large scale from anybody, on any
locations or parts of the world, at any times. In this situation, there is increased potential for disclosing information
and violating the privacy of any individuals and groups of people due to its widespread disseminations worldwide.
It is our challenge and responsibility to maintain the privacy and integrity of data regarding individuals. This also
includes taking precautions to ensure the accuracy of data, as well as protecting it from unauthorized access or
accidental disclosure to inappropriate individuals.
The second aspect of ethical issues in computing systems is access right. Due to the current popularity of
international commerce on the Internet, the topic of computer security and access right has moved quickly from
being a low priority for corporations and government agencies to a high priority. This interest has been heightened
by computer break-ins at places like Los Alamos National Laboratories and NASA in the US. Many attempts of
such illegal access to United States government and military computers by computer hackers have been widely
reported. Without implementation of proper computer security policies and strategies, network connections on the
Internet can’t be made secure from illegal accesses.
In computer ethics, harmful action means injury or negative consequences, such as undesirable loss of

2

information, loss of property, property damage, or unwanted environmental impacts. This principle prohibits use
of computing technology in ways that result in harm to any of users, the general public, employees, and employers.
Harmful actions include intentional destruction or modification of files and programs leading to serious loss of
resources or unnecessary expenditure of human resources such as the time and effort required to purge systems
from "computer viruses." In the following tables, a survey of various activities on Internet indicates that illegal
information nowadays is often reported. The data shows that the percentage of response from Japanese companies
and organizations is quite significant (Kubo, 1999).

Table 1. Illegal Information on Internet
Type of information:
Fraudulent Information
Violation of Privacy
False Rumors
Obscene Information
Libel Information
Civil Rights Violation
Gambling Information

Percentage of response:
79.5%
73.1 %
59.3%
59.0%
55.2%
48.5%
10.4%

Table 2. Prejudicial Information
Type of information:
False Rumors
Drug Information
Sex Information
Violence Information

Percentage of response:
73.1%
71.3 %
66.4%
63.4%

So far, there has been relatively little investigation into the privacy and security issues relevant to these ethical
problems in IT and Cyberspace. Beside the false contents of information on Internet, many people tried to access
information that they don’t have rights to do so. For this reason, computer developers have proposed and used
intrusion-detection systems as basis of security systems designed to protect privacy. Typically, the intrusiondetection systems determine if a user is an intruder or a legitimate user, generally by way of various internal system
profiles.

3. INTERNATIONAL EFFORTS ON LEGISLATIONS

The growing threat to individuals is beginning to claim attention in national and international community. In many
countries around the world, existing laws are likely to be unenforceable against such crimes. This lack of legal

3

protection means that businesses and governments must rely solely on technical measures to protect themselves
from those who would pose false information, from who steal, deny access to, or even destroy valuable
information.
Self-protection is not sufficient to make cyberspace a safe place to conduct business. The rule of law must also
be enforced. Countries where legal protections are inadequate will become increasingly less able to compete in the
new economy. As cyber crime increasingly breaches national borders, nations perceived as havens run the risk of
having their electronic messages blocked by the network. National governments should examine their current
statutes to determine whether they are sufficient to combat such kinds of crimes (Chan and Camp, 2002).
Until now, only few nations have amended their laws to cover computer crimes that need to be addressed, as
shown in Table 3. Other countries begin to implement some initiatives, and it is clear that a great deal of additional
work and efforts are needed before organizations and individuals can be confident that cyber criminals will think
twice before attacking valued systems and information.

Table 3. IT Legislations in Some Countries
Country
USA

Year
1970

Legislation
Freedom of Information Act

USA

1980

Privacy Protection Act

USA

1987

Computer Security Act

USA

1997

USA

1997

Consumer Internet Privacy
Protection Act
Data Privacy Act

Japan

2000

MITI Legislation
commerce

Canada
Singapore

2000
1999

Australia

2000

UK

1998

Information Technology Act
Electronic
Transactions
Regulations
NSW Electronic Transactions
Act
Data Protection Act

for

E-

Contents
Permits individuals to access any information
about themselves stored in the Federal Government
Offices.
Provides protection of privacy in computerized and
other documents.
Requires security of information regarding
individuals.
Requires prior written consent before a computer
service can disclose subscriber’s information.
Limits the use of personally identifiable
information and regulates “spamming”.
Legal Provisions for Electronic Signatures &
Certification, and Foundation for Network-Based
Social and Economic Activities
Establish a legal framework for IT
Govern the actions of certification authorities in
Singapore
Application of legal requirements to electronic
communications
Data protection and Right of data access

New participating countries started generating principles to protect individuals from the potential invasion of
privacy that data collection and retrieval poses. These countries have adopted guidelines as statutory law, in whole
or in part. The OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development) in the US has specific
guidelines pertaining to data privacy that directly affect those dealing with Internet data access in general, and
those who use so-called "personal data" in particular.

4

4. ENCRYPTION TECHNOLOGY TO MINIMIZE HARMFUL ACTIONS ON INTERNET

In World War II, scrambled messages, written using a secret code, were common to prevent the enemy from
intercepting battle instructions. Today on the Internet, these scrambled messages are quite popular as we protect
our credit card numbers and private information from enemy hackers. A mathematical technique, called encryption,
is used to scramble/encode a message into an unreadable format. The message's recipient decrypts, or decodes, the
data using a key that converts it back into a readable form. Such encryption is widely used in online banking
transactions, stock trading, Internet shopping, in ATMs, in point-of-sale machines, and in electronic business-tobusiness transactions. Data can be encrypted in a number of forms: web information transmissions, e-mail, files,
transactions, etc.
On homepage data transmissions, encryption system commonly implemented to protect data is Secure Sockets
Layer (SSL). This encryption can be easily identified by its web page address which starts with “https:” in place of
usual “http:”. Another sign that SSL is being used is the presence of a gold lock on the status bar in Microsoft's
Internet Explorer or the presence of a gold outline around the Security toolbar button's lock in Netscape.
Most popular algorithms to encrypt files and email messages are DES (Data Encryption Standard), RSA (Rivest
Shamir and Adleman), and PGP (Pretty Good Privacy). Each employs key method to encrypt data, which requires
the use of two keys, a public and a private key. To encrypt an email message, the sender encrypts the email using
the receiver's public key, which is widely known and can be obtained from a company or Internet public-key server.
The email message is then sent in a locked, unreadable format. The receiver uses his private key, which is
confidential to everyone except the recipient, to decrypt the message.
Recently, new Advanced Encryption Standard (AES) has been adopted by the U.S. government. Developed by
two Belgian cryptographers, the algorithm, called Rijndael, is designed to better safeguard government data than
the older standard and works on multiple hardware and software platforms. This encryption method uses little
memory and provides a defense against a number of data attacks. This new technique is particularly important
when data passes through shared systems or insecure network segments where multiple people may have access to
the information. In these situations, sensitive data--such as passwords--should be encrypted in order to protect it
from unintended disclosure or modification.
Another data protection that is specific for e-mail messages is called “digital ID”. As more people send
confidential information by e-mail, it is increasingly important to be sure that documents sent in e-mail are not
forged, and to be certain that messages sent cannot be intercepted and read by anyone other than the intended
recipient. By using "digital IDs" in MS Outlook Express, senders can prove their identity in electronic transactions
in a way similar to showing driver's license when people cash a check.
Similar to encryption technique, digital ID is composed of a "public key," a "private key," and a "digital
signature." When somebody digitally signs messages, he/she is adding digital signature and public key to the
message. The combination of a digital signature and public key is called a "certificate." With Outlook Express,

5

senders can specify a certificate to be used by others to send encrypted messages to recipient.
For secure data transmissions on the Internet, both SSL and digital ID are commonly used to identify the
legitimate identity of senders and receivers. Both techniques allow people to send/receive data in privacy, so that
no body on the Internet is able to do eavesdropping. Furthermore, they can also be used to prevent any modification
of transaction or message on the computer networks (Internet).
Another protection method against computer crimes is called firewalls. Internet firewall is essentially one or
more systems that control access between computer networks. In this regard, the Internet is nothing more than
collections of very large computer networks that need to be isolated one from another. The firewall serves two
basic purposes: it controls access to the network from outside users, and it also controls the transfer of information
from the inside network to outside world (Internet). The most important thing to remember about firewall is that it
creates an access control policy for the organization.

5. SOME OF THE REMAINING ISSUES

Information Technology also concerns computer professionals who design and create information systems and
devices. Recently, national and international organizations, such as the International Federation of Information
Processors (IFIP), the Association for Computing Machinery (ACM), Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Engineers (IEEE), the British Computer Society (BCS) and the Institute of Data Processing Management (IDPM),
have recognized the need for new codes of ethics to inform and advise their members about relevant social and
ethical issues.
In the US since 1992, the ACM has established a new policy on professional ethics. National accrediting bodies,
like the Computer Sciences Accreditation Board and the Accreditation Board for Engineering Technology, now
also require that accredited university curricula in the computing sciences include mandatory instruction in the
social and ethical effects of information technology. As listed in Table 4, commitment to ethical professional
conduct has been proposed so that every member of the ACM will follow (ACM , 1992).

Table 4. ACM Commitments on Ethics
No

Ethical conducts

1

Contribute to society and human being.

2
3
4
5
6
7
8

Avoid harm to others.
Be honest and trustworthy.
Be fair and take action not to discriminate.
Honor property rights including copyrights and patents.
Give proper credit for intellectual property.
Respect the privacy of others.
Honor confidentiality.

6

9

Contribute to society and human being.

In this regards, ethical problems are very important to be understood, realized, and solved legally or technically,
not only in one or two countries, but worldwide, since the use of such computing technology will change
everything in our life: where and how we work, learn, shop, vote, spend time, and live (Zhong, Liu, and Yao, 2002).
As many governments and organizations formulate new strategies, it is probably also important to realize some
related questions that may drive directly or indirectly some ethical issues in general sense. Such strategies should
address a growing number of worldwide community issues, which may affect our lives, such as:
•

How should society cope with resulting unemployment and underemployment worldwide?

•

How should governments and businesses deal with possible exploitation of poor countries by wealthy
countries and multinational conglomerates?

•

How can society provide people with jobs that are interesting, fulfilling and challenging?

•

How will education in cyberspace be planned, administered and financed?

•

How can safeguards be introduced to ensure that the poor are not excluded from employment
opportunities, education, shopping, entertainment and many more things on the global information net?

6. CONCLUDING REMARKS

The new world of information society with global networks and cyberspace will inevitably generate a wide variety
of social, political, and ethical problems. Many problems related to human relationships and the community
become apparent, when most human activities are carried on in cyberspace. Some basic ethical issues on the use of
IT on global networks consist of personal privacy, data access rights, and harmful actions on the Internet. These
basic issues have been solved partially using technological approaches, such as encryption technique, SSL, digital
IDs and computer firewalls. Besides these protection technologies, legal laws are also needed in cyberspace to
address hundreds of countries, which are incorporated into one global network. Guidelines and strategies should be
implemented so that global information can be exploited in a socially and ethically sensitive way for our future
benefit and applications. These and many more ethical issues urgently need the attention of governments,
businesses, educational institutions, public and private individuals worldwide.

7. REFERENCES

ACM, 1992, ACM Code of Ethics and Professional Conduct, Association of Computing Machinery, USA,
October 1992.
Chan, Serena and L. Jean Camp, 2002, Law Enforcement Surveillance in the Network Society,

7

IEEE Technology and Society, Volume 21, Number 2, page 22-30.
Kubo, Takeaki, 1999, Internet Revolution & Japanese IT Industry, Symposium on Development of
Information Industry in the Asia-Pacific Region, 5-8 October 1999, Srilanka, page 21-93.
Stephan, Karl D, 2002, Is Engineering Ethics Optional?, IEEE Technology and Society, Volume 20,
Number 4, page 6-12.
Zhong, Ning, Jiming Liu, and Yiju Yao, 2002, In Search of the Wisdom Web, IEEE Computer, IEEE, Volume
35, No. 11, page 27-31.

8

