AN IMPENDING STORM
Impacts of deforestation on
weather PATTERNs and agriculture

October 2013
Greenpeace Research Laboratories
Technical Report (Review) 04-2013

AN IMPENDING STORM

Title
report
Impacts ofof
deforestation
on weather patterns and agriculture
Executive summary	

3

1. Introduction	

7

2. Indirect impacts of deforestation	

9

3. Indirect impacts of Asian deforestation	

14

4. Indirect impacts of African deforestation	

18

5. Indirect impacts of Amazon deforestation	

20

6. Indirect impacts of boreal deforestation	

23

7. Synthesis and conclusions	

24

Endnotes	28

Greenpeace Research Laboratories
Technical Report (Review) 04-2013

For more information contact: pressdesk.int@greenpeace.org
Written by:
Clare Miller & Janet Cotter
Edited and produced by:
Steve Erwood
Cover image
© Greenpeace / Daniel Beltrá
JN 455
Published October 2013 by
Greenpeace International
Ottho Heldringstraat 5
1066 AZ Amsterdam
The Netherlands
Tel: +31 20 7182000
greenpeace.org

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Open flames on dry tree
branches in an area
of recently deforested
peatland in the PT Rokan
Adiraya Plantation palm oil
plantation near Sontang
village in Rokan Hulu, Riau,
Sumatra.
© Ulet Ifansasti /
Greenpeace

Forests currently cover around 30% of the Earth’s land surface, but are being
lost at an “alarming rate” (FAO, 2010). Deforestation is highest in the tropical
areas of South America, central West Africa, and South and Southeast Asia, with
13 million hectares of global forest lost each year (FAO, 2010). Forests provide
ecosystem services that include the regulation of weather and climate at local,
regional and even global levels. Therefore, deforestation not only causes a direct
loss of forest habitat but also leads to indirect impacts as ecosystem services
deteriorate or fail. While it is well known that deforestation emits carbon dioxide
that contributes to global climate change, less well known are the projected
impacts on weather patterns. This report reviews published studies on these
indirect impacts of deforestation and their potential impact on agriculture.
Changes in land cover (for example, conversion of forest to crop land) affect the
exchange of moisture and heat between the soil, vegetation and atmosphere; altering
natural cycles and changing atmospheric circulation. This leads to changes in local and
regional surface temperatures and also rainfall patterns. Local changes in atmospheric
circulation caused by deforestation can, potentially, affect weather patterns on the other
side of the world. Teleconnection is an emerging scientific concept that links changes
in atmospheric circulation and pressure patterns across the world over large distances.
Remote areas are indirectly impacted by deforestation due to the propagation of impacts
through global teleconnections. The El Niño-Southern Oscillation is one example of a
teleconnection, where warmer ocean temperatures result in changes to climate patterns
over large geographic areas.
Projecting the indirect effects of deforestation on weather and climate is an emerging
area of science. Inherent uncertainties exist with modelling of complex environmental
systems, so projected effects and impacts contain a degree of uncertainty, with
phrases such as “may affect” being used to convey this. Despite this uncertainty, many
models show wide scientific consensus that deforestation has the potential to disrupt
weather and climate systems on a local, regional and global scale. Further studies will
undoubtedly increase our understanding of the indirect impacts of deforestation.
3

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

The major global indirect impacts projected from deforestation are changes to rainfall
patterns and surface temperatures. A reduction in evapotranspiration and moisture
circulation is indicated to weaken the hydrological cycle, with models suggesting up
to 80% reduction in annual rainfall in deforested areas (Hasler et al., 2009). In certain
regions, surface temperatures are predicted to increase by a maximum of 3°C, using
complete deforestation models (Snyder, 2010). This is largely due to the reduction in
evaporative cooling associated with vegetation loss (Snyder, 2010). However, boreal
deforestation could decrease northern hemisphere temperatures due to cooling effects
associated with increased snow cover. Changes to rainfall and surface temperatures are
expected to impact agriculture and crop harvests, with an approximate 10% reduction in
crop yields for a 1°C rise in temperature (Lobell et al., 2011).
Other potential impacts include poor air quality and the spread of diseases. In Southeast
Asia, smoke from fires associated with deforestation, particularly of peat forests, adds
considerably to existing urban air pollution, especially in El Niño years (Johnston et al.,
2012; Marlier et al., 2013). Modelling attributes an average of 110,000 deaths a year
in the region to these fire emissions, primarily long-term seasonal exposure to smoke
particles, rising to 300,000 deaths during the 1997/8 El Niño year (Johnston et al., 2012).
Diseases such as malaria and yellow fever may spread due to the removal of forest
pathogen hosts, increases in standing water, and faster reproduction cycles caused by
warmer temperatures (Vittor et al., 2006; Patz et al., 2008). Forest removal is also linked
to increased flood risk and surface run-off (Bradshaw et al., 2007).

Deforestation
for agriculture
– as well as
having extremely
negative impacts
from a climate
change and
biodiversity
perspective –
increasingly
appears to
be counterproductive if it
leads to changes
in weather and
climate systems
that impact
agricultural
production.

The end use of much deforested land is agriculture. Deforestation for agriculture – as well
as having extremely negative impacts from a climate change and biodiversity perspective
– increasingly appears to be counterproductive if it leads to changes in weather and
climate systems that impact agricultural production. Voldoire & Royer (2004) suggest that
deforestation could cause more intense climatic extremes, which would result in larger
negative impacts to agriculture than those associated with temperature increases due to
climate change. For example, their model indicates that El Niño years would be drier than
present, increasing soil water stress and reducing evaporation. Modelling suggests that
loss of forests in areas such as Amazonia and Central Africa can severely reduce rainfall
in the US Midwest at times when water is crucial for agricultural productivity in these
regions (Avissar & Werth, 2005).
Modelling is currently the best tool to investigate differences in deforestation extent, as
well as covering both regional and global areas1. These studies tend to model complete
deforestation to maximise effects on climate and weather, although expected impact
trends associated with both current and historical deforestation are also indicated.
Importantly, indirect impacts may act in a non-linear fashion. That is to say, instead of a
steady change, there may be little noticeable effect for a period but then a rapid change
to different conditions occurs when a “tipping point” is reached.

4

1	Computational
models are used to
predict the impacts
of deforestation as
widespread destruction
of forested areas for
a scientific purpose is
both unfeasible and
undesirable.

DEEP SEABED
MINING AN
WAKE-UPON
CALL
TO PROTECT
OURAND
OCEANS
AN IMPENDING
STORM IMPACTS
OFURGENT
DEFORESTATION
WEATHER
PATTERNS
AGRICULTURE

In conclusion, there is wide scientific consensus that deforestation can cause indirect
impacts to local and regional weather systems, such as rainfall patterns and surface
temperatures. There is also strong modelling evidence for remote global impacts via
teleconnections caused by deforestation in the three main tropical forested areas
(Amazon, equatorial West Africa and Southeast Asia). These impacts vary in extent and
magnitude, but there is agreement on deforestation being the underlying cause.
Ending deforestation would stop the direct loss of forest habitat but it would also minimise
the indirect effects of deforestation and the possibility of changes to weather and climate
systems, locally, regionally and globally. There would also be benefits to public health,
reductions in flood risks, and decreases on the negative impacts on crop output in
certain areas. Our knowledge of the services provided to humans by forest ecosystems
(underpinned by biodiversity) is incomplete, and hence the full consequences of their loss
cannot be estimated with any certainty. Therefore, employing the precautionary principle
and conserving existing forest ecosystems under a “Zero Deforestation” footprint is the
only way to ensure that forests continue to regulate our weather and climate, minimise the
indirect effects of deforestation and conserve biodiversity.

Indirect impacts of Asian deforestation2
Rainfall: Southeast Asia is modelled to have a 1mm/day decrease in rainfall throughout
the year if forest cover loss is complete (Werth & Avissar, 2005a), with southern China
and Vietnam undergoing a 20-30% decrease in rainfall (Sen et al., 2010).

Employing the
precautionary
principle and
conserving
existing forest
ecosystems
under a “Zero
Deforestation”
footprint is
the only way
to ensure that
forests continue
to regulate
our weather
and climate,
minimise the
indirect effects
of deforestation
and conserve
biodiversity.

Temperature: Models indicate a regional increase in air temperature of 1°C after complete
deforestation (Schneck & Mosbrugger, 2011).
Monsoons: It was suggested that the East Asian monsoon flow would weaken over
eastern China and the South China Sea, but become enhanced over mainland
Southeast Asia after complete deforestation (Sen et al., 2004; Sen et al., 2010).
Oceans: Surface temperatures could reduce by up to 1.25°C in the Southern and
South Indian Oceans, but increase by 0.75°C in the South Pacific Ocean after complete
deforestation, impacting ocean circulation (Schneck & Mosbrugger, 2011).
Coastal protection: Removal of mangrove forests increases community exposure to ocean
and tidal influences such as cyclones and tsunamis (Kathiresan & Rajendran, 2005)
Human health: Smoke from fires associated with deforestation, particularly of peat
forests, adds considerably to existing urban air pollution in Southeast Asia, especially in
El Niño years (Johnston et al., 2012; Marlier et al., 2013). This can affect people’s health,
not only in the immediate vicinity, but also in urban centres near forest burning.
Teleconnections: A 20-25% decrease in rainfall in western Turkey (Avissar & Werth,
2005), enhanced storm track activity over Scandinavia (Snyder, 2010), changes to
European storm track locations (Snyder, 2010), cooling in Siberia of 1°C, and increased
temperatures in Canada and central Africa, are all suggested as consequences of
complete Asian deforestation (Schneck & Mosbrugger, 2011).

5

2	 These modelled impacts
focus on deforestation
impacts only, so are
separate from those
expected due to global
climate change. Model
results are independent
of changes caused by
increases in greenhouse
gas concentrations.

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

Indirect impacts of African deforestation
Rainfall: Modelling suggests widespread reductions in rainfall of 1mm/day locally (Werth
& Avissar, 2005b), with a 2-3mm/day decrease in the dry season (Semazzi & Song, 2001)
after complete tropical African deforestation. These models showed regional patterns;
Mozambique would experience reduced rainfall, while Botswana, Zambia and the
southern Democratic Republic of Congo would experience increased rainfall.
Temperature: Land surface temperatures were indicated to increase locally between 1.22.4°C following complete deforestation of South Sudan (Salih et al., 2012).
Monsoons: The West African monsoon weakens due to reduced northward moisture
transport after modelled loss of West African forests (Abiodun et al., 2008).
Agriculture: Western Kenyan agriculture production was expected to reduce following
decreased rainfall linked to local forest loss (Otieno & Anyah, 2012).
Teleconnections: Models of complete forest loss in central Africa suggest a 5-35% rainfall
decrease in the US midwest (Avissar & Werth, 2005), which could impact crop harvests
and global food supply. The Arabian Peninsula was expected to have a 15-30% increase
in rainfall (Avissar & Werth, 2005).

Indirect impacts of Amazon deforestation
Rainfall: Annual rainfall is modelled to decrease by 10-20% across the entire basin after
total Amazon deforestation (Moore et al., 2007), but there are some regional differences.
The northwest of the basin is predicted to become drier by up to 2mm/day, while the
southeast may become wetter by up to 1.5mm/day (Medvigy et al., 2011).
Flood risk: Annual discharges into a river in the southeast of the Amazon have increased
by 25% following land use change (forests to agriculture) over the past 40 years (Costa et
al., 2003), and flood risks are considered to have increased (Davidson et al., 2012).
Temperature: Modelling complete conversion of Amazonian forest to agriculture
suggests significant temperature increases locally of around 2°C (Feddema et al., 2005).
The frequency of extreme cold events is indicated to triple in the south and west of South
America, which would impact agriculture (Medvigy et al., 2012).
Agriculture: Reductions in rainfall and increased extreme cold events would negatively
impact crops such as coffee, maize, soybean and wheat (Medvigy et al., 2012).
Teleconnections: With complete deforestation of the Amazon, rainfall is suggested to
decrease by 25% in Texas, but increase by 45% in the Arabian Peninsula (Avissar &
Werth, 2005). At the same time, Northern Europe would also experience increased
annual rainfall (Feddema et al., 2005).

6

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

1. INTRODUCTION
Areas of natural forest
in the southwest of
Cameroon are being
cleared to establish
a large-scale palm oil
plantation, despite
growing local and
international opposition
and a heightened risk of
social conflict over the
project.
© Greenpeace /
Alex Yallop

The worldwide forest area is around 4 billion hectares, approximately 30% of
the Earth’s land surface, but it is declining by 13 million hectares a year – an
“alarming rate” (FAO, 2010). Deforestation is highest in the tropical regions of
South America, central West Africa and South and Southeast Asia. Forests
provide ecosystem services that include the regulation of weather and climate at
local, regional and global levels. Therefore, deforestation not only causes a direct
loss of forest habitat but also leads to indirect impacts as ecosystem services fail.
While it is well known that deforestation emits carbon dioxide that contributes to
global climate change, less well known are the projected impacts on weathern
patterns. This report reviews published studies on these indirect impacts of
deforestation and their potential impact on agriculture.
A change in land cover impacts the exchange of water and energy between the soil,
vegetation and the atmosphere. These changes can alter atmospheric circulation
and thermodynamics, affecting rainfall patterns and surface temperatures (Foley et
al., 2003). Local and regional climate may be impacted by these changes in land
cover, with evidence for global climatic changes in distant regions due to atmospheric
teleconnections (Snyder, 2010). Teleconnections are processes that link changes in
atmospheric pressure and circulation patterns across the world, despite large distances.
One example of a teleconnection is the El Niño-Southern Oscillation (Snyder, 2010).
Tropical land areas influence climate3 in mid-latitude regions, since they are a major
energy source to the atmosphere. General atmospheric circulation transports this energy
towards the poles to maintain the global energy balance. Changes to the tropical energy
balance and this northwards transport process could lead to impacts on the climate in
northern latitudes (Snyder, 2010).

7

3	 The distinction between
deforestation impacts
on weather and/or
climate is unclear so
this report has referred
to the terminology as
used within each study.
The implications of
deforestation on carbon
storage and hence
climate change are not
covered here.

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

Many components of the Earth system can display non-linear behaviour (Lenton et al.,
2008). The ecosystem goods and services provided by forests, such as the regulation
of climate and rainfall, might also exhibit non-linear behaviour. That is to say, instead
of a steady decline in an ecosystem service, there may be little noticeable effect for a
period but then a sudden change to a different state occurs; in this case, one where that
ecosystem service would no longer be provided.
The concept of non-linearity is best illustrated by “tipping points”. In the Amazon basin,
the combined effects of deforestation and global climate change threaten to push the
forest towards a “tipping point” (Lenton et al., 2008; Malhi et al. 2009). It is suggested
that 40% deforestation of the Amazon basin might be enough for it to reach a tipping
point, after which an irreversible drier climate would establish preventing reforestation
(Sampaio et al., 2007; Nobre & Borma, 2009). Similar tipping points have not been
reported for other large tropical forested areas (e.g. Southeast Asia or the Congo Basin).
Models are used to predict the impacts of deforestation. They can investigate differences in
deforestation extent, as well as cover both regional and global areas. Indirect impacts can
be hard to identify, due to natural climate variability (Findell et al., 2006) and the difference
between time scales of observations (days) and modelled (years) systems (Aragão, 2012).
However, as widespread destruction of forested areas for a scientific purpose is unfeasible,
modelling is currently the best tool. This field is an emerging area of science with further
studies expected. Importantly, although many of the models project the consequences of
total deforestation in a specific region, they give an idea of what trends might be expected,
for example in terms of rainfall or temperature. However, this does mean any steady
transition would occur, as the system may well respond in a non-linear fashion. Most
models in this report study complete deforestation, so figures are reported for impacts
linked to total forest cover loss. Where this differs, it is noted in the text.
This report identifies indirect impacts associated with deforestation, and investigates the
impact these may have on agricultural production and weather patterns. Studies specific
to indirect impacts associated with deforestation in the Amazon, Asia, Africa and the
Boreal forest are also noted.

8

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

2. INDIRECT IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION
Thousands of peatland
fires in Riau, Sumatra
- the majority within
pulp and palm oil
concessions - have
caused recordbreaking air pollution
in Singapore and
Malaysia, with the haze
extending as far as
Thailand.
© Ulet Ifansasti /
Greenpeace

Human health
Fire emissions
Together with burning of savannah, forest fires make up most of the smoke from
landscape fires globally. Forest fires do occur naturally in some types of forests, but
typically not in tropical rainforest. However, degradation of rainforests increases their
vulnerability to fire, and burning is often used to clear forests. In Southeast Asia, forest
clearance fires associated with deforestation, especially of peat forests, are the primary
source of fire emissions in the region (Johnston et al., 2012). They add considerably to
existing urban air pollution, particularly in El Niño years when drought increases the extent
and longevity of fires (Johnston et al., 2012; Marlier et al., 2013). This smoke includes
carbon particles smaller than 2.5 µm in diameter (PM2.5), which are harmful to human
health. Gases from fires also contribute towards low-level ozone formation.
During strong El Niño years, modelling indicates that particulates from landscape fires
alone cause World Health Organisation (WHO) daily PM2.5 guidelines to be exceeded
in the worst affected areas of Southeast Asia by between 100 and 200 days a year
(Johnston et al. 2012; Marlier et al. 2013). In the models, average particulate levels
from fires alone exceed WHO annual PM2.5 guidelines over large parts of the islands
of Borneo and Sumatra and also Peninsular Malaysia. Johnston et al. (2012) estimate
that 110,000 deaths a year (average 1997-2006) are attributable to fire emissions in
the region, primarily long-term seasonal exposure to smoke particles. This rises to
nearly 300,000 deaths during the 1997/8 El Niño year. Marlier et al. (2013) modelled the
health impact of fire emissions in Southeast Asia (1997-2006) in terms of increase in
mortality from cardiovascular disease. The increased annual mortality was approximately
10,800 adults (a 2 % increase) from exposure to PM2.5, and a further 4,100 adults from
exposure to ozone.
There are high population densities near to high fire activity areas in Southeast Asia,
and this enhances the health impact of fire emissions in this region (Marlier et al., 2013).
Both studies recommend that reductions in exposure to fire emissions via decreases in
deforestation would have an immediate and measurable effect on human health, as well
as preserving the forest ecosystem.
9

“Reducing fires
[in SE Asia] from
deforestation
and land
management
would benefit
public health in
addition to global
scale benefits for
carbon storage
and biodiversity.”
– Marlier et al.,
2013

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

Disease
Deforestation could increase the risk and spread of disease, due to increased contact with
wildlife and the destruction of existing pathogen forest hosts. In particular, forest clearance
increases artificial water pools that can become breeding sites for malaria-carrying
mosquitoes. Vittor et al. (2006) report that changes in malarial disease patterns have
been recorded due to deforestation in the Amazon. Sites that were 80% deforested had a
mosquito (Anopheles darlingi) biting rate that was 278 times higher than the rate in areas
which had less than 30% deforestation. It is thought that this is due to A. darlingi breeding
preference for grass or crop land. In Kenya, open, treeless habitats have a warmer midday
temperature than forested areas. The increase in temperature shortened the reproductive
cycle of the female mosquito Anopheles gambiae by 52% during the dry season (Patz et
al., 2008). These studies show it may be possible for deforestation to increase mosquito
populations, and thereby the transmission of diseases such as malaria.
There are also concerns that diseases such yellow fever and dengue could re-emerge
in some countries, or increase their outbreak frequency (Walsh et al., 1993). Grard et al.
(2011) raised concerns that Crimean-Congo haemorrhagic fever virus could re-emerge
in Africa, following increased dry savannah habitats possibly caused by deforestation.

Hydrological cycle
Forests are a vital constituent of the global water cycle, as they have a high evaporation
rate, contributing to atmospheric moisture circulation. Aragão (2012) reports that
the forest canopy recycles water more efficiently through evapotranspiration than
sparsely vegetated surfaces such as crop fields. Evapotranspiration is the combination
of evaporation and transpiration from vegetation to the atmosphere. Deforestation
weakens the local hydrological cycle, and a new pattern of heat release occurs due to
the changed land cover (Figure 1). This heat release change propagates around the
world via teleconnections, affecting the global pattern of rainfall (Werth & Avissar, 2005b).
Rainfall
Deforestation can reduce evapotranspiration due to a loss of vegetation. This results
in reduced moisture circulation and decreased rainfall (Spracklen et al., 2012).
Deforestation also impacts local thermodynamics, resulting in a decrease in heat
released to the atmosphere. This impacts atmospheric circulation and its associated
rainfall (Avissar & Werth, 2005). Models suggest that deforested regions have reduced
annual rainfall of up to 80%, with regions outside of the deforested area also impacted
by rainfall changes (Hasler et al., 2009; Figure 2). Spracklen et al. (2012) suggest that
large-scale land-use change could alter rainfall patterns hundreds to thousands of
kilometres away from the region of deforestation. Changes to rainfall patterns could
result in droughts, especially in the dry season, negatively impacting agriculture and
water availability.

10

“Unabated loss
of forests may
increase or
exacerbate the
number of floodrelated disasters,
negatively impact
millions of poor
people, and inflict
trillions of dollars
in damage in
disadvantaged
economies over
the coming
decades.
This first globalscale empirical
demonstration
that forests
are correlated
with flood risk
and severity
in developing
countries
reinforces the
imperative for
large-scale forest
protection to
protect human
welfare, and
suggests that
reforestation may
help to reduce
the frequency
and severity of
flood-related
catastrophes.”
– Bradshaw et al.,
2007

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

a) Intact tropical forest

b) Regional impacts

Atmospheric circulation

Atmospheric circulation

moisture recycling

moisture

evapotransporation
heat

evapotransporation

recycling

rainfall

rainfall

run-off

run-off

Flooding
Loss of forests can lead to increased water run-off, as there is limited interception of
rainfall and reduced evaporation of water from the canopy (Bradshaw et al., 2007).
Spracklen et al. (2012) suggest that decreased evapotranspiration due to deforestation
could increase localised run-off and raise river levels. These impacts could contribute
towards flooding, especially in the wet season. Bradshaw et al. (2007) report that flood
frequency was negatively correlated with the amount of remaining forest, but positively
correlated with the amount of forest area lost. Modelling indicates that a 10% decrease
in natural forest area results in an increased flood frequency between 4% and 28%,
depending on the country being modelled. The same 10% decrease in forest cover also
results in a 4-8% increase in total flood duration.
Temperature
It is thought that global deforestation would have a regional cooling effect in temperate
and boreal zones of the northern hemisphere, but a regional warming effect in the tropics
(Davin & Noblet-Ducoudré, 2010). Lee et al. (2011) expand upon this theory, stating that
their models indicate that north of 45° latitude there is increased cooling, and south of
35° latitude there is some evidence of increased warming. Deforestation results increase
temperatures due to the reduction in the cooling effects of evapotranspiration caused by
loss of vegetation (Snyder, 2010). This also contributes towards reduced cloud formation
(Castillo & Gurney, 2012).

11

Figure 1: Intact tropical
rainforest (A) recycles
moisture and has low
run-off. Regional impacts
of tropical deforestation
(B) include human
health issues associated
with smoke from fire
clearance, spread of
disease (for example,
malaria), increased
run-off and flood risk,
increased temperatures,
and reduced rainfall due
to decreased moisture
recycling. These changes
alter atmospheric
circulation. After Aragão,
2012.

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

Models by Snyder (2010) indicate that deforestation in all three major tropical forest centres
would cause increased air temperatures within the forest regions of 2- 3°C. For example,
the Amazon region is predicted to warm by 1.88°C between September and November.
The surrounding oceans are thought to limit the temperature response in Southeast
Asia. Regions outside of the deforested areas are shown to warm, particularly southern
Siberia and China, due to global teleconnections and amplification of changes to northern
hemisphere circulation. Albedo-driven cooling is an important mechanism in boreal regions
(Davin & Noblet-Ducoudré, 2010). Albedo is a measure of surface reflectance, so as forest
clearance exposes highly reflective snow (high albedo), warming radiation is reflected
instead of absorbed. This contributes towards cooling of surface temperatures and
expansion of snow cover, resulting in net cooling (Spracklen et al., 2008).
Agriculture
The end use of much deforested land is agriculture. Deforestation for agriculture may be
counterproductive if deforestation leads to changes in weather and climate systems that
impact agricultural production. Voldoire & Royer (2004) suggest that deforestation could
cause more intense climatic extremes that would result in larger negative impacts to
agriculture than those associated with temperature increases due to climate change. For
example, their model indicates that El Niño years would be drier than present, increasing
soil water stress and reducing evaporation.
Lobell et al. (2011) report that a 1°C rise in temperature as a result of global climate
change generally lowered crop yields by 10%, except at high latitudes where crops
benefit from warmer temperatures. They also note that rainfall increased yields for almost
all crops but a point does occur where further rain starts to cause damage. In SubSaharan Africa, models predict decreases in the five main crop yields (maize, sorghum,
millet, groundnut and cassava) with climate warming, despite predicted increases in
rainfall in east Africa (Schlenker & Lobell, 2010). Models of land change from native
woody vegetation to agricultural land in Australia indicate that it caused a decrease in
rainfall and an increase in temperature in southeast Australia. This area of Australia is a
major agricultural producer, so these changes would lead to impacts on crop harvests
(McAlpine et al., 2007). These studies indicate that changes in temperature due to
deforestation would adversely impact crop yields, affecting agriculture dependant
economies and cattle feed.

“Changes
in regional
climate could
exacerbate
drought-related
tree mortality,
which in turn
would reduce
carbon stocks,
increase fire
risk and lower
biodiversity.
Such changes
might also
directly threaten
agriculture,
which generates
$15bn US dollars
per year in
Amazonia, and
the hydropower
industry, which
supplies 65%
of Brazil’s
electricity.
Society should
therefore
take urgent
action now, to
curb tropical
deforestation
and avert future
environmental
problems.”
– (Aragão, 2012)

12

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

Figure 2: Predicted impacts of deforestation
on weather patterns and crop yields around the
world: results from computer modelling studies.

Rainfall impacts
crop yield

Temperature change
impacts crop yield
Temperature change

Europe
Deforestation in Asia
could lead to changes
in European storm track
location and intensity
(Snyder, 2010), while
Amazon deforestation may
increase annual rainfall in
northern Europe.
This could impact
crop yields.

Turkey
20-25% decrease in rainfall
in western Turkey could
occur due to southeast
Asian deforestation (Avissar
& Werth, 2005). This
could impact crop yields.

USA
A 5-35% rainfall decrease
in Midwest USA was linked
to African deforestation,
which is likely to impact crop
harvests. A 25% decrease
in rainfall in Texas was
suggested after Amazon
deforestation (Avissar &
Werth, 2005).

Siberia
Temperature decrease of
>1°C possibly due to Asian
deforestation (Schneck &
Mosbrugger, 2011).

South America
Temperature increase
was related to Asian
deforestation (Schneck &
Mosbrugger, 2011). This
could impact crop such
as wheat, maize, soybean
and coffee (Medvigy et al.,
2012).

13

Africa
Increased surface
temperatures were
associated with Asian
deforestation (Schneck &
Mosbrugger, 2011). The
West African monsoon
was indicated to weaken
due to reduced northward
moisture transport
(Abiodun et al., 2008). This
could impact crop yields
and increase water stress.

Storm track
Monsoon

Asia
The East Asian monsoon
flow was suggested to
weaken over eastern
China and the South China
Sea, but was enhanced
over mainland southeast
Asia following Asian
deforestation (Sen et al.,
2004; Sen et al., 2010).

Arabian Peninsula
Rainfall was predicted
to increase by 15-30%
following African
deforestation, or
increase by 45%
following Amazon
deforestation (Avissar
& Werth, 2005). This
could impact crop
yields.

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

3. INDIRECT IMPACTS OF ASIAN DEFORESTATION
Charred sapling
and burnt stumps
in recently cleared
peatland forest area in
Indragiri Hulu, Riau.
© Kemal Jufri /
Greenpeace

Asia contains 15% of the global forest area (FAO, 2010), but is considered to
have more complex impacts due to deforestation than those in the Amazon. This
is due to the influence of the Asian monsoon, island geographic distributions,
and different spatial features (Mabuchi et al., 2005). Schneck & Mosbrugger
(2011) report that models of Asian deforestation indicate changes to the regional
hydrological cycle, warming of surface temperatures, and alteration of regional
circulation patterns such as monsoons. The region’s location within the warm
west Pacific Ocean is likely to lead to strong ocean-atmosphere feedbacks
resulting in regional and global climate impacts via teleconnections (Schneck &
Mosbrugger, 2011). These impacts are discussed further below.
Rainfall
Across the whole of Southeast Asia, Werth & Avissar (2005a) predict that there would
be reduced rainfall of 1mm/day throughout the year following deforestation. Olchev
et al. (2008) enhance this idea, after models indicated that a 15% decrease in tropical
rainforest in Sulawesi, Indonesia showed a 2% decrease in monthly evapotranspiration
and a 21% increase in soil evaporation. Sen et al. (2004) predicted that deforestation in
Myanmar could cast a rain shadow to the east, influencing rainfall in Bangladesh and
northeast India. However, no additional studies on this rain shadow are, as yet, available.
Deforestation, which had previously been focused on lowland areas in Southeast Asia,
is now moving to upland areas. Sen et al. (2010) model climatic changes that result from
the replacement of montane forests with either irrigated crops or grassland: Southern
China and Vietnam experience a 20–30% decline in rainfall, while the South China Sea
sees a 30% increase in rainfall. Replacement with grass is shown to cause similar but
enhanced changes, with rainfall being reduced by 30% across the entire Indochina
peninsula and montane region. Major river headwaters are located in montane mainland
Southeast Asia, so changes in rainfall would impact upland and lowland regions, as well
as agricultural production.

14

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

Temperature
There are currently few modelling studies on temperature change due to deforestation
within Asia. However, Schneck & Mosbrugger (2011) predict a regional increase in
surface temperature of 1°C due to reduced evaporative cooling (Figure 3, overleaf). The
authors also suggest that ocean surface temperatures will fall in some regions due to
reduced trade winds and weakened upwelling of cold, deep water.

Monsoons
Modelling studies of the Indochina peninsula emphasise the deforestation impact on
the East Asian Summer Monsoon (Sen et al., 2004). Complete tree removal causes an
increase in wind speed and air temperature, and a decrease in water vapour, which leads
to weakening of the monsoon flow over east China. At the same time, the frequency
of rainfall changes, with a higher rainfall frequency in areas with an increased annual
quantity of rain, such as those downwind of deforestation. Further models by Sen et
al. (2010) find that a change from forest cover to irrigated crops causes enhanced
monsoonal flow over the upland montane region of mainland Southeast Asia, but
a weaker flow over the South China Sea. It is reported that a significant decrease in
summer monsoon rainfall has already occurred in the Indochina peninsula, due to
extensive lowland deforestation (Kanae et al., 2001).

Mangrove deforestation
As well as acting as a nursery ground for fish species and retaining sediment, mangrove
forests act as a physical barrier against tidal and ocean influences such as tsunamis
(Dahdouh-Guebas et al., 2005; Sjöling et al., 2005). Between 1990 and 2010 there was
a loss of 0.5 million hectares of mangrove forest, with the current area standing at 15.6
million hectares (FAO, 2010).
Mangrove trees protect coastlines from tidal and ocean influences by reducing wave
amplitude and energy (Danielsen et al. 2005). Despite this vital service, around 50%
of the world’s mangrove forests have been destroyed (Dahdoun-Guebas et al., 2005).
Communities that were located behind intact mangrove forests suffered less damage
than those that were exposed during the “Boxing Day” tsunami of 26 December 2004
(Kathiresan & Rajendran, 2005).This highlights their importance and protective qualities
for communities. Sjöling et al. (2005) report that deforested mangrove areas had higher
sulphide and ammonia concentrations, low bacterial diversity and low nitrogen fixation
rates. These changes are likely to modify the remaining habitat, making it unsuitable for
seed propagation and mangrove forest re-establishment.

Teleconnections
Several authors have modelled teleconnections resulting from Asian deforestation.
Werth & Avissar (2005a) indicate that, as the area of Asian deforestation increases, so
to does the impact to regions outside of Asia. For example, a 66% reduction in forested
areas would extend the area of reduced rainfall and increase the number of months
experiencing a significant decrease in rainfall. With total deforestation (100% reduction),
this reduced rainfall area would extend from Southeast Asia into the Indian and western
Pacific Oceans. Geopotential height changes also spread with increasing deforestation,
impacting regional weather systems (Figure 4, overleaf).

15

“Tropical
rainforests and
peat swamps,
the primary
source of fire
emissions in
Southeast Asia,
rarely burn
without human
instigation.
If such
deforestation
fires were to
be halted, fire
activity in this
region (and
the associated
mortality) would
be minimal.”
– Johnston et al.,
2012

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

Geopotential height is a scaled measure of the height of pressure surfaces in the
atmosphere taken from mean sea level. Southeast Asian deforestation models indicate
a 20-25% decrease in rainfall in western Turkey, as well as China (Avissar & Werth,
2005). Snyder (2010) suggests that European storm tracks may be changed due to
large-scale atmospheric circulation changes caused by tropical deforestation. For
example, models suggest enhanced storm track activity over Scandinavian countries
impacting surface temperature via adiabatic warming (warming by compression without
the gain or loss of heat).
Schneck & Mosbrugger (2011) also find global impacts due to Asian deforestation in their
model. In high latitudes such as Siberia, the model indicates a decrease in temperature
by up to 1°C, due to changes in atmospheric circulation, and increased snow and ice
cover (Figure 3). It is thought that this area may be more sensitive to changes, as oceanic
currents do not suppress feedback mechanisms. The authors also indicate increased
temperatures in South America, Canada and central Africa. This model also includes the
oceans, which are found to have a decrease in surface currents in the South China Sea
and eastern Pacific Ocean, impacting upwelling of deep water. This could potentially
impact nutrient availability and ocean temperatures.

16

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

Figure 3: Model output of
temperature change (°C)
due to deforestation in
Southeast Asia. Contour
line intervals at 0.25°C (0°C
is not shown). Significant
(p=0.05) positive change
is coloured red and
significant negative change
is coloured blue (Schneck
& Mosbrugger, 2011).
Output shows increases in
temperature greater than
1°C in Southeast Asia and
the South Pacific Ocean,
and decreases greater than
1°C in the southern Indian
Ocean and Siberia.
Reprinted with permission
from John Wiley & Sons.

Figure 4: Model output
of the number of months
(coloured scale bar) where
a significant (p=0.05)
change of rainfall (left)
and geopotential (247 mb)
height fall (right) would
occur after Southeast
Asian deforestation.
Top output is after 33%
deforestation, middle output
is after 66% deforestation,
and bottom output is
after 100% deforestation
(Werth & Avissar, 2005a).
Output shows increased
deforestation results in
significant rainfall and
geopotential height fall
changes.
Reprinted with permission
from John Wiley & Sons.

17

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

4. INDIRECT IMPACTS OF AFRICAN DEFORESTATION
Clearing of rainforest
through fires, in the
Democratic Republic
of the Congo.
© Thomas Einberger /
argum / Greenpeace

Africa contains 17% of the world’s total forest area, mainly located in equatorial
regions (FAO, 2010). These forests have the lowest average rainfall of all
rainforests (Malhi & Wright, 2004), so may be strongly impacted by changes
in rainfall. Deforestation in Africa is expected to result in warming of the land
surface, reduced evaporation rate, increased surface albedo, reduced net
radiation, reduced cloud cover, and reduced rainfall (Snyder et al., 2004). These
impacts are discussed further below.
Rainfall
The impact of complete African deforestation is modelled by Werth & Avissar (2005b).
Results indicate that local climate would respond with a decrease in rainfall of up to 1mm/
day, especially during the dry season in July. A strong decrease is found by Semazzi &
Song (2001) when they model total deforestation over the whole of Africa with savannah
grassland replacement. During the dry season from July to September, there is a
2-3mm/day decrease in rainfall, and a delay in the onset of the wet season. However,
this decrease is not uniform over the whole continent; Mozambique would experience
reduced rainfall, but Botswana, Zambia and the southern Democratic Republic of Congo
would all experience an increase in rainfall.
Complete deforestation of the Congo basin is modelled to result in reduced precipitation
of up to 50% (Nogherotto et al., 2013). Deforestation in the Horn of Africa has been
undertaken to enlarge agricultural areas, and several studies have investigated the
climatic impacts of deforestation. Models by Otieno & Anyah (2012) suggest that the loss
of forests in Kenya results in a decrease in monthly rainfall, and could lead to a shift in
moisture convergence zones. Salih et al. (2012), model deforestation in Sudan and South
Sudan, with forest being replaced by grass or desert. The results indicate a decrease in
rainfall during the wet season (July to September) by 0.1-2.1mm/day for desert, and 0.10.9mm/day for grass.

18

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

Temperature
Snyder et al. (2004) suggest that land surface temperatures would increase due to
deforestation in Africa. This is supported by modelling studies that find increases of 1.2°C
(desert) and 2.4°C (grass), depending on the type of habitat following deforestation (Salih
et al., 2012). Nogherotto et al. (2013) find significant warming of up to 4°C following
deforestation of the Congo basin.

Monsoon
Modelling indicates that the removal of trees decreases rainfall in West Africa, as the
mid-troposphere retains more monsoon moisture. This results in reduced northward
transport of moisture, which produces rainfall over West Africa. An increased easterly
mid-troposphere flow speed also contributes towards decreased rainfall, as it transports
moisture away from West Africa (Abiodun et al., 2008). Nogherotto et al. (2013) also find
changes to the West African monsoon in deforestation models, with intensification over the
Guinean coast but a decrease in precipitation in the Sahel. The south equatorial monsoon
is found to strengthen with increased precipitation over southern equatorial Africa.

Agriculture
Individual country models exist for the impacts of deforestation on agriculture, but
regional scale models are absent. A study by Giertz et al. (2005) reports that deforestation
in central Benin increases the water yield of soil due to increased surface run-off and
evapotranspiration. Otieno & Anyah (2012) suggest that decreased rainfall due to the loss
of forests in Kenya could impact agricultural production in western Kenya. Reduced rainfall,
especially in the dry season, combined with increased evapotranspiration, would reduce
the soil water content and increase water stress. Increased surface run-off could remove
soil and nutrients from cropland, also impacting agricultural production. These conditions
may exacerbate the reduced agricultural output and the lack of food security currently
present in some African countries, particularly those in the Sahel and Horn of Africa.

Teleconnections
Modelling studies suggest evidence of global impacts association with deforestation in
Africa. Avissar & Werth (2005) use models to show that removal of forests in Central Africa
would cause a 5-15% decrease in rainfall in the Great Lakes region of the midwest US,
with a peak decrease of 35% in February. Models by Werth & Avissar (2005b) indicate
a geopotential fall in September throughout the tropics, centred over Africa. There is a
rainfall decrease over the tropical Atlantic and Gulf of Mexico. This could be linked to
distinct atmospheric highs over Alaska and lows over North America leading to impacts
on rainfall (Werth & Avissar, 2005b). The US accounts for 40% of global maize and
soybean production (Lobell et al., 2011). The midwest region is a key agricultural area, and
decreases in rainfall are likely to affect crop output and global food supplies. Conversely,
according to models by Avissar & Werth (2005), deforestation of central Africa increases
rainfall in the Arabian Peninsula by 15-30% during August and September.

19

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

5. INDIRECT IMPACTS OF AMAZON DEFORESTATION
An illegally logged area
near Santarem. Illegal
logging is still driving
destruction in the
Amazon.
© Karla Gachet /
Panos / Greenpeace

The Amazon region in South America contains 21% of the global forest area
(FAO, 2010). Due to its size, regional differences in impacts are expected
to occur, and have been previously indicated by modelling studies. Models
suggest that the Amazon region will have reduced rainfall, changes to regional
temperatures and an increased flood risk with deforestation. These impacts are
further discussed below.
Rainfall
Deforestation within the Amazon is expected to reduce rainfall, and Moore et al. (2007)
suggest that total deforestation of the Amazon would result in a 10- 20% decrease in
annual rainfall across the entire Amazon basin. This is expanded by Spracklen et al.
(2012), who model a rainfall decrease across the Amazon basin by 2050 of 12% during
the wet season and 21% during the dry season. Even areas outside of deforested
regions would be impacted, with the southern Rio de la Plata Basin predicted to have a
4% decrease in rainfall (Figure 5). Coe et al. (2013) report that savannah deforestation in
southern central Brazil may already be reducing rainfall in south-southeastern Amazonia,
hundreds of kilometres downwind.
It is expected that deforestation will have regional differences in impacts across South
America. This is highlighted in modelling studies by Medvigy et al. (2011), who suggest
that the northwest Amazon will become drier by up to 2mm/day, while the southeast
Amazon will become wetter by up to 1.5mm/day. This is caused by changes in moisture
convergence, with an average decrease in rainfall of 2.3%. However, deforestation in the
Atlantic Forest on the east coast of Brazil does not exhibit a strong relationship between
forest cover and total rainfall (Webb et al., 2005)

20

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

Longitude east

Latitude north

a

–80°

–60°

–40°

b

–80°

–60°

–40°

10°

10°
0°
–10°

0°
–10°

–20°

–20°

–30°

–30°
–20 –10

0

10

20 (%)

–40 –20

0

20

40 (%)

Flood risk
The hydrological impact of Amazon deforestation is modelled by D’Almeida et al. (2006).
The authors find that water fluxes decline with all sizes of deforested area, but there are
noticeable differences too. For example, with limited deforestation (less than 102km2)
there are local increases in run-off, but with extensive deforestation (more than 105km2)
the water cycle is shown to weaken.
In the southeastern Amazon, the impact of deforestation on the hydrological cycle has
been separated from natural climatic changes. In the Tocantins River, the area of crop
and pasture land increased from around 30% to 50% between 1955 and 1995. This led
to increases in annual river discharge by 25%, but there were no significant changes in
rainfall (Costa et al., 2003). In the Araguaia River, deforestation has occurred since the
1970s, with the average annual discharge shown to have increased by 25% between the
1970s and 1990s. The sediment load of the river was found to have increased by 28%
(Coe et al., 2011). Davidson et al. (2012) pointed out that discharge increases the most
during the wet season, in turn increasing the risk of flooding in these regions.

Temperature
Surface temperatures are expected to increase following tree clearance, but increased
frequencies of cold events are also expected. Feddema et al. (2005) report that
the complete conversion of the Amazon rainforest to agriculture would result in a
temperature increase of over 2°C.
Medvigy et al. (2011) suggest that models indicate that the frequency of extreme cold
events (a decrease in temperature of more than 1°C) would increase. Further studies
by Medvigy et al. (2012) investigate these extreme cold events. Deforestation models
predict that these events could triple in frequency in the west and south of South America
but decrease in frequency in the east. They note that the southern La Plata Basin is
particularly vulnerable to changes in climate. It is suggested that the increased frequency
of extreme cold events is caused by positional changes of the subtropical jet stream due
to temperature changes in the Amazon basin.

21

Figure 5: Model output of
percentage rainfall change (colour
scale) due to deforestation of
the Amazon basin during the wet
season (a) and dry season (b). The
black-outlined area indicates the
Amazon basin and the red-outlined
area indicates the Rio de la Plata
basin. Black dots highlight rainfall
anomalies that differ by more than
one standard deviation (Spracklen et
al., 2012). Output shows a marked
decrease in rainfall in the Amazon
and neighbouring basins.
Reprinted with permission from
Nature Publishing Group

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

Stream temperatures in the Xingu Basin in Mato Grosso, Brazil are shown to be
significantly warmer in watersheds with pasture and soya bean than those in forested
watersheds (Macedo et al., 2013). Average daily maximum stream temperatures are over
4ºC higher in pasture and 3ºC in soybean watersheds than forested ones. The authors
suggest that this is due to agricultural expansion, and may negatively impact fish and
other species in the streams.

Agriculture
Decreased rainfall and increased frequency of cold events is likely to impact the
Amazonian agriculture industry, which is worth $15bn US dollars a year (Aragão,
2012). Changes to rainfall patterns modelled by Spracken et al. (2012) are suggested
to negatively impact crops and soil conditions. Medvigy et al. (2012) suggest that the
La Plata Basin in southern South America, a major agricultural area growing soybean,
wheat, maize and rice, could be negatively impacted by changes in temperature caused
by deforestation. Crop damage due to cold events has already been recorded for coffee
in southern Brazil, and wheat, soybean and citrus harvests in Argentina and southern
Brazil (Medvigy et al., 2012).

Teleconnections
There are limited studies on teleconnections resulting from Amazon deforestation.
Avissar & Werth (2005) report that forest clearance could result in changes to rainfall
patterns in the Gulf of Mexico, with severe decreases (25%) in Texas during spring
and summer. However, increases in rainfall by up to 45% are predicted in August and
September in the Arabian Peninsula and counties surrounding the Red Sea. Northern
Europe is also shown to experience enhanced rainfall throughout the year, but this would
be less significant than the increase in the Arabian Peninsula. Models suggest that
temperature increases could lead to a weakening of the Hadley circulation, impacting
worldwide atmospheric circulation and the Asian monsoon (Feddema et al., 2005).

22

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

6. INDIRECT IMPACTS OF BOREAL DEFORESTATION
Remains of an old
growth forest situated
on the edge of a lake
in Peurakaira, Finland.
Deforestation caused
by a state-owned
logging company and
others threatens the
natural habitat of the
reindeer herds and the
traditional livelihood of
the local Sámi people.
© Greenpeace /
Tim Georgeson

There is little information on the indirect impacts of deforestation of boreal forests.
Models indicate that deforestation could cause regional cooling in the northern
hemisphere winter and spring, causing snow melt to occur later and leading to
cooler temperatures (Strengers et al., 2010). Clearance of the boreal forests in
northern Europe, Asia and North America could increase surface albedo by up
to 25% (Bala et al., 2007), enhancing albedo-induced cooling. Lee et al. (2011)
report that observational air surface temperatures are lower in open land than
boreal forested areas in Canada and the US. The authors suggest that this is an
example of the albedo cooling effect.

23

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

7. Synthesis and conclusions
Single tree in a soy
field next to rainforest,
south of Santarem and
along the road BR163.
Cutting through the
Brazilian Amazon from
north to south over a
vast distance of 1,700
km this highway has
been one of the major
drivers of deforestation
in the region for the
past 20 years.
© Daniel Beltrá /
Greenpeace

Changes in land cover, including deforestation, can lead to reduced
evapotranspiration and enhanced surface temperatures. This alters atmospheric
moisture and circulation patterns, resulting in local and regional climatic changes
that are propagated around the world to distant regions by teleconnections.
Modelling these changes allows the indirect impact of deforestation to be
investigated, both regionally and globally.
Deforestation can lead to human health issues caused by the release of smoke during
clearance burning. Worldwide, an average of 339,000 deaths a year are estimated to be
attributable to exposure to landscape fires, which predominantly arise from fires set in
tropical forests and savannah in Southeast Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa. In Southeast
Asia, fire emissions are estimated to contribute towards an additional 200 days a year
on which World Health Organisation air quality targets are exceeded. There are also
concerns that forest clearance may increase the spread of diseases such as malaria, due
to increased temperatures, artificial water ponds, and the loss of forest pathogen hosts.
The hydrological cycle is disrupted and weakened by deforestation due to the decrease
in evapotranspiration and moisture circulation, with models suggesting that annual
rainfall could be reduced by up to 80%. This impacts the agriculture industry and water
availability, while the loss of trees also contributes towards increased run-off and flood
risk. Models suggest that flood frequency is positively correlated with the amount of
forest area lost; indicating that flooding will increase with future deforestation.
Temperate and boreal zones in the northern hemisphere are expected to undergo a
regional cooling effect due to global deforestation, while tropical regions would undergo
regional warming. Models indicate that forest loss in the three main forest regions
(Asia, Amazon and Central Africa) could cause a 2-3°C temperature increase, strongly
impacting agriculture.

24

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

Asia is thought to have the most complex deforestation impacts due to its island
geography, the effect of the Asian monsoon, and strong ocean-atmosphere feedbacks.
Models suggest there would be a reduced annual rainfall of 1mm/day and increased
surface temperatures of up to 1°C following tropical forest clearance. These changes
are expected to weaken the Asian monsoon over the South China Sea, but strengthen it
over upland mainland Southeast Asia. Deforestation of mangrove forests for aquaculture
may leave communities more vulnerable to damage from cyclones and tsunamis, as
mangrove barriers would no longer reduce wave energy.
African forests have the lowest average rainfall out of all forests, so are expected to
be highly impacted by changes in rainfall due to deforestation. Models indicate that a
decrease in rainfall of up to 1mm/day would be caused by forest clearance, which would
be amplified in the dry season and could delay the start of the wet season. There was
regional variation across the continent, with reduced rainfall in the southeast and Horn of
Africa but increased rainfall in central Africa. It was suggested that the monsoon would
also be impacted, with a reduction in moisture transport over West Africa. Land surface
temperatures are modelled to increase between 1.2 and 2.4°C, depending on the
vegetation type replacing the rainforest. Studies also predicted a decrease in agricultural
production due to reduced rainfall and increased soil water stress, threatening food
security in Africa.
As the Amazon is the largest forest area in the world, it is expected to have more
pronounced regional variations and a greater impact on remote regions. Models
demonstrate that deforestation could cause a 10-20% decrease in rainfall across the
Amazon basin, with regional changes also noted outside of deforested areas. The
northwest Amazon is suggested to have a decrease in rainfall of up to 2mm/day, while
the southeast is suggested to have an increase of up to 1.5 mm/day. There is evidence
that deforestation in South America has led to increased flood risk and increased annual
river discharge by 25%, which may be exacerbated by further deforestation. Surface
temperatures are predicted to increase by 2°C, and the frequency of extreme cold events
could possibly triple. The change in rainfall and cold events are suggested to negatively
impact crops and soil conditions, affecting agricultural production of coffee, soybean,
maize and wheat.
There is limited information on the indirect impacts of boreal forest loss, but it is predicted
to result in regional cooling. This is due to albedo-associated cooling effects and delayed
spring snowmelt.
Modelling studies suggest that impacts propagate around the world due to
teleconnections, impacting rainfall patterns and storm tracks far away from deforestation
areas. Modelling suggests that Asian deforestation could result in a rainfall decrease of up
to 25% in Turkey, alteration and intensification of European storm tracks and reductions
to surface ocean current speeds in the South China Sea and eastern Pacific Ocean.
African forest loss is suggested to reduce rainfall in the midwest US by 5-35%, negatively
impacting a major agricultural region and increasing water stress. However it is reported
that some regions, such as the Arabian Peninsula, would have increased rainfall of up to
30% due to changes in rainfall patterns caused by central African deforestation.

25

Modelling
studies suggest
that impacts
propagate
around the
world due to
teleconnections,
impacting rainfall
patterns and
storm tracks
far away from
deforestation
areas.

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

A decrease in Amazon forest cover indicates a 25% decrease in rainfall in Texas during
spring and summer, but an increase in rainfall of up to 45% for the Arabian Peninsula due
to changes in moisture circulation. Northern Europe is also suggested to have increased
annual rainfall, although not to the same extent as the Arabian Peninsula. These models
indicate that the Amazon region has the strongest impact on hydroclimatic changes in
remote regions, possibly due to its large forest area, but other regions of deforestation
also have significant impacts.
Many authors agree that there is evidence of deforestation causing change to local
and regional temperatures and rainfall. However, these impacts do alter between forest
regions. For example, while both Asian and African deforestation changes regional
rainfall patterns, the effect of deforestation is strongest during the dry season in Africa,
but distributed throughout the year in Asia. There is also some evidence for significant
remote impacts cause by deforestation teleconnections. As this is an emerging field,
it is expected that further studies will be needed to investigate the links between
deforestation-induced climatic changes and agriculture, as well as remote impacts.
Despite most studies using models of complete deforestation, the impacts can indicate
changes that may occur even with current rates of forest cover loss.
Although studies may agree on the impacts, there is disagreement on the magnitude,
extent, location and physical causes that generate them. There are also no studies
that investigate the cumulative effects of indirect impacts. For example, Amazon forest
clearance may impact the Asian monsoon, which is also impacted by deforestation
within Asia. It is not yet known if these impacts may amplify each other or cause other as
yet unknown impacts.
Ending deforestation would stop the direct loss of forest habitat but it would also
minimise the indirect effects of deforestation, and the possibility of changes to weather
and climate systems locally, regionally and globally. There would also be benefits to
public health, reductions in flood risks, and decreases on the negative impacts on
crop output in certain areas. Our knowledge of the ecosystem services provided to
humans by forest ecosystems (underpinned by biodiversity) is incomplete, and hence
the full consequences of their loss cannot be known, or even estimated with any
certainty. Therefore, employing the precautionary principle and conserving existing
forest ecosystems under a “Zero Deforestation” footprint is the only way to ensure that
forests continue to regulate our weather and climate, minimise the indirect effects of
deforestation, and conserve biodiversity.

26

“These models
indicate that
the Amazon
region has the
strongest impact
on hydroclimatic
changes in
remote regions,
possibly due to
its large forest
area, but other
regions of
deforestation
also have
significant
impacts.”
– (Aragão, 2012)

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

The expansion of the
soya industry is one
of the main causes of
deforestation in the
Amazon rainforest, as
huge areas are cleared
to meet agricultural
demand. Trees stand
on the edge of a
manmade field that
has been cut through
the natural forest.
© Greenpeace /
Ricardo Beliel

27

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

References
Abiodun B, Pal J, Afiesimama E, Gutowski W & Adedoyin A (2008). Simulation
of West African monsoon using RegCM3 Part II: impacts of deforestation and
desertification. Theoretical and Applied Climatology 93:245-261
Aragão L (2012). The rainforest’s water pump. Nature 489:217-218
Avissar R & Werth D (2005). Global and hydroclimatological teleconnections resulting
from tropical deforestation. Journal of Hydrometeorology 6:134-145
Bala G, Caldeira K, Wickett M, Phillips T, Lobell D, Delire C & Mirin A (2007).
Combined climate and carbon-cycle effects of large-scale deforestation. Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences 104:6550-6555
Bradshaw C, Sodhi N, Peh K & Brook B (2007). Global evidence that deforestation
amplifies flood risk and severity in the developing world. Global Change Biology
13:2379-2395
Castillo C & Gurney K (2012). Exploring surface biophysical climate sensitivity to
tropical deforestation rates using a GCM: a feasibility study. Earth Interactions 16:1-23
Coe MT, Latrubesse EM, Ferreira ME & Amsler ML (2011). The effects of
deforestation and climate variability on the streamflow of the Araguaia River, Brazil.
Biogeochemistry 105:119–131
Coe M, Marthews T, Costa M, Galbraith D, Greenglass N et al. (2013). Deforestation
and climate feedbacks threaten the ecological integrity of south–southeastern
Amazonia. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 368: 20120155.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2012.0155
Costa M, Botta A & Cardille J (2003). Effects of large-scale changes in land cover on
the discharge of the Tocantins River, Southeastern Amazonia. Journal of Hydrology
283:206–217
D’Almeida C, Vörösmarty C, Marengo J, Hurtt G, Dingman S & Keim B (2006).
A water balance model to study the hydrological response to different scenarios of
deforestation in Amazonia. Journal of Hydrology 331:125-136
Dahdouh-Guebas F, Jayatissa L, Di Nitto D, Bosire J, Lo Seen D & Koedam N
(2005). How effective were mangroves as a defence against the recent tsunami? Current
Biology 15:443-446
Danielsen F, Sørensen M, Olwig M, Selvam V, Parish F, Burgess N, Hiraishi T,
Karunagaran V, Rasmussen M, Hasen L, Quarto A & Suryadiputra N (2005). The
Asian tsunami: a protective role for coastal vegetation. Science 310:643
Davidson E, de Araújo A, Artaxo P, Balch J, Foster Brown I, Bustamante M, Coe M,
DeFries R, Keller M, Longo M, Munger J, Schroeder W, Soares-Filho B, Souza C, Jr
& Wofsy S (2012). The Amazon basin in transition. Nature 481:321-330
Davin E & Noblet-Ducoudré N (2010). Climatic impact of global scale deforestation:
radiative versus nonradiative processes. Journal of Climate 23:97-112
FAO (2010). Global forest resources assessment 2010 – main report. FAO Forestry
Paper No:163. Rome. http://www.fao.org/docrep/013/i1757e/i1757e00.htm [accessed
20 February 2013]

28

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

Feddema J, Oleson K, Bonan G, Mearns L, Buja L, Meehl G & Washington W
(2005). The importance of land cover change in simulating future climates. Science
310:1674-1678
Findell K, Knutson T & Milly P (2006). Weak simulated extratropical responses to
complete tropical deforestation. Journal of Climate 19:2835-2850
Foley J, Costa M, Delire C, Ramankutty N & Snyder P (2003). Green surprise?
How terrestrial ecosystems could affect earth’s climate. Frontiers in Ecology and the
Environment 1:38–44
Giertz S, Junge B & Diekkrüger B (2005). Assessing the effects of land use change
on soil physical properties and hydrological processes in the sub-humid tropical
environment of West Africa. Physics and Chemistry of the Earth 30:485-496
Grard G, Drexler J, Fair J, Muyembe J, Wolfe N, Drosten C & Leroy E (2011).
Re-Emergence of Crimean-Congo Hemorrhagic Fever Virus in Central Africa. PLoS
Neglected Tropical Diseases 5: e1350 doi:10.1371/journal.pntd.0001350
Hasler N, Werth D & Avissar R (2009). Effects of tropical deforestation on global
hydroclimate: a multimodel ensemble analysis. Journal of Climate 22:1124-1141
Johnston F, Henderson S, Chen Y, Randerson J, Marlier M, DeFries R, Kinney P,
Bowman D & Brauer M (2012). Estimated global mortality attributable to smoke from
landscape fires. Environmental Health Perspectives 120:695-701
Kathiresan K & Rajendran N (2005). Coastal mangrove forests mitigated tsunami.
Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf Science 65:601-606
Kanae S, Oki T & Musiake K (2001). Impact of deforestation on regional precipitation
over the Indochina Peninsula. Journal of Hydrometeorolgy 2:51–70
Lee X, Goulden M, Hollinger D, Barr A, Black T, Bohrer G, Bracho R, Drake B,
Goldstein A, Gu L, Katul G, Kolb T, Law B, Margolis H, Meyers T, Monson T,
Munger W, Oren R, U KTP, Richardson A, Schmid H, Staebler R, Wofsy S & Zhao
L (2011). Observed increase in local cooling effect of deforestation at higher latitudes.
Nature 479:384-387
Lenton T, Held H, Kriegler E, Hall J, Lucht W, Rahmstorf S & Schellnhuber H (2008).
Tipping points in the Earth’s climate system. Proceedings of the National Academy of
Sciences of the United States of America 105:1786-1793
Lobell D, Schlenker W & Costa-Roberts J (2011). Climate trends and global crop
production since 1980. Science 33:616-620
Mabuchi K, Sato Y & Kida H (2005). Climatic impact of vegetation change in the Asian
tropical region. Part 1: Case of the Northern Hemisphere Summer. Journal of Climate
18:410-428
Macedo M, Coe M, DeFries R, Uriarte M, Brando P, Neill C & Walker W (2013).
Land-use-driven stream warming in southeastern Amazonia. Phil Trans R Soc B
368:20120153.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2012.0153
Malhi Y & Wright J (2004). Spatial patterns and recent trends in the climate of tropical
rainforest regions. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 359:311–329

29

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

Malhi Y, Aragão L, Galbraith D, Huntingford C, Fisher R, Zelazowski P, Sitch S,
McSweeney C & Meir P (2009). Exploring the likelihood and mechanism of a climatechange-induced dieback of the Amazon rainforest. Proceedings of the National Academy
of Sciences of the United States of America106:20610-20615
Marlier M, DeFries R, Voulgarakis A, Kinney P, Randerson J, Shindell D, Chen Y &
Faluvegi G (2013). El Niño and health risks from landscape fire emissions in southeast
Asia. Nature Climate Change 3:131-136
McAlpine C, Syktus J, Deo R, Lawrence P, McGowan H, Watterson I & Phinn S
(2007). Modelling the impact of historical land cover change on Australia’s regional
climate. Geophysical Research Letters 34:L22711
Medvigy D, Walko R & Avissar R (2011). Effects of deforestation on spatiotemporal
distributions of precipitation in South America. Journal of Climate 24:2147-2163
Medvigy D, Walko R & Avissar R (2012). Simulated links between deforestation and
extreme cold events in South America. Journal of Climate 25:3851-3866
Moore N, Arima E, Walker R & Da Silva R (2007). Uncertainty and changing
hydroclimatology of the Amazon. Geophysical Research Letters 34:L12707
Nobre C & Borma L (2009). ‘Tipping points’ for the Amazon forest. Current Opinion in
Environmental Sustainability 1:28-36
Nogherotto R, Coppola E, Giorgi F & Mariotti L (2013). Impact of Congo Basin
deforestation on the African Monsoon. Atmospheric Science Letters 14:45-51
Olchev A, Ibrom A, Priess J, Erasmi S, Leemhuis C, Twele A, Radler K, Kreilein H,
Panferov O & Gravenhorst G (2008). Effects of land use changes on evapotranspiration
of tropical rain forest margin area in Central Sulawesi (Indonesia): modelling study with a
regional SVAT model. Ecological Modelling 212:131-137
Otieno V & Anyah R (2012). Effects of land use changes on climate in the Greater Horn of
Africa. Climate Research 52:77-95
Patz J, Olson S, Uejio C & Gibbs H (2008). Disease emergence from global climate and
land use change. Medical Clinics of North America 92:1473-1491
Salih A, Körnich H & Tjernström M (2012). Climate impact of deforestation over South
Sudan in a regional climate model. International Journal of Climatology DOI: 10.1002/
joc.3586
Sampaio G, Nobre C, Costa M, Satyamurty P, Soares-Filho B & Cardoso M (2007).
Regional climate change over eastern Amazonia caused by pasture and soybean
cropland expansion. Geophysical Research Letters 34:L17709
Schlenker W & Lobell D (2010). Robust negative impacts of climate change on African
agriculture. Environmental Research Letters 5:1-9
Schneck R & Mosbrugger V (2011). Simulated climate effects of Southeast Asian
deforestation: Regional processes and teleconnection mechanisms. Journal of
Geophysical Research 116:D11116 dx.doi.org/10.1029/2010JD015450
Semazzi F & Song Y (2001). A GCM study of climate change induced by deforestation in
Africa. Climate Research 17:169-182

30

AN IMPENDING STORM IMPACTS OF DEFORESTATION ON WEATHER PATTERNS AND AGRICULTURE

Sen O, Wang Y & Wang B (2004). Impact of Indochina deforestation on the East Asian
Summer Monsoon. Journal of Climate 17:1366-1380
Sen O, Bozkurt D, Vogler J, Fox J, Giambelluca T & Ziegler A (2010). Hydro-climatic
effects of future land-cover/land-use change in montane mainland southeast Asia.
Climatic ChangeDOI 10.1007/s10584-012-0632-0
Sjöling S, Mohammed S, Lyimo T & Kyaruzi J (2005). Benthic bacterial diversity and
nutrient processes in mangroves: impact of deforestation. Estuarine, Coastal and Shelf
Science 63:297-406
Snyder P, Foley J, Hitchman M & Delire C (2004). Analyzing the effects of complete
tropical forest removal on the regional climate using a detailed three-dimensional energy
budget: an application to Africa. Journal of Geophysical Research 109:D21102
Snyder P (2010). The influence of tropical deforestation on the Northern Hemisphere
climate by atmospheric teleconnections. Earth Interactions 14:1-34
Spracklen D, Bonn B & Carslaw K (2008). Boreal forests, aerosols and the impacts on
clouds and climate. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A 366:4613-4626
Spracklen D, Arnold S & Taylor C (2012). Observations of increased tropical rainfall
preceded by air passage over forests. Nature 489:282-288
Strengers BJ, Müller C, Schaeffer M, Haarsma RJ, Severijns C, Gerten D, Schaphoff
S, Van den Houdt R & Oostenrijk R (2010). Assessing 20th century climate–vegetation
feedbacks of land-use change and natural vegetation dynamics in a fully coupled
vegetation–climate. International Journal of Climatology 30:2055-2065
Vittor A, Gilman R, Tielsch J, Glass G, Shields T, Lozano W, Pinedo-Cancino V &
Patz J (2006). The effect of deforestation on the human-biting rate of Anopheles darlingi,
the primary vector of Falciparum malaria in the Peruvian Amazon. American Journal of
Tropical Medicine and Hygiene 74:3-11
Voldoire A & Royer J (2004). Tropical deforestation and climate variability. Climate
Dynamics 22:857-874
Walsh J, Molyneux D & Birley M (1993). Deforestation: effects on vector-borne disease.
Parasitology 106:855-875
Webb T, Woodward F, Hannah L & Gaston K (2005). Forest cover-rainfall relationships
in a biodiversity hotspot: the Atlantic forest of Brazil. Ecological Applications 15: 19681983
Werth D & Avissar R (2005a). The local and global effects of Southeast Asian
deforestation. Geophysical Research Letters 32:L20702
Werth D & Avissar R (2005b). The local and global effects of African deforestation.
Geophysical Research Letters 32:L12704

31

Greenpeace is an independent global
campaigning organisation that acts
to change attitudes and behaviour,
to protect and conserve the
environment and to
promote peace.
For more information contact:
pressdesk.int@greenpeace.org
JN 455

Published in October 2013 by
Greenpeace International
Ottho Heldringstraat 5
1066 AZ Amsterdam
The Netherlands

greenpeace.org

