solar
wind
water
bio

a field guide
to renewable
energy
technologies
land art generator initiative

other

Robert Ferry & Elizabeth Monoian

solar

As a part of the Land Art Generator Initiative, we have put
together this field guide of renewable energy generation
technologies as a useful resource for all designers, homeowners,
urban planners, students, artists, architects and landscape architects,
engineers, and anyone else interested in a clean energy future.
There is a lot more out there than what we see in the everyday.
In fact, you will see in this guide that there are dozens of proven
methods of harnessing the power of nature in sustainable ways.
Some of the more interesting examples that may be applicable as a
medium for public art installations are the organic thin films which
are flexible and offer interesting hues and textures, piezoelectric
generators that capture vibration energy, and concentrated
photovoltaics, which allow for interesting play with light. But the
possibilities are endless, and new designs that can be artistically
integrated into residential and commercial projects are coming into
the market all the time.
It is our hope that this field guide will get you thinking creatively
about ways to use technologies in innovative contexts—and that a
clear understanding of the wealth of possibilities that are out there
will help designers to conceive of the most creative net zero energy
constructions.

wind
water
bio

The Land Art Generator Initiative provides a platform for
innovative ways of thinking about what renewable energy
generation looks like and how it relates to the overall fabric of our
constructed and natural environments. It calls on interdisciplinary
teams to conceive of large scale site-specific artworks that provide
renewable electricity to the city at a utility-scale (equivalent to the
demand of hundreds of homes). Once constructed, these public
infrastructure artworks will offset thousands of tons of CO2 and
provide iconic amenities that will serve to educate and inspire the
communities in which they are built.

other

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

ABOUT THIS GUIDE

solar

THERMAL

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Solar thermal collectors can
be mounted on the roof or
the wall of a building, or in
another location that has
exposure to the sun.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

DIRECT NON-CONCENTRATING

energy output
= 45%–75%
energy input
Depending on system type
& operating temperature

Solar combisystems: solar
thermal is often used in
combination with other
energy-saving techniques
such as ground source heat
(geosolar systems), and solar
thermal cooling (absorption
refrigeration).
One large installation can be
used for “district heating” of
multiple buildings.

EVACUATED TUBE SYSTEM

Photo provided by Lumen Solar, courtesy of Apricus Solar Hot Water.

Solar thermal is any installation in which solar radiation is used to heat a
medium such as water or air.
Water can be for direct use in the domestic plumbing system of a building
and for radiant floor heating (instead of relying on natural gas or grid
source electricity that is most likely generated from fossil fuels to heat the
water). These systems typically utilize either flat plate or evacuated tube
collection systems.
Solar heated water can serve as an energy storage mechanism to create
thermal heat lag within occupied space such as with a trombe wall.
Other systems that can help heat occupied space rely on air rather than
water. The air is circulated through a cavity that is exposed to direct
sunlight on the exterior of a building.
A very simple example of thermal energy is a greenhouse where the entire
building acts as the solar energy collection device.
1

solar
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

A defining characteristic of
a highly saline body of water
is that it naturally stratifies
into three layers of salinity.
At the surface is a layer
of low salinity and at the
bottom is a layer of very high
salinity. In between there is
an intermediate insulating
layer that keeps a heat
exchange convention cycle
from forming.
When exposed to solar
radiation, heat is trapped in
the bottom of the salt water
pond where temperatures
can reach nearly 100°C while
water at the surface is 30°C.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

THERMAL
SOLAR POND (SALTWATER)

energy output
= 10%
energy input

Rankine-cycle electrical generator

liner

salt gradient layer
high salt content hot brine

heat exchanger tubes

wind protection
lower salt and cooler water

SOLAR POND

The heat that is trapped at the bottom of a saltwater pond can be harnessed
to power an organic Rankine cycle turbine or a Stirling engine, both
of which convert heat into electricity without steam (does not require
temperatures in excess of H2O boiling point).
Via the Organic Rankine Cycle (ORC), water is piped to an evaporator
coil that heats a low-boiling-point fluid to pressurized vapor, driving a
turbine. The vapor then passes to a condenser, where water from the top
layer of the pond is used to cool the fluid back into liquid form after which
it is then pumped back to the evaporator (with energy from a PV panel
on-site).
Because salt water is an excellent thermal heat sink, the solar pond
produces electricity 24 hours per day regardless of weather conditions.
Efficiency is greater in climates that receive higher average solar irradiance.

2

solar
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

As of 2010, CSP
(concentrated solar power)
plants in operation in
the USA met the needs of
over 350,000 people and
displaced the equivalent
of 2.3 million barrels of oil
annually.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

THERMAL
CONCENTRATED (CSP)
PARABOLIC TROUGH

energy output
= 25%
energy input

Utility-scale CSP typically
requires large tracts of land,
but “Micro CSP” systems can
be designed for installation
on building rooftops.

SEGS POWER PLANT AT KRAMER JUNCTION IN THE MOJAVE DESERT

Owned and operated by FPL Energy. Image via Desertec-UK.

The concentrated parabolic trough design is one of the most common types
of solar power systems in application for utility-scale electricity generation.
It consists of a series of long, highly polished parabolic reflecting surfaces
that focus sunlight onto an absorber tube running along the focal point of
the parabola.
A heat transfer fluid (typically an oil) runs through the tube and is heated
to approximately 400°C to provide the thermal energy required to run a
steam turbine.
The parabolic shape of the reflector allows the troughs to be oriented on a
north-south axis and track the sun in only one rotational axis from east to
west each day.
Highly polished metals are often used as the reflector material since
parabolic curved mirrors can be complex to manufacture.

3

solar

THERMAL
CONCENTRATED (CSP)

Fresnel geometry allows flat
surfaces to act in a way that
mimics convex or concave
mirror or lens optics.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

LINEAR FRESNEL REFLECTOR
(LFR OR CLFR)

energy output
= 20%
energy input

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

It was originally developed by
French physicist Augustin-Jean
Fresnel for use in lighthouses.

In a Fresnel reflector, a
parabolic mirror is simulated
in a segmented or “Fresnel”
arrangement of flat mirrors.

KIMBERLINA POWER PLANT IN BAKERSFIELD, CALIFORNIA

Image courtesy of AREVA Solar.

Linear Fresnel Reflectors (LFR) use long, thin segments of flat mirrors to
focus sunlight onto a fixed absorber located at a common focal point of the
reflectors. Absorbers in LFR often contain multiple heat transfer tubes.
Similar to the more common parabolic trough, this single-axis tracking
concentrated reflector system heats up a transfer fluid which in turn heats
water to run a steam turbine (in the case of LFR, temperatures in the
transfer fluid can reach 750°C although 300°C is more common). One
advantage of LFR is that the reflector mirrors are flat rather than parabolic
in shape, which makes for a simpler mirror manufacturing process.
Systems can be set up to focus sunlight onto a single absorber (LFR) or
onto multiple absorbers which is referred to as a Compact Linear Fresnel
Reflector (CLFR) system. CLFR design is obtained by alternating the
angle of each reflector. This can lead to greater energy conversion efficiency
of the overall system.

4

solar

THERMAL
CONCENTRATED (CSP)

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

The Stirling Engine is a type
of external combustion engine
of the reciprocating piston
variety. It is named after
Robert Stirling, who in 1816
invented the closed-cycle air
engine.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

DISH STIRLING

energy output
= 31.25%
energy input

The engine works on the
principle that gas expands
as its temperature increases.
Expansion and contraction
cycles will move a piston
back and forth within a
closed chamber. A magnetic
piston moving through
an electromagnetic field
becomes a linear alternator,
thus producing electric
current.
STIRLING ENERGY SYSTEMS

At the Sandia National Laboratories in Albuquerque, New Mexico.

Dish type collectors look sort of like television satellite receivers in their
shape. They are parabolic, but unlike a linear parabola that concentrates
along an axis, these are dish parabolas that concentrate light onto a single
point. They can be one large dish, or an array of smaller reflectors as in the
photo above.
They must rotate on a dual-axis to track the sun’s position in the sky. At
the single focal point is typically situated a Stirling Engine which converts
heat into mechanical energy with high efficiency. The mechanical energy is
then converted to electricity with a dynamo.
This type of concentrated solar thermal electricity installation rivals the
best efficiencies of concentrated photovoltaic systems per similar land
area and relies on more simple mechanical technologies as opposed to
semiconductors and microelectronics.
Some CPV installations also utilize dish type collectors (refer to page 18).
5

solar
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Solar power towers require a
large amount of land in order
to achieve sufficient operating
temperature (500°C–1000°C)
in the central receiver. The
overall efficiency of the
system can rise as receiver
temperature increases.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

THERMAL
CONCENTRATED (CSP)
SOLAR POWER TOWER

energy output
= 25%
energy input

Higher receiver temperature
can allow for thermal storage,
making it possible for this type
of CSP power plant to generate
consistent energy for baseload
supply 24 hours a day (up
to 17 hours of continuous
electrical generation without
solar feed).

GEMASOLAR POWER PLANT IN SPAIN

Owned by Torresol Energy (joint venture of SENER and MASDAR).
Image courtesy of Torresol Energy.

In this type of concentrated solar thermal power, an array of mirrors at the
ground level tracks the sun’s location in the sky and focuses sunlight onto
a single collector positioned high atop a central tower pylon structure. The
temperatures reached at the collector can become extremely high and create
efficiencies of scale. By using a high heat capacity material such as molten
salt in the collector (which transfers heat to water to run a steam turbine)
energy can be stored to produce electricity even after the sun has set.
Another variation, the beam-down tower, was recently demonstrated by
Masdar in Abu Dhabi. Beam-down design allows the entire heat transfer
loop to be located at ground level, potentially increasing the overall efficiency
of the system.
Other design variations include a pit-power tower for a stadium mirror array
(University of Queensland), and integrated applications on buildings such as
those by Studied Impact Design (10MW Tower for Dubai).
6

solar
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

The photovoltaic effect, first
recognized by A. E. Becquerel
in 1839, is the ability of a
material (a semiconductor)
to produce direct current
electricity when exposed to
solar radiation. It is related to
the photoelectric effect, which
is the ejection of an electron
from a material substance
by electromagnetic radiation
incident on its surface.
However, in the photovoltaic
effect, the electrons remain
within the material, creating
positive and negative bands
which can be harnessed by
an electrical circuit.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

PHOTOVOLTAICS
ALL TYPES

energy output
= 3%– 42.5%
energy input

MONOCRYSTALLINE SILICON PHOTOVOLTAIC ARRAY

Image courtesy of Siemens AG, Munich/Berlin.

Although the photovoltaic (PV) effect was demonstrated in various
laboratory applications throughout the 19th century, it was not until
1954 that the first commercially viable application of the technology was
demonstrated by Bell Laboratories.
Throughout the PV section we will discuss conversion efficiency. A good
rule of thumb is that one square meter surface area (at sea level and
perpendicular to the sun on a clear day) will typically receive 1000 watts of
solar radiation energy (insolation = 1000W irradiance/square meter). This
measure will vary slightly according to latitude, time of day, and season. The
conversion efficiency is how many of those 1000 watts can be converted to
electrical energy. A 20% efficient solar panel will have a 200W(p) capacity.
The (p) stands for peak, nameplate, or rated capacity, and the panel will not
always reach this level of output during field operation. The ratio between
the rated capacity and the real measured output is the “capacity factor.”
Many environmental factors such as heat build-up, humidity, surface dust,
and airborne particulates can contribute to a lower capacity factor in field
applications.

7

solar

PHOTOVOLTAIC

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Silicon is the most common
metalloid found in nature.
It is typically found as silica
(SiO2) in sands rather than
in its pure elemental form.
Silicon makes up 27.7% of the
earth’s crust by mass.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

CRYSTALLINE SILICON WAFER

energy output
= 18%–23%
energy input

Molten salt electrolysis can
create pure silicon from silica
with low energy input and
without CO2 emissions.
More commonly, high
temperature furnaces
(1,900°C) create the condition
in which silica is converted
via reaction with carbon into
pure silicon.
SiO2 + 2 C -> Si + 2 CO
POLYCRYSTALLINE SILICON SOLAR PANEL

Photo by Scott Robinson.

Silicon (Si) is a semiconductor material that displays the photovoltaic
effect. It was the first material to be employed in solar cells and is still the
most prevalent. It can be applied for use in either a crystalline (wafer) form,
or in a non-crystalline (amorphous) form.
There are two types of crystalline silicon (c-Si): monocrystalline and
polycrystalline (aka multicrystalline).
Monocrystalline is expensive to manufacture (because it requires cutting
slices from cylindrical ingots of silicon crystals that are grown with
the Czochralski process) but it is the most efficient crystalline silicon
technology in terms of energy conversion.
Polycrystalline is easier to manufacture and can be cut into square shaped
slices, but has slightly lower efficiency (approximately -5%). It is comprised
of small crystals or crystallites.

8

solar
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

The efficiencies that are
gained in the manufacturing
process of thin film
photovoltaics often times
more than offset the reduced
conversion efficiency of the
panels when figured over the
life-cycle of the system.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

PHOTOVOLTAIC
THIN FILM SILICON

energy output
= 12%
energy input

PHOTOVOLTAIC INSTALLATION
REAL GOODS SOLAR LIVING CENTER IN HOPLAND, CALIFORNIA

Photo by Cris Benton.

Amorphous silicon (a-Si) is less expensive to produce than either mono
or poly-crystalline silicon. It is non-crystalline, meaning that the atomic
structure is more randomized. While it operates at a lower efficiency than
crystalline structures (about half the efficiency of monocrystalline Si), it can
be placed in much thinner applications which can lead to a lower cost per
watt capacity of the solar cell design.
Other types of thin film silicon are protocrystalline and nanocrystalline (aka
microcrystalline). Some variations that combine layers of different types of
thin film silicon have been referred to as micromorph (a combination of the
terms MICROcrystalline and aMORPHous).

9

solar

PHOTOVOLTAIC

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

The levelized cost of energy
for non-silicon systems when
compared to silicon-based PV
depends greatly on the global
market cost of silicon at the
time of manufacture.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

THIN FILM NON-SILICON

energy output
= 16%–20%
energy input

Silicon is more abundant in
nature than CIGS or CdTe
raw materials. However,
during periods of high
global demand, silicon can
sometimes cost more as a
raw material.
Each semi-conductor
material captures light
energy most efficiently
across a limited wavelength
spectrum.
SEMPRA GENERATION’S CDTE COPPER MOUNTAIN SOLAR FACILITY

Image courtesy of Sempra U.S. Gas & Power, LLC.

As an alternative to silicon (Si), other semiconductor materials can be used
for thin film solar cells. They have been proven to have greater efficiency
than thin film amorphous silicon.
Copper-Indium Gallium Selenide (CIGS) has a conversion efficiency
of about 20%. It can be manufactured to be very thin due to its high
absorption coefficient.
Cadmium Telluride (CdTe) has a conversion efficiency of about 16% and
potentially offers cost advantages over CIGS.
The company Nanosolar has developed
a method of printing CIGS onto thin
foil substrates with nanoparticle inks and
roll-to-roll manufacturing, which allows
for flexible thin film panels while reducing
production costs.
Image courtesy of Nanosolar.

10

solar

PHOTOVOLTAIC

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Also called “tandem cells,”
these specialized type of solar
cells have been limited to use
in aerospace, CPV, or other
unique applications due to
their complexity and expense.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

MULTIJUNCTION

energy output
= 25%– 45%
energy input

Multijunction cells are capable
of achieving high conversion
efficiencies because they are
able to capture electrons within
multiple wavelengths of light.
Single junction cells are limited
to the energy within a partial
spectrum, the remaining light
either reflecting off or being
lost to heat energy.

MULTIJUNCTION CELL

Multijunction cells take advantage of multiple materials, each of which
best capture a particular light wavelength (color spectrum) for solar-toelectricity conversion. This can lead to very high conversion efficiencies,
even above 40%.
The technology was first developed for use in space explorations such as
the Mars rover missions, and is still used for space applications. Because
of the manufacturing expense, terrestrial commercial application has been
generally limited to CPV systems (refer to page 18).
Different techniques use different substrate materials and can be either
two-junction or three-junction. Some substrate materials that are used are:
Gallium arsenide, Germanium, and Indium phosphide. Because the thin
film is deposited (epitaxially) onto a monocrystalline substrate, the applied
layers take on the lattice structure of the substrate crystal while maintaining
thin film properties.

11

solar
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

One of the technical
obstacles to greater
proliferation of PEC-type
electrolysis for hydrogen
generation is the
corrosive effect of the
electrolyte solution on the
semiconductor anode.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

PHOTOELECTROCHEMICAL
CELL (PEC)

energy output
= 10%
energy input

PROOF-OF-CONCEPT BY PROFESSOR MICHAEL STRANO ET AL.

Image courtesy of MIT. Photo by Patrick Gillooly.

These are solar cells that transform solar energy directly into electrical
energy. Instead of using a solid-state semiconductor as the light absorbing
material, PECs use a electrolyte material (typically a fluid). A circuit is
created via a semiconducting anode and a metal cathode which are both in
contact with the electrolyte.
One type of PEC is the DSSC (dye-sensitized solar cell). More about
DSSC can be found on page 13.
Other types of PEC can be used to harness solar energy directly for
purposes of electrolysis to create hydrogen—a stored fuel. In this system,
water acts as the electrolyte solution. Hydrogen and oxygen form around
the anode when exposed to sunlight. The resulting hydrogen can be stored
and used to generate electricity in fuel cells. An example of this technology
in action is the work by Rose Street Labs Energy (RSLE) scientists in
Phoenix, Arizona.

12

solar

PHOTOVOLTAIC

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Because of the existence of
liquid electrolyte within the
DSSC cells, the temperature
must be maintained within
certain bounds.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

THIN FILM
DYE-SENSITIZED (DSSC)

energy output
= 9%–11%
energy input

The liquid also acts as a
solvent over time. This, and
the volatility of the dyes under
UV light, mean that details of
the material housing assembly
are critical.
Research is underway to
replace the liquid with a solid
material.

DSSC MODULE

Techniques for creating dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) are simple and
the materials are very low cost, but the conversion efficiency is also below
that of solid-state semiconductor technologies (DSSC is the most efficient
of the “third generation” thin films). This technique was invented in 1991
by Michael Grätzel and Brian O’Regan at EPFL. The DSSC solar cell is
alternatively known as the Grätzel cell.
They have the characteristic of being semi-transparent, flexible, and are very
durable. They also function comparatively better than other PV technologies
in low light levels and indirect light. Because they are relatively inexpensive
to produce they have one of the lowest price/
performance ratios, and despite their lower
conversion efficiency are therefore competitive
with conventional energy in terms of levelized
cost (price per KWh over the lifetime of the
installation).
The Dye Solar Cell (DSC) modules (tiles) used in the window systems
installed at Seoul City’s Human Resource Development Centre, were
produced and supplied by Dyesol Limited’s Korean joint venture
partner, Timo Technology, using Dyesol DSC materials.

13

solar
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Organic thin film has some
advantages over silicon or
other semi-conductor type
solar cells.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

PHOTOVOLTAIC
THIN FILM ORGANIC
PHOTOVOLTAIC CELL (OPVC)
OR POLYMER SOLAR CELL

energy output
= 5%–10%
energy input

Its organic and plastic nature
means that it can be easily
fabricated into flexible shapes
and adhered to fabrics.
It functions well under low
light conditions and at nonperpendicular angles to the
sun such as vertical walls.
Its translucency means that it
can also be applied to windows
and other light transmitting
surfaces.

ORGANIC PHOTOVOLTAIC PLASTIC SHEET

Similar to that produced by Heliatek, Solarmer, Eight19, and Disasolar.

OPVC (or OPV) uses organic polymers to absorb sunlight and transmit
electrical charges. Organic PV can be manufactured in solutions that can
be painted or rolled onto proper substrate materials. They can be produced
at a very low cost in comparison to other PV technologies because they can
take advantage of roll-to-roll production techniques in which the organic
photovoltaic system is “printed” onto a continuous sheet of substrate material.
Current OPVC technology has a conversion efficiency of up to 10%. Its low
cost of production, its flexibility, and its good performance in lower level and
indirect light make it an attractive option for some applications.
Examples of small-scale uses for OPVC can be seen sewn into fabric such
as in backpacks, laptop cases, tents, and jackets. The energy generated by
a backpack utlizing this technology, for example, is sufficient to charge
portable electronic devices and to provide power to one or two lights. OPV
is finding interesting applications in developing countries. A great example
is the IndiGo 2.5KW system by Eight19 that is being provided to off-grid
communities, financed via mobile phone SMS credit codes. Larger-scale
applications, such as building integrated OPV in façade systems are also
being implemented.

14

solar
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

One application of 3D
photovoltaics is the research
that is being done at Georgia
Tech. They are coating
optical fibre cable with dyesensitized solar cells in an
effort to increase the amount
of light transmission to
photovoltaic material over any
given surface area exposed
to the sun.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

PHOTOVOLTAIC
3D CELLS

energy output
= 26%–50%
energy input

STILL IN THE RESEARCH STAGE OF DEVELOPMENT

A project at CalTech also
shows promise with a flexible
array of light-absorbing
silicon microwires and lightreflecting metal nanoparticles
embedded in a polymer.

3D SOLAR CELL

These solar cells can utilize any of the various PV material designs. The
initial focus by the company 3D Solar has been on integrating conventional
silicon-based PV as the photovoltaic material. The technological innovation
lies in the initial capture of light at the surface of the solar panel.
Whereas a standard panel solar cell will typically reflect 20%–30% of the
light that strikes its surface, a 3D cell relies on a geometric structure that
can recapture the reflected light onto adjacent PV surfaces, thus increasing
the efficiency of the entire system over the same surface area of installation.
Use of multijunction technology in combination with 3D solar cell
geometry has the potential to see applications in CPV systems with an
energy conversion efficiency of 50% or greater.
Plasmonic solar cells (PSC) use nanoparticles on the surface of a solar cell
to scatter and trap more light within the cell.

15

solar
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Because infrared and
ultraviolet light is outside of
the spectrum of human sight,
these type of photovoltaic
panels could function very
well as window surfaces,
while still letting in the entire
visible spectrum and reducing
internal building heat gain at
the same time.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

PHOTOVOLTAIC
INFRARED AND UV

energy output
= UP TO 90%
energy input

STILL IN THE RESEARCH STAGE OF DEVELOPMENT

This technology is still mostly
in the research stage and is
not yet commercially available.

2μm

NANOANTENNA STRUCTURE CAPTURES IR SPECTRUM RADIATION

Image courtesy of Idaho National Laboratory.

Experimental research is ongoing to develop methods of converting
infrared and UV light into electrical power.
Since infrared solar radiation energy is radiated back from the earth during
the night, a system to capture it could potentially provide energy 24 hours
a day. A team of researchers at Idaho National Laboratory, the University
of Missouri, and the University of Colorado are working to develop
nanoantennas (nantenna) that can collect both solar heat energy and
industrial waste heat energy. The flexible film would be able to convert up to
90% of available light across multiple spectrums.
Since UV and infrared light is beyond the visible spectrum, solar panels
that focus on these spectrums can let visible light through while still
harnessing solar energy. Japan’s National Institute of Advanced Industrial
Science and Technology has shown proof of concept applications of this
type of technology.

16

solar

THERMOPHOTOVOLTAIC
(TPV)

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Potential exists with TPV to
see significant increases in
the overall efficiency of solar
power systems by converting
residual heat energy that is
otherwise wasted.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

energy output
= Greater than 50%
energy input
PV + TPV (theoretical)

Image courtesy of IMEC.

TPV converts heat energy directly into electricity via photons. A TPV
system consists of a thermal emitter and a photovoltaic diode. For the most
efficient operation, the temperature of the thermal emitter should be about
1000°C above the temperature of the photovoltaic diode cell, but some
amount of energy could be created from smaller differences in temperature.
TPV employs photovoltaic technology but does not necessarily rely on the
sun as the emitter of the photon energy.

17

solar

PHOTOVOLTAIC

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Some CPV systems employ
parabolic troughs that direct
sunlight onto a linear solar cell.
Another design is the Total
Spectrum Collector which
separates light with a prism into
different spectrums best suited
to different solar cell types.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

CONCENTRATED PV (CPV)
LOW (LCPV) = 2–100 SUNS
HIGH (HCPV) = 300–1000 SUNS

energy output
= UP TO 42%
energy input

Still another variation is the
mylar balloon design developed
by Cool Earth in which a CPV
solar cell at the upper side of
a clear hemisphere receives
concentrated sunlight from
the lower hemisphere which is
highly reflective on the inside
surface.
CONCENTRATED PV

Image courtesy of SolFocus, Inc.

CPV employs photovoltaic cells, but rather than rely on the standard
intensity of naturally occurring solar radiation energy, the CPV system
concentrates the sunlight and directs a magnified beam onto a smaller area
solar cell specifically designed to handle the greater energy and heat.
Because the solar cell can be much smaller, the amount of semiconductor
material required is far less for the same watt capacity output when
compared to non-concentrated PV systems. This can greatly reduce the
construction cost per watt capacity of the overall system. Because of
the increased heat on the solar cell, CPV installations often require the
integration of heat sinks or other cooling apparatus.
The magnification of the sunlight can be accomplished by a number of
methods, the most common of which is a Fresnel lens. Other designs,
such as that of SolFocus and Cool Earth, utilize reflectors. Nearly all CPV
systems must track the sun’s movement across the sky in order to function
properly. CPV can reach the greatest installed efficiencies of existing PV
installations for utility-scale applications.
18

solar
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

While this technology has not
had commercial application
yet, there is some potential
for building integration in
windows. The LSC panels
allow most visible light to
pass through them while still
generating some power at the
luminescent edges from a very
defined spectrum.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

LUMINESCENT SOLAR
CONCENTRATOR (LSC)

energy output
= 7%
energy input

STILL IN THE RESEARCH STAGE OF DEVELOPMENT

EXAMPLE OF LUMINESCENT SOLAR CONCENTRATORS

Image courtesy of MIT and researchers: Marc Baldo, Michael Currie,
Jon Mapel, and Shalom Goffri. Photo by Donna Coveney.

The application of special dyes to the surface of a pane of glass or plastic
can cause a certain spectrum of light to be diverted at concentrated levels
directly to the edges of the glass, where it can then be collected by a solar
cell that is calibrated specifically for that wavelength. All other light
wavelengths continue uninterrupted through the glass pane, which
appears completely transparent.
Research continues to improve efficiency of transmission and stability of
dye treatment. Advances in OLED technology and laser technology have
portability to LSC applications.
Commercial application is being pursued by Covalent Solar, Inc.

19

solar

CONCENTRATED
PV & THERMAL (PVT)
INTEGRATED SYSTEM

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Combined Heat and Power
(CHP) systems use concentrated
solar power, which can be
achieved by various methods
such as parabolic trough,
parabolic dish, or linear Fresnel
reflector.

(COMBINED HEAT AND POWER)

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

energy output
= UP TO 75%
energy input

Heated water can be used
directly in domestic systems or
can be heated again to produce
steam (lowering the input
energy required of the parallel
system).

PARABOLIC TROUGH CHP INSTALLATION

Image courtesy of Cogenra Solar.

Known by a variety of names, such as Concentrated Photovoltaic Thermal
(CPVT), or Combined Heat and Power Solar (CHAPS), or most simply
Combined Heat and Power (CHP), these integrated systems capture the
wasted heat energy from the inefficiency of the photovoltaic system, and
store it in a heat transfer fluid such as water for direct use.
CHP systems help to cool the operating temperature of the PV cell (which
increases its conversion efficiency to electrical power) while providing hot
water for domestic consumption at temperatures of approximately 80°C.
This water would otherwise require external energy (most likely derived
from fossil fuels) to heat it.

20

solar
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Thermoelectric systems have
the potential to increase
the overall efficiency of
photovoltaic panels by
harnessing the heat energy
that would otherwise be
wasted, and at the same
time increasing the operating
efficiency of the PV panels.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

THERMOELECTRIC

energy output
= 6%–10%
energy input

THERMOELECTRIC GENERATOR (TEG)

Thermoelectric systems convert heat (temperature differences) directly
into electrical energy, using a phenomenon called the “Seebeck effect” (or
“thermoelectric effect”). This is where an electric current is created between
two different metals that are at different temperatures.
The voltage generated can be as high as 41 microvolts per degree kelvin
difference using the right combination of metals.
Thermoelectric cooling takes advantage of the reverse effect, wherein an
electric current is provided to a similar device, thus creating a difference
in temperature between the two sides of the device. Known as the Peltier
Effect, this can be used to remove heat from an object or space.

21

solar
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

The stack effect is the natural
property of air within a
closed space to rise vertically
with buoyancy when heated
in relation to ambient air
temperature. The greater the
heat differential the faster the
resulting air movement.
This differential is made
as great as possible in the
updraft tower by 1) heating
the air at ground level via
a greenhouse with thermal
storage, and 2) building the
tower tall enough so that the
ambient temperature of the
air is naturally lower by a few
degrees at the mouth.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

UPDRAFT TOWER
SOLAR CHIMNEY

energy output
= APPROX. 2%
energy input

close-up view of base turbine

CROSS CUT DIAGRAM OF SOLAR UPDRAFT TOWER

Image created by Robert Ferry based on design by EnviroMission.

A solar updraft tower combines the stack effect with wind turbines
located at the base of a very tall tower. The tower is surrounded by a
large greenhouse at ground level where air is constantly being pulled in
by convection and heated.
With a sufficiently tall chimney tower structure, the convection current
moves air from the greenhouse area into the bottom of the tower and
up to the open mouth at the top. As air passes into the base of the
tower, it drives wind turbines located there.
A theoretical variation would replace the tower with a controlled
cyclonic atmospheric updraft vortex.
The application of the updraft tower principle to double-skinned
skyscrapers has been proposed by Studied Impact Design.
A theoretical inverse is the solar downdraft tower in which water vapor
is misted at the top of the tower causing the air to cool and fall down
the tower.

22

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

solar

SOLAR CHEMICAL

Since the photosynthetic
process removes CO2 from the
atmosphere, a highly efficient
system in wide commercial
application could help to bring
down atmospheric levels of
CO2 while at the same time
producing clean energy.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

ARTIFICIAL PHOTOSYNTHESIS

energy output
= UP TO 60%
energy input

Image via Wikimedia Commons.

Some direct-to-hydrogen processes (refer to PEC technology on page
12) are referred to as artificial photosynthesis, but they can also be more
accurately described as photoelectrolysis.
There are other types of technologies that closely mimic photosynthesis
by using carbon dioxide and water along with sunlight in order to produce
hydrogen using ruthenium as a chlorophyll substitute. Other systems using
cobalt oxide aim to create synthetic fuels such as methanol or methane.
Cyanobacteria (blue-green algae) can also be used to create hydrogen
directly from sunlight, though the efficiency is lower.
Researchers Andreas Mershin and Shuguang Zhang of MIT’s Center for
Biomedical Engineering have shown how the actual molecules responsible
for photosynthesis in plants (PS-I) can be inexpensively put to work in solar
panels. Work continues to increase efficiency (presently 0.1%).
Photodimerization and Photoisomerization are two other processes that are
being investigated as methods of storing solar energy in usable forms.

23

solar
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

OTHER EXPERIMENTAL /
THEORETICAL

DIRECT TO FUEL OR SUNLIGHT TO PETROL (S2P)

The Counter Rotating Ring Receiver Reactor Recuperator (CR5) at
Sandia National Laboratories is demonstrating the conversion of solar
energy directly into fuels such as ethanol that are combustible in existing
gas engines without modification. The Sandia Solar to Petrol (S2P) system
works by converting atmospheric CO2 into oxygen and carbon monoxide
which can then be converted into liquid fuels. Although the process takes
CO2 from the atmosphere, because the combustion of the fuel that comes
from these technologies most likely produces CO2 again as a by-product,
a complete system could be seen as carbon neutral.
Another example is the work being done by Joule Unlimited in
Massachusetts. One of their technologies, called HeliocultureTM uses
photosynthetic organisms to create fuel from sunlight and carbon dioxide.
DIRECT TO HYDROGEN

Usually via photoelectrochemical (PEC) technology, the conversion
of solar energy directly into hydrogen can be used as a stored fuel. An
example of this technology in action is the work by RoseStreet Labs
Energy (RSLE) scientists in Phoenix, Arizona.
RADIOMETER

Also called a Light Mill or a Solar Engine, the
somewhat mysterious phenomenon of the radiometer
has not been investigated as of yet for its potential to run
electrical turbines, but perhaps this will have application
in the future.

24

wind
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

The energy available in the
wind for conversion by a wind
turbine is equal to:
½ pAv3 where p=air density,
A=swept area of the rotor, and
v=velocity of the wind.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

HORIZONTAL AXIS WIND
TURBINE (HAWT)
ONSHORE

energy output
= Varies with wind speed
typically up to 40%
energy input

In 1920, Albert Betz published
the discovery (also made by
Frederick Lanchester in 1915)
that it is possible to extract
59.3% of the wind energy that
passes through the swept area
of the rotor. This is now known
as the Betz Limit.
Typically HAWTs are able to
operate at 70% of the Betz
Limit, or at about 40%
overall efficiency.
WILD HORSE WIND FARM, PUGET SOUND ENERGY

Photo by Robert Ferry.

Perhaps the most commonly recognizable icon of the renewable energy
industry, the horizontal axis wind turbine has come a long way from its
historic origins in milling grains and pumping water.
Early wind turbines typically had at least four blades, and sometimes many
more. The first megawatt capacity turbine, built in Vermont in 1942, had
only two large blades. There are some interesting modern examples of
single-blade turbines as well. Standard contemporary utility-scale models
typically have three blades and can have capacities as high as 10 megawatts.
The capacity of the modern HAWT is a function mostly of the overall
outside diameter as measured from tip to tip, with some larger models
exceeding 100 meters.
Smaller units can be designed to rotate with assistance of a vane on the
downwind side. Larger models must be turned more slowly by computer
guided gears.
25

wind
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

HAWTs must be placed far
apart from one another in
order to minimize the shadow
effect of air wake disturbance
on the efficient operation of
downwind turbines.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

HORIZONTAL AXIS
WIND TURBINE (HAWT)
OFFSHORE

Varies with wind speed
energy output
= typically up to 40% wind speed
energy input

is more consistent
offshore = greater overall output

Offshore arrays can take
advantage of the large open
area of the sea to ensure the
most proper placements and
maximize overall efficiency.
Without topographic
ground features to cause
air disturbance, offshore
installations also can take
advantage of more consistent
and higher velocity winds.
NYSTED WINDFARM (72 WINDMILLS, 165.6MW CAPACITY)

Image courtesy of Siemens AG, Munich/Berlin.

There are two types of off-shore turbines—those mounted on pylons in
shallow waters and those that are designed to float in deep water. Both
types typically employ variations on the standard three-blade designs for
the turbine itself.
Floating models can be designed to use this feature as a method of rotation
to follow the wind direction. Also, floating models can take advantage of
higher and more consistent wind speeds in the open ocean.
Floating HAWTs deal with the issue of aesthetics in that their location
more than 12 miles from land makes them completely disappear beyond
the horizon as viewed from shore.
Pylon-mounted shallow water turbines are less expensive and easier to
maintain. Their power transmission lines are also shorter.
It is important to consider all possible impacts that offshore turbines can
have on marine ecosystems.
26

wind
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

The earliest recorded use of
wind power is with vertical
axis wind turbines used to
mill grains as long ago as 200
BCE. They were very common
in 7th century Persia.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

VERTICAL AXIS WIND
TURBINE (VAWT)

energy output
= Varies with wind speed
typically up to 40%
energy input

These typically employed four
vertical flags of fabric or
woven grasses connected with
wooden beams to a central
column.

REVOLUTIONAIR WT1KW (GHT TYPE DESIGN)

Image courtesy of PRAMAC. Design by Philippe Starck.

Vertical axis wind turbines are generally either Darrieus or Savonius in
type (named after their early 20th century inventors). A simple distinction
is that Darrieus-type turbines use aerofoil blades and Savonius-type
turbines use wind scoops. Gorlov helical turbine (GHT) is a variation on
a standard Darrieus type (invented by Professor Alexander M. Gorlov of
Northeastern University in the 1990’s).
Typically VAWTs have lower cut-in speeds (the wind speed at which they
begin to produce electricity) than HAWTs and can be positioned lower to
the ground than can HAWTs.
Another advantage of VAWTs is that they can be located in closer
proximity to each other than can HAWTs. Some studies have shown
that dense configurations can actually increase efficiency of the overall
installation with turbines picking up wake energy from the rotations of
adjacent turbines.

27

wind

CONCENTRATED WIND

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

CWAT is a new acronym that
encompasses the class of
machines formerly known as
DAWTs as they were known in
the 1970’s and 1980’s.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

COMPACT WIND ACCELERATION
TURBINE (CWAT), ALSO KNOWN
AS DIFFUSER AUGMENTED WIND
(DAWT), OR DUCTED TURBINE

energy output
= Varies with wind speed
56%–90% (as measured
energy input

Comparison on wind energy
conversion efficiency is often
made between ducted and
non-ducted rotor diameter.
A more accurate comparison
would be between non-ducted
rotor diameter and ducted
diffuser diameter. In the former
comparison, increases are as
high as 2x. Using the latter
comparison, the increase is
closer to 1.4x.

against non-ducted turbine
with equal rotor diameter)

CROSS-CUT ILLUSTRATION OF A TYPICAL CWAT

Image created by Robert Ferry.

This type of horizontal axis wind turbine uses a cone—or series of cones—
to concentrate the wind, increase the velocity of the wind as it passes
through the rotor’s swept area, and thus increase the efficiency of the
overall system. They are also referred to as ducted turbines.
This technology has recently (after a long history of attempts) proven some
measure of improvement over non-ducted HAWTs. As these systems
require more material (the ducting cone) their application to utility-scale
installations may be limited.
For now, companies such as Arista and Enflo-WindTec are bringing small
and medium size turbines to the market with excellent energy output
efficiencies and reduced noise levels.
Ducted turbine manufacturers often refer to standard HAWTs as “freerunning” turbines to distinguish the two types.

28

wind
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

The Blade Tip design has a
low cut-in speed that allows
for the generation of energy
at wind speeds as low as 0.5
miles per hour or 2 meters
per second.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

BLADE TIP POWER
SYSTEM

energy output
= Varies with wind speed
up to 56%
energy input

Current models measure
approximately 6 feet in
diameter and are capable
of generating 1500 KWh per
year. Ideal operation is at
wind speeds of 12.5 mph
(5.6 meters per second).

BLADE TIP WIND TURBINES INSTALLED ON A ROOF

Image courtesy of WindTronics/Honeywell.

This wind turbine has the appearance of a horizontal axis wind turbine
with a concentrator ring. However, with the Blade Tip design, the outside
tips of the rotating blades carry the magnets that generate electrical
current when they pass the copper coil banks on the inside of the
perimeter diffuser.
This reduces the resistance as compared to the mechanics of a centrally
located gearbox and it captures the power at the place where the rotation
speed is highest.
The Blade Tip Power SystemTM design is patented by WindTronics and
manufactured by Honeywell.

29

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

wind

HIGH ALTITUDE WIND
POWER (HAWP) AND
AIRBORNE WIND
TURBINES (AWT)

Douglas Selsam conceived
of the ladder mill in 1977 to
make use of high altitude
winds. It is a series of kites
arranged like a ladder in a
loop formation. The shape of
the individual kites changes
based on their location in the
loop so that they are either
fully harnessing the wind
or creating minimum drag
resistance on their return
journey. In this way, the loop
can be designed to constantly
rotate. With kite-type HAWP,
the conversion of energy is
done at the ground level by
harnessing the movement of
the tether cable.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

energy output
= Varies with wind speed
up to 40% high altitude wind
energy input
is very constant, leading to
high annual energy output

HIGH ALTITUDE WIND POWER

Image courtesy of Joby Energy.

The power of the wind at high altitudes is much stronger and more
consistent than what is typically available nearer to the ground. However,
getting access to this excellent source of energy and harnessing it for
electrical use presents obvious challenges.
HAWP has the potential to be a cheap and consistent source of energy.
There are a wide number of HAWP technologies that are presently being
developed. The electricity generation can either occur in the sky or at
ground mooring, depending on the design type.
Some designs, such as the KiteGen system, are derivative of kite and
sailing technologies. Other types of HAWP devices (airborne turbines, or
AWT) use lighter-than-air balloons (aerostats) that rotate between two
cables. One example of this is the Magenn AWT.
Yet another design is comprised of small glider-like machines that are
designed to fly in a constant circle or figure-eight such as the systems by
Joby or Makani.
30

wind

WINDBELT

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

The Windbelt works on the
aerostatic flutter effect.
Aerostatic flutter is created
when a feedback loop occurs
between an object’s natural
mode of vibration and an
aerodynamic flow of energy
passing over that object.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

energy output
= UNKNOWN
energy input

The effect is similar to that of
an aeolian harp which is used
to create musical notes from
the wind.

EXAMPLE OF A WINDBELT IN OPERATION

Image created by Robert Ferry based on design by Humdinger Wind Energy.

This type of wind generator uses a belt secured between two fixed points
set within a rectangular housing. The belt oscillates rapidly creating a
rocking motion at the two ends. This motion is harnessed by small kinetic
energy generation devices employing magnets at the ends of the belt which
move rapidly back and forth between metal coils.
The invention is patented by Shawn Frayne who has founded the company
Humdinger Wind Energy LLC to develop and market the device.

31

wind
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

OTHER EXPERIMENTAL /
THEORETICAL

SELSAM MULTIROTOR WIND TURBINE

This invention by Douglas Selsam uses multiple rotors on a single drive
shaft. There are two main variations on the technology. One type supports
the system at a pylon located at about the midpoint of the driveshaft. This
type can accommodate approximately seven rotors and provides a power
output equivalent of up to six rotors of the same size (but using only one
shaft and generator). The other type, called the Sky Serpent, is supported
from one end at the ground (location of the generator) and (like its name)
is free to wave in the wind. It is supported at the other end by a balloon.
VANELESS ION

This concept requires no moving parts. Rather, the device is in appearance
similar to a fence that allows the wind to pass through it. By introducing
water mist with small differing charges and allowing the wind to carry the
charge between electrodes, electrical power can be produced, potentially
on a large scale. It is similar in operational principal with Lord Kelvin’s
Thunderstorm where two bodies of water with small charge difference can
create high voltage current by using the force of gravity. The vaneless ion
generator uses the wind to move the water rather than gravity.
Two prototypes were patented by Alvin Marks in the late 1970’s.

32

water

HYDROELECTRICITY

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Generating approximately
20% of the world’s electrical
energy, hydroelectricity is by
far the most established form
of renewable energy.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

DAMMED RESERVOIR

energy output
= 80%–95%
energy input
Turbine efficiency

It accounts for more than
80% of all renewable energy
installed capacity.

HOOVER DAM

Image via Wikimedia Commons.

Conventional hydroelectricity uses dam structures to limit the flow of
existing rivers. By selectively releasing water through turbines in the dam,
the tremendous pressure of the water is converted to electrical energy.
There are many ecological side effects of interrupting the flow of existing
rivers. This has led to the deconstruction of many hydroelectric dams and
has resulted in a decrease in construction of new hydroelectric facilities.
The damming of a river causes the upstream side to flood large areas of
land, disrupts fish spawning activities, and changes the characteristics
(temperature, oxygen content, and silt content) of the downstream water.
Dams also come with the risk of structural failure and the resulting severe
downstream flooding.

33

water
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

In some installations a
penstock pipe is placed in the
river in order to regulate the
flow of water. At the mouth
of the penstock a constant
water pressure is formed and
is transferred to the turbine
downstream.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

HYDROELECTRICITY
RUN-OF-THE-RIVER
(DAMLESS HYDRO)

energy output
= 80%–95%
Turbine efficiency (limited by
energy input
the amount of water that is
diverted)

Other installations simply
place a water turbine in
a strong current area of a
river without any additional
damming or piping. While
this type of installation has
the most minimal ecological
impact, it is most susceptible
to fluctuations in the flow rate
of the river.
FISH LADDER AT THE COLUMBIA RIVER JOHN DAY DAM

Image courtesy of the Army Corps of Engineers.

While not entirely without ecological side effects, run-of-the-river type
hydroelectricity plants offer an alternative to large flooding reservoirs. In
these installations, only a portion of the river is diverted to the generators
and the rest of the river is left to flow naturally.
Since no land is flooded, existing forests and natural habitats are not
adversely affected.
Since there is very little storage capacity, this technology requires a river
with a constant flow rate. While conventional hydro facilities can generate
in the 10,000MW capacity and above, run-of-the-river type plants
typically are limited to around a 1,000MW range or below.

34

water
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Many micro and pico-hydro
installations use a penstock
pipe to divert water from the
natural flow of an existing
river or stream.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

HYDROELECTRICITY
MICRO AND PICO HYDRO

energy output
= 50%– 85% (varies)
energy input
Smaller turbines are

sometimes less efficient

This pipe then flows to a
small turbine generator, after
which the water is channeled
to rejoin the river at some
point downstream.

PICO HYDRO PROJECT (PRACTICAL ACTION SRI LANKA) IN
KALAWANA, SRI LANKA Photo by Janani Balasubramaniam.

Classified as hydroelectric installations of less than 100KW capacity for
micro-hydro and less than 5KW capacity for pico-hydro, these installations
are in smaller rivers and streams. They can be either dammed reservoir
type or run-of-the-river type but are usually the latter, especially for pico
installations.
These types of installations are an excellent method of providing energy
to small communities in developing countries that do not have access to
grid source power. Because the required output is small, the elevation drop
(hydraulic head) of the water can be small, in some cases as little as one
meter.
Pico-hydro can be very do-it-yourself and inexpensive. For example, Sam
Redfield of the Appropriate Infrastructure Development Group (AIDG)
has developed a pico-hydro generator that can be built for less than $150,
made from PVC pipe, a modified Toyota alternator, and a five gallon
bucket.
35

water
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Vortex Hydro Energy is a
spin-off of the University
of Michigan’s Engineering
Department and owns the
rights to the VIVACE converter,
which was invented in 2004 by
Michael Bernitsas, a professor
in the school’s Department of
Naval Architecture and Marine
Engineering.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

HYDROELECTRICITY
(HYDROKINETIC)
VORTEX POWER

energy output
= UNKNOWN
energy input

The VIVACE converter is
inspired by the way that fish
use water vortex energy to
propel themselves.

IMAGE OF CLOUDS OFF THE CHILEAN COAST NEAR THE JUAN
FERNANDEZ ISLANDS (VON KARMAN VORTEX)

Image courtesy of NASA/GSFC/Landsat.

When you place obstacles in the path of flowing water, it creates vortices
or small turbulent spinning movements within the fluid. Recent research
into harnessing these vortices has made some very rapid progress. This
is perhaps the hydro power least damaging to the environment since the
installations are no more impactful to wildlife than natural obstacles along
the path of water in a riverbed or ocean floor.
By placing fins in sequence, the vortex energy that is created by the
wake of one fin is transferred to up and down mechanical motion by the
next fin downstream. This in turn generates a sustained feedback loop
and maximizes the efficiency of the system. The vortex power converter
functions in flowing water with a speed as slow as two knots.
Some micro-hydro designs are referred to as “vortex gravity turbines”
when they are placed on a vertical axis within a water channel and use a
controlled vortex to run a turbine.
36

water
Five main types of TSG:

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

1. Axial: most similar to HAWT
designs adapted to water
application.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

OCEAN TIDAL
(HYDROKINETIC)
TIDAL STREAM GENERATOR
(TSG)

energy output
= UP TO 40%
energy input

2. Vertical and Horizontal Axis
Crossflow: similar to Darrieustype VAWTs. They are often
oriented horizontally in TSG
applications.
3. Flow Augmented: uses a
shroud to increase the flow to
the turbine.
4. Oscillating: do not have a
rotating component, but instead
employ hydrofoil sections that
move back and forth.
5. Venturi: a duct generates
differential pressure which is
used to run a turbine.

SEAGEN TIDAL POWER PLANT, STRANGFORD, COUNTY DOWN,
NORTHERN IRELAND (BLADES RAISED FOR MAINTENANCE)

Image via Wikimedia Commons, user Ardfern.

Similar to how a wind turbine harnesses the flowing kinetic energy of
the wind, tidal stream generators harness the similar power of the water
as tides flow in and out of coastal inlets by transferring the flow of the
water to a rotating turbine. In outward appearance, they typically resemble
a horizontal axis or vertical axis wind turbine. Since this is a relatively
new technology, there are many approaches that are currently being tried
and tested.
Tidal is an interesting form of energy. Whereas other forms of ocean
energy (wave, thermal, ocean currents) can trace their energy origin to the
wind or the sun, tidal energy is caused by the gravitational forces of the
moon and the sun and the rotation of the earth. Depending on the body of
water, tides can be either semidiurnal (two high waters and two low waters
each day), or diurnal (one tidal cycle per day).

37

water

OCEAN TIDAL
(HYDROKINETIC)
BARRAGE

Five main types of barrage:

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

1. Ebb Generation: A natural
tidal basin is filled through
sluice gates until high tide. At
low tide, gates are opened to run
turbines.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

energy output
= UP TO 85%
energy input

2. Flood Generation: Turbines
operate while the tide is rising.
3. Pumping: Ebb Generation
+ excess grid power pumps
additional water into the tidal
basin.
4. Two Basin: An additional
barrier wall across the basin
provides nearly continuous
generation.
5. Tidal Lagoon: A circular wall
structure that has built-in
basin(s). Surrounding water is
free to flow around the lagoon.

RANCE RIVER TIDAL POWER PLANT IN BRETAGNE, FRANCE

Image via Wikimedia Commons, user Dani 7C3.

Tidal Barrage Generators typically span the width of a tidal inlet or
estuary and impede the entire tidal flow. Similar to dammed reservoir
hydroelectricity in rivers, they can have negative effects on the marine
ecosystems of the inlet due to the nearly complete separation of the estuary
from the open ocean.
Changes to water salinity, water turbidity (opacity due to suspended
solids), sediment disturbance, and fish kills in turbines also lead to negative
environmental impacts. These effects can be mitigated with studied design
strategies (the tidal lagoon type is the lease damaging design), but there
will always be greater impact from barrage-type tidal power than from
TSG systems.

38

water
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

There are three types of
Ocean Marine Current
designs: sea bed mounted
systems, floating moored
systems, and hybrid
combinations of these two.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

OCEAN
MARINE CURRENT
(HYDROKINETIC)

energy output
= UP TO 85%
energy input

Sea bed mounted systems
can be designed with similar
engineering to tidal stream
generators, but must be
located in relatively shallow
waters where ocean currents
are not at their strongest.
Floating moored systems
offer the greatest energy
potential but require
engineering solutions to
transmission and mooring.
ILLUSTRATION OF THE GULF STREAM FROM BENJAMIN FRANKLIN’S
PHILOSOPHICAL AND MISCELLANEOUS PAPERS, 1787

Image courtesy of Smithsonian Institute Libraries.

This type of ocean power would harness the streaming currents that exist
in the world’s oceans such as the powerful Gulf Stream in the Atlantic
Ocean. These currents are so powerful that explorers sailing the Atlantic in
the 16th century such as Ponce de Leon noted that often the stream of the
water was more powerful than the wind, causing their ships to be still or
even to move backward.
No installation has yet successfully been implemented to harness the
oceans currents. While the available energy is quite vast, the difficulties for
engineering systems in deep ocean water are also great.
Marine current energy is indirectly a form of solar power since the currents
of the ocean are created by the heat energy of the sun.

39

water
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Wave energy converters (WEC)
harness the local surface
energy of large bodies of water.
If you think about it, wave
energy is (very indirectly) a
form of solar energy. Waves
are caused by the movement
of wind over the surface of
water, and the wind is caused
by changes in air temperature
created by the energy of the
sun.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

OCEAN WAVE
(HYDROKINETIC)
SURFACE FOLLOWING
OR ATTENUATOR

energy output
= 70%
energy input
Broad wave surface area

In 2004 Pelamis Wave Power
first transmitted electricity to
the land grid. Each Pelamis
machine is currently rated at
750KW.
SECOND GENERATION P2 PELAMIS MACHINE IN OPERATION AT
THE EUROPEAN MARINE ENERGY CENTRE (EMEC) IN ORKNEY

Owned by E.ON UK. Image courtesy of Pelamis Wave Power Ltd.

Wave energy offers another vast potential for harnessing the power of
the oceans. Waves are generated by winds over large expanses of ocean area
and travel immense distances with minimal energy loss. Because of this
fact, the energy embodied in local waves is often out of phase with local
wind conditions and can therefore act as a complement to off-shore wind
power generation.
Surface following type wave generation uses long, hinged serpentine
devices that create pressure in chambers of oil as the segments of the device
change their orientations with the action of the waves. The release of the
oil pressure drives hydraulic motors within the floating machine.

40

water
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

There have been attempts
made to harness wave energy
since the late 18th century.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

OCEAN WAVE
(HYDROKINETIC)
BUOY OR POINT ABSORBER

energy output
= 80%
energy input
Limited wave surface area

The ocean surface is a
harsh environment for the
continuous operation of
mechanical devices.

BUOY TYPE WEC OFF THE COAST OF HAWAII

Image courtesy of Ocean Power Technologies, Inc.

Buoy type wave generators use the up and down motion of the waves at a
single point. Some use the up and down motion to transfer liquids within
chambers to spin turbines.
Some types installed in more shallow conditions use a piston that extends
to the sea floor to drive a hydraulic motor, a linear generator, or to fill
compressed air chambers that run small internal air turbines.
Deeper water provides longer period waves and more regular wave energy
without as much potential for damage to equipment from cresting waves.
But the logistics of electrical transmission and equipment maintenance
must be weighed against this.

41

water

OCEAN WAVE
(HYDROKINETIC)

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

The Oyster Wave Energy
Converter employs a fin
perpendicular to the wave
propagation direction.
The first successful
demonstration is a 315KW
version installed in 2009
off the coast of the Orkney
Islands in Scotland by a joint
project of SSE Renewables
and Aquamarine Power.
The joint venture has recently
installed a 800KW version
and has secured sea bed
leases for many tens of
megawatts in capacity to
be installed over the coming
years in Ireland and the US
Pacific coast.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

OSCILLATING WAVE SURGE
CONVERTER

energy output
= 65%
energy input
(capture factor: 20m wide flap)

OYSTER WEC IN OPERATION

Image courtesy of SSE and Aquamarine Power.

The oscillating wave surge energy converter is installed in nearshore
locations of approximately 10 meters depth and is secured to the sea bed.
A mechanical flap at the surface is hinged to allow it to move with the
waves. This movement drives hydraulic pistons that create high pressure
water. The pressure from the pistons drives a constant flow through a series
of pipes to the shore where the pressurized water runs a turbine to generate
electricity.

42

water

OCEAN WAVE
(HYDROKINETIC)

Testing began on the Wave
Dragon WEC in 2003 at which
time the device was connected
to the land grid.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

WING REFLECTOR
OR OVERTOPPING

energy output
= UNKNOWN
energy input

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

A 1.5MW demonstrator project
was launched in the North Sea
in 2011.
Once scaled up, the potential
exists to deploy overtopping
WECs in series. Such an
installation would be on scale
with conventional utility power
generation facilities.

OVERTOPPING TYPE WEC IN OPERATION

Image courtesy of Wave Dragon.

This type of wave energy converter consists of a long floating armature
containing a reservoir that is at a higher elevation than the surrounding
ocean wave troughs. The crests of the waves gradually fill this reservoir by
overtopping the sides. The reservoir, once filled, releases the water back into
the ocean to run a series of low head hydraulic turbines.
The device is designed to be heavy for stability against rolling and is
constructed with thick ship-like steel plates. It is slack moored to the sea
bed to anchor it permanently in place.
See page 47 for additional methods of wave energy conversion.

43

water

OCEAN

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

The Norwegian company
Statkraft opened the world’s
first facility for osmotic power
generation in 2009 with a
limited capacity of 4KW, using
the technology of pressureretarded osmosis.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

OSMOTIC POWER
OR SALINITY GRADIENT POWER

energy output
= UNKNOWN
energy input

A full-scale commercial
osmotic power plant could be
ready by 2015.
The negative environmental
impacts of discharging
brackish water (by-product
of osmotic power) in large
quantities into surrounding
waters should be carefully
mitigated.
OSMOTIC MEMBRANES ARE COILED INSIDE PRESSURE VESSELS

Photo courtesy of Statkraft.

In locations where freshwater mixes with saltwater there is an opportunity
to take advantage of an interesting characteristic of water which is its
strong tendency towards equalization of salinity levels. Therefore, if two
containers of water are separated by a semi-permeable membrane, water
will pass from the freshwater side to the saltwater side thus increasing the
pressure on the saltwater side. This increased pressure can then be released
to turn a turbine and generate electricity in a continuous cycle.
Methods of energy conversion include: pressure-retarded osmosis (used
in commercial production); reversed electrodialysis (experimental); and
capacitive (experimental).
These methods could theoretically be applied in combination with a solar
pond (refer to page 2) where salinity gradients exist between water layers
within the pond.

44

water
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

OTEC can also supply
quantities of cold water
which can be used for
air conditioning and
refrigeration.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

OCEAN
THERMAL ENERGY
CONVERSION (OTEC)

energy output
= 10%
energy input

Some open-loop OTEC
designs can also create
desalinated water as a
by-product.

SATELLITE COMPOSITE SHOWING OCEAN THERMAL ENERGY

Image courtesy of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.

Water in the deep ocean is many degrees cooler than surface temperature
water. The difference in temperature can be used to run a heat engine either
using the water itself in an open-loop (placing warm ocean water in a low
pressure system causes it to boil), or by transferring the heat energy to a
closed-loop system with a heat exchanger and a low-boiling point liquid
such as ammonia.
The technology for energy conversion is similar to that employed in solar
pond systems (refer to page 2), such as Rankine cycle low pressure turbines.
Cool deep water from oceans or deep lakes (typically at a constant 4°C or
40°F) can also be used as heat sinks, reducing the demand side electrical
loads of buildings that are sited to take advantage of this. A similar (though
less efficient) effect can be utilized in almost any location via ground source
heat sink loops.

45

water

GEOTHERMAL

There are three geothermal
power generation methods:

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

1. Dry steam: directly uses
geothermal steam of 150°C or
greater to run turbines.

CONVERSION =
EFFICIENCY

energy output
= 10%–25%
Natural steam is at a lower
energy input

temperature than that produced
by a boiler

2. Flash steam: requires natural
geothermal temperatures of
180°C or more. High pressure
steam is pulled into a low
pressure separator which
creates a powerful flash steam.
3. Binary cycle: can operate
with water temperatures as low
as 57°C. This moderate heat
is used to generate steam in
a secondary fluid with a low
boiling point.
NESJAVELLIR GEOTHERMAL POWER PLANT, ÞINGVELLIR, ICELAND

Image courtesy of Gretar Ivarsson.

Geothermal power harnesses the natural force of thermal energy from
deep underground which comes both from residual heat from the
formation of planet Earth and from heat that is constantly generated by
radioactive decay.
The ability to harness the earth’s geothermal energy is somewhat limited
by site dependency (located near thermal plumes in the earth’s crust),
though recent technological advancements in drilling have extended the
range. Advanced drilling technologies may have the potential to trigger
seismic events by creating new fissures where tectonic pressure has built up
over time.
The overall efficiency of the plant can be increased if exhaust heat from the
turbine is captured and used for other purposes.
The earth’s natural insulation can be used in any location as part of a
ground source heat pump. While not actively generating electricity, this is
a great method of energy conservation.
46

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

water

OTHER TECHNOLOGIES

DYNAMIC TIDAL POWER (DTP)

This is an untested technology that could theoretically produce large
amounts of power in the range of 10,000MW capacity by creating
extremely large artificial jetties into the ocean that would be shaped like a
“T” as viewed from the sky. The top of the “T” would serve to separate tidal
action on either side of the long leg that connects to the land. Computer
simulation models have shown that the length of the system would have
to be in the area of 30km to be viable, which would require an extremely
large capital expense. There may be negative impacts to marine habitat by
building such a extensive structure out into the ocean.
OTHER WAVE ENERGY CONVERTERS (WEC)

Experiments are being done on a wide range of technologies to convert
wave energy to electricity. In addition to the surface-following, buoy,
oscillating wave surge, and overtopping varieties, there are also those that
use an oscillating water column at the shoreline and other techniques to
convert the kinetic energy of waves to electricity.
Each of these mechanical systems can use a variety of electric energy
conversion technologies. These include: hydraulic ram, elastomeric hose
pump, pump-to-shore, hydraulic turbine, air compression with air turbine,
and direct linear generator.
HYDROELECTRIC BARREL (HEB)

Mike Lowery has developed a floating
waterwheel that spins on the surface
of a river or stream. The treading of
the outer surface keeps the barrel
from sinking (counteracts the Coanda
effect).

Image created by Paul Price and
used with permission of HEB.

47

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

bio

BIOMASS

Biomass is considered a
sustainable energy resource
because it is a product of
organic processes which
naturally regenerate at a rapid
cycle (as opposed to fossil
fuel energy sources which
take millions of years to form
naturally).

BIOGAS AND LANDFILL GAS

Conversion efficiency is determined by the method used to convert the
biofuel into mechanical or electrical energy

Biomass can be combusted
directly as a solid fuel or
converted to liquid or gas
biofuels. These biofuels can be
used in either a combustion
engine (conversion to
mechanical energy) or in a fuel
cell (conversion to electrical
energy).
LANDFILL GAS INFRASTRUCTURE AT FRESHKILLS PARK,
THE FORMER FRESH KILLS LANDFILL, NEW YORK CITY

Photo by Robert Ferry.

Biogas is created through the breakdown of any organic material
(biomass) in an oxygen-poor environment. The resulting gas by-product
is mostly methane and carbon dioxide. Biogas is similar in composition
to conventional natural gas and as such can be compressed or fed into a
municipal gas grid. It can be used for many different purposes including
cooking, heating, lighting, transportation, and electricity production.
It can be either tapped from the underground activity in a landfill site, or
it can be produced in specially constructed anaerobic digester tanks.
Farms with such tanks can process manure into biogas reducing the
amount of nitrous dioxide and methane that would otherwise enter the
atmosphere. These two gases have a far greater atmospheric warming
effect than does carbon dioxide (nitrous dioxide = 310 times greater, and
methane = 21 times greater).

48

bio
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Alcohol biofuels like ethanol
are produced through the
fermentation of sugars from
high carbohydrate content
plants such as corn, potato,
beet, wheat, or sugarcane.

BIOMASS
ALCOHOL BIOFUEL
ETHANOL

Conversion efficiency is determined by the method used to convert the
biofuel into mechanical or electrical energy

Other (more costly) processes
can use wood product waste
and fibrous grasses such as
switchgrass that grow very
quickly.
Ethanol can be used as an
additive to gasoline or it can
be used in a majority ethanol
mix such as “E-85” (ethanol
85%) in engines that have
been appropriately modified.

Some concerns over the proliferation of “first generation” ethanol type biofuels
include:
FOOD VS. FUEL: with the world frequently experiencing food shortages and
people suffering from starvation, it is not wise to convert useful food resources
into fuels if other alternatives are available. Ethanol use has been promoted by
the agricultural industry lobby because higher corn prices result from increased
demand.
CONVENTIONAL OIL PRICE DEFLATION: the abundant use of biofuels has

kept oil prices below where they would otherwise be. Some estimates put the
deflation at as much as 25%. The price deflation of oil may contribute to a
greater and longer lasting reliance on conventional fossil fuels.

LOSS OF BIODIVERSITY AND DEFORESTATION: with more demand for

sugarcane and high sugar corn, fields are dedicated to monoculture.

POLLUTION: the combustion of ethanol produces carcinogenic by-products
such as formaldehyde and acetaldehyde.
WATER: crops that most easily produce the best performing biofuels require
significant irrigation resources.

As a response to these issues, new methods have evolved as second, third, and
fourth generation biofuel technologies (see subsequent pages).

49

bio
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Diatoms or algae can be
used as the raw organic
material (feedstock) for
butanol production instead
of agricultural crops like
corn or sugar cane.

BIOMASS
ALCOHOL BIOFUEL
BIOBUTANOL FROM DIATOM
OR ALGAE (SOLALGAL FUEL)

Conversion efficiency is determined by the method used to convert the
biofuel into mechanical or electrical energy

The biobutanol conversion
process can be powered
(catalyzed) entirely by solar
energy.
When algae is used as the
feedstock and solar power
as the energy source, the
resultant biobutanol from
this process is known as
Solalgal fuel.

DRAWING OF DIATOMS

From Ernst Haeckel’s Kunstformen der Natur (Artforms of nature) (1904).

Butanol can be used in gasoline engines without engine modification. The
exact same fuel can be produced from fossil fuels or biomass. Biobutanol is
that made from biomass. The process is similar to the way that ethanol can
be formed via (anaerobic) fermentation processes. Butanol production uses
a specialized bacteria, clostridium acetobutylicum, instead of yeast.
Clostridium acetobutylicum is also known as the Weizmann organism.
Chaim Weizmann first used this bacteria in 1916 for the production
of acetone from starch. The butanol was a large by-product of this
fermentation (twice as much butanol was produced as was acetone).
The process also creates a recoverable amount of H2 and a number of other
by-products: lactic and propionic acids, acetic, isopropanol, and ethanol.

50

bio
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

The process of methanolysis
that creates biodiesel fuel
from biomass has its origins
in experiments to produce
glycerine for explosives during
World War II.

BIOMASS
BIOFUEL
BIODIESEL

Conversion efficiency is determined by the method used to convert the
biofuel into mechanical or electrical energy

The chemical processes that go
into transesterification, and the
reliance on the availability of
glycerol, sodium hydroxide and
other compounds, make this
type of biodiesel production
relatively expensive.
Production costs can be in the
range of $2 per gallon (using
soybean oil)§ or $84 per barrel.

A SUNFLOWER FIELD IN FARGO, NORTH DAKOTA

Image courtesy of the Agricultural Research Service of the
US Department of Agriculture. www.ars.usda.gov

Using a process known as transesterification, naturally occurring oils or fats
(biolipids) are transformed into liquid diesel fuel that can be used in most
diesel engines. The raw material, or feedstock, can be animal fat, vegetable
oil, soy, rapeseed, jatropha, mahua, mustard, flax, sunflower, palm, hemp,
field pennycress, pongamia pinnata, or algae.
The specific chemical process (type of transesterification) when applied
to biodiesel production is called methanolysis. It requires the addition of
alcohol to the biolipid in the presence of an acid or base catalyst. While
complicated chemically, the process does not require added heat. The same
process can be used for plastic recycling.

§
Michael J. Haas, Andrew J. McAloon, Winnie C. Yee, Thomas A. Foglia
(US Department of Agriculture). A process model to estimate biodiesel production costs.
Bioresource Technology 97 (2006). 671–678

51

bio
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

The fractional distillation
process required to produce
green diesel from biolipid
feedstock requires heating
the feedstock to very high
temperatures (approximately
600°C). This is usually done
by combusting fossil fuels.

BIOMASS
BIOFUEL
GREEN DIESEL OR
RENEWABLE DIESEL

Conversion efficiency is determined by the method used to convert the
biofuel into mechanical or electrical energy

The vaporized feedstock
rises up a distillation column
where it is separated into its
constituent parts and cooled.

ALGAE GROWING IN SUSAN GOLDEN’S LAB AT UC SAN DIEGO

Image courtesy of UC San Diego.

Green diesel uses naturally occurring oils (biolipids) to produce diesel
fuel. Natural oils can be extracted from canola, algae, jatropha, salicornia,
or tallow. It differs from biodiesel in that it uses traditional fractional
distillation methods to process the oils rather than transesterification.
This type of green diesel should not be confused with fossil-fuel based
diesel that has been dyed green to distinguish its quality.
The benefit of algae cultivation as feedstock is that it can be produced
using ocean water or wastewater (it does not require fresh water resources)
and that it is biodegradable and relatively harmless to the environment if
spilled. Algae costs somewhat more to produce per unit of feedstock mass
(compared to soybean) due to the complexity of cultivation, but it can be
converted into much more fuel energy per unit of feedstock mass, which
more than makes up for this difference.

52

bio
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Syngas is combustible and
can be used in internal
combustion engines, but
it contains less than half
of the energy density when
compared to natural gas.

BIOMASS
BIOFUEL
SYNGAS

Conversion efficiency is determined by the method used to convert the
biofuel into mechanical or electrical energy

It can also be used in the
creation of synthetic natural
gas or synthetic petroleum
by a technique known as the
Fischer–Tropsch process.

Syngas is a mixture of carbon monoxide and hydrogen that is created by
partially combusting (in a medium-low oxygen environment) any material
rich in carbon content including biomass and even plastic waste. It can
also be produced from coal gasification, but that particular method is not
recommended by this guide.
The name “syngas” comes from its use as an intermediate in the production
of synthetic natural gas (SNG) and for producing ammonia or methanol.
Syngas can also be used as an intermediate in producing synthetic
petroleum for use as a fuel or lubricant.
Syngas production has been shown to be possible using solar energy as the
single source of heat in the process.

53

bio
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Vegetable oil used as fuel can
be either waste vegetable oil
(WVO) left over from its first
use such as food frying, or
it can be straight vegetable
oil (SVO) also known as pure
plant oil (PPO).

BIOMASS
BIOFUEL
VEGETABLE OIL

Conversion efficiency is determined by the method used to convert the
biofuel into mechanical or electrical energy

WASTE VEGETABLE OIL CONVERSION

Image courtesy of Dr. Dave’s Automotive.

Vegetable oil can be used in some older diesel engines or in newer engines
that are modified. Modifications typically incorporate systems to preheat
the oil to allow for proper atomization of the fuel.
In many cases, there is a greater wear and tear on the engine parts from
100% vegetable oil use due to its high viscosity. This can be mitigated by
burning conventional diesel at the beginning and the end of the cycle and/
or by cutting the vegetable oil with conventional diesel.
Vegetable oil can also be blended with gasoline, diesel, or kerosene, to
reduce viscosity, but this has had generally poor results in sustained
practical use.

54

bio
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

A list of hydrocarbon
plant families:
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	
•	

Euphorbiaceae
Apocynaceae
Asclepiadaceae
Sapotaceae
Moraceae
Dipterocarpaceae
Compositae (sunflower)
Leguminosae

BIOMASS
BIOFUEL
HYDROCARBON PLANTS
AND BIOGASOLINE

Conversion efficiency is determined by the method used to convert the
biofuel into mechanical or electrical energy

Some algae also produce
hydrocarbons.
Dr. M. Calvin (1979) was
the first to collect the
hydrocarbons from plants of
the Euphorbiaceae family.

EUPHORBIUM RESINIFERA (EUPHORBIACEAE)

Image from Franz Eugen Köhler’s Medizinal-Pflanzen, 1887.

Hydrocarbon plants, such as Euphorbia lathyris and Euphorbia tirucalli,
produce terpenoids in sufficient quantities through their metabolic
processes that it is possible to convert them directly into gasoline-like fuels.
Biogasoline is usually produced from algae using complex industrial
conversion processes such as deoxygenation/reforming or hydrotreating.
The resulting fuel is very similar to conventional gasoline but with higher
octane levels. It is not an alcohol fuel like ethanol.

55

bio
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Pyrolysis is the same process
that occurs when you roast
vegetables, bake a pie, or
grill a cheese sandwich.
In dry conditions, the
carbohydrates present on
the surface of these foods
undergo pyrolysis and leave
behind the darkened brown
crust or black residue of
charcoal. Controlled pyrolysis
of sugar (170°C) results in
caramel.

BIOMASS
BIOFUEL
PYROLYSIS DERIVED FUELS

Conversion efficiency is determined by the method used to convert the
biofuel into mechanical or electrical energy

Pyrolysis is a different
process than combustion,
occurring generally below
ignition temperature.

BIOCHAR RESEARCH AT UPPSALA UNIVERSITY

Photo by Tor Kihlberg.

Pyrolysis is a high temperature and high pressure thermochemical
decomposition process that differs from anaerobic digestion or
fermentation and requires very little water.
The process requires pressure and temperatures of over 430°C. It can be
used in controlled conditions and with biomass feedstock to produce biooils which resemble light crude oil.
Flash pyrolysis, in which feedstock is heated quickly for two seconds to
between 350°C and 500°C, is the most efficient method.
Pyrolysis can also be used to create biochar from organic waste and
charcoal from wood feedstock. Biochar is useful as a fertilizer, and both
can be combusted for energy.

56

bio
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

IMPORTANT:
The by-products of solid
biofuel combustion are very
hazardous to human health
and include high quantities
of the greenhouse gases that
are directly responsible for
global climate change.

BIOMASS
BIOFUEL
SOLIDS

Conversion efficiency is determined by the method used to convert the
biofuel into mechanical or electrical energy

A strong reliance on
solid biomass energy in
the developing world is
responsible for highly
elevated rates of respiratory
diseases, especially among
women who are exposed to
the toxic fumes for extended
periods every day during
cooking activities.

This category includes combustion of any renewable solid organic
material such as wood or charcoal. We must include this category in this
guide because it is technically a renewable energy source. However the
combustion of solid biomass contributes heavily to greenhouse gases and
the harvesting of wood for this purpose increases deforestation.
Conversion to mechanical, heat, or electrical energy is generally inefficient,
and the environmental and human health costs are too high for biomass
energy to be used on a large scale.
Solid biomass was the predominant form of energy prior to the advent
of coal mining. This transition began to occur in the late medieval period
(around 1500) in Europe, when unsustainable use of wood as fuel had led
to massive deforestation§.

§
Norman F. Cantor (1993). The Civilization of the Middle Ages: The Life and Death of
a Civilization. Harper Collins. p. 564.

57

bio

BIOMASS

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

WtE is generally preferable
to landfill waste disposal
even though WtE results in
emissions of CO2 and other
greenhouse gases.

WASTE TO ENERGY (WTE)

Conversion efficiency is determined by the method used to convert the
biofuel into mechanical or electrical energy

Limestone scrubbers can
greatly reduce the emission
of harmful chemicals from
incineration, and while there
is CO2 released, the effect
of this is less than the more
toxic greenhouse gases that
are produced by landfill
offgassing of methane, even
if much of that methane is
captured.

TREZZO SULL’ADDA 3 WASTE TO ENERGY PLANT IN MILAN, ITALY

Image courtesy of Falck Renewables SpA.

WtE is the use of non-recyclable waste for combustion (incineration) to
generate electricity, or (in a small number of cases) for processing into
methane or similar fuel.
There are some emerging WtE technologies which do not require
incineration (some of which have been discussed above):
	
	
	
	

GASIFICATION (produces hydrogen, synthetic fuels)
THERMAL DEPOLYMERIZATION (produces synthetic crude oil)
PYROLYSIS (produces combustible tar, bio-oil, and biochars)
PLASMA ARC GASIFICATION, PGP (produces syngas)

Non-thermal

	
	
	

technologies:

ANAEROBIC DIGESTION (biogas rich in methane)
FERMENTATION PRODUCTION (ethanol, lactic acid, hydrogen)
MECHANICAL BIOLOGICAL TREATMENT (MBT)

58

bio
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

The University of Queensland,
Australia, completed a
prototype MFC in partnership
with Foster’s Brewing.

BIOMASS
MICROBIAL FUEL CELLS
(MFC)

Conversion efficiency is determined by the method used to convert the
biofuel into mechanical or electrical energy

The prototype converts
brewery wastewater into
carbon dioxide, clean water,
and 2KW of power.
The idea of using microbial
cells in an attempt to produce
electricity was first conceived
at the turn of the nineteenth
century. M.C. Potter was the
first to perform work on the
subject in 1911.

MICROBES

Image courtesy of Rocky Mountain Laboratories, NIAID, NIH.

Microbial Fuel Cells produce electricity by harnessing the natural bioelectrical systems that convert chemical energy into electrical energy
in anaerobic microbial ecosystems. The by-products of the electricity
production are water and carbon dioxide (CO2 emissions may be minimal).
There are two types of MFC:
MEDIATOR MICROBIAL FUEL CELL

Most of the microbial cells are electrochemically inactive. The electron
transfer from microbial cells to the electrode is facilitated by mediators
such as thionine, methyl viologen, methyl blue, etc., which are expensive
and toxic.
MEDIATOR-FREE MICROBIAL FUEL CELL

Mediator-free microbial fuel cells do not require a mediator but use
electrochemically active bacteria to transfer electrons to the electrode.
Mediator-less microbial fuel cells can run on wastewater and derive energy
directly from certain aquatic plants.
59

other
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

There are many different
ways that kinetic energy
(natural or man-made) can
be harvested and converted
to electrical energy.

KINETIC ENERGY
HARVESTING

Conversion efficiency varies by technology

PAVEGEN SYSTEMS PAVER IN A LONDON SIDEWALK

Image courtesy of Pavegen Systems Ltd. www.pavegen.com
PIEZOELECTRIC GENERATORS convert mechanical strain into electrical
energy. They can be inserted into shoes or in walkway pavers to harvest the
energy of walking or jumping.
AMBIENT RADIATION from radio transmitters could potentially be collected
and converted into usable electricity.
PYROELECTRIC EFFECT

converts temperature change into electric current.

THERMOELECTRICS was discussed in the Solar section as it referred to the
use of the device to harness heat energy that is generated by the sun. Other
applications of the technology could be used to harvest heat energy from
sources that would otherwise be wasted.
ELECTROSTATIC devices can harvest vibration energy and convert it into
electricity. One example is the regenerative shock absorber that is planned
for use in electric vehicles.

60

other
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Microharvesting is the
process by which low levels
of natural energy that would
otherwise be dissipated
or wasted is captured and
converted into electrical
energy. The natural energy
can be in any form (e.g., solar
power, mechanical vibrations,
thermal energy, wind energy,
salinity gradients).

MICROHARVESTING

Conversion efficiency varies by technology

The harvested micropower
can be stored and/or used
to power small, wireless
autonomous devices,such
as those used in wearable
electronics, wireless sensor
networks, and biomedical
devices.
PIEZOELECTRIC MICROHARVESTER

Image courtesy of Ethem Erkan Aktakka, Ph.D. and the
University of Michigan. www.eecs.umich.edu/~aktakka

There are various technologies in use that harvest energy from
blood sugar and tree sugars for conversion into electricity to power very
small biological devices and monitoring equipment. Other advanced
technologies include electroactive polymers, nanogenerators, and noise
harvesting devices.
Energy harvesters provide a very small amount of power for low-energy
electronics. While the input fuel to some large-scale generation costs
money (oil, coal, etc.), the energy source for energy harvesters is present as
ambient background and is free.
For example, temperature gradients exist from the operation of a combustion
engine, and in urban areas there is a large amount of electromagnetic energy
in the environment because of radio and television broadcasting.
Output is measured in: milliwatts (10-3 W), microwatts (10-6 W), and
nanowatts (10-9 W).
61

other
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Since some forms of
renewable energy do not
produce consistent power
twenty-four hours a day
(base load power), it is
important to develop
methods of energy storage
that are in themselves
ecological and do not
cause more harm in their
production and disposal
than the old forms of
electrical generation
that renewable energy is
replacing.

ENERGY STORAGE
CHEMICAL:
BATTERY, HYDROGEN, AND
SYNTHETIC GAS

Conversion efficiency varies by technology

1MW SODIUM SULFUR (NaS) BATTERIES FOR GRID STABILITY

Image courtesy of Younicos.

While there are great transitional applications for lithium-ion, nickelmetal hydride, sodium-sulphur, and other electrochemical batteries,
especially as it pertains to transportation, these may not be the best long
term solution for utility-scale energy storage since the metals that go
into their production are not in themselves entirely renewable. There are
however some successful applications of high capacity battery storage such
as the 1MW units used in the Younicos Island Systems.
Electrical power can be used to produce hydrogen gas which can then be
used to power hydrogen fuel cells with water as the only product required
during production and the only by-product output during consumption.
Biofuels and methane gas can be considered a type of energy storage. If
renewable energy is the power used in the processing of these fuels then
the energy that is embodied in them can be considered entirely renewable.

62

other
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Flywheels can provide
continuous (regulated)
energy output in any
situation where the energy
input is not continuous.

ENERGY STORAGE
MECHANICAL

Conversion efficiency varies by technology

The use of the flywheel for
efficient use of mechanical
energy dates back to the
Neolithic spindle.

EXAMPLE OF A FLYWHEEL FROM A HYBRID AUTO ENGINE

Image courtesy of Ricardo.

Compression of gas or water can be used during times of peak capacity.
Then the pressure can be released during times of lower production to
augment power. This can be accomplished in very large quantities with the
use of underground cavities.
Mechanical Flywheels can be used to store energy. They consist of heavy
weighted round cylinders which are designed to rotate on a central axis
with as little friction as possible. Electrical energy can be put into the
flywheel causing it to rotate up to very high rotations per minute speeds.
Then when energy is required at a later time, the rotational energy is
extracted from the flywheel, slowing its rotation down.
Hydroelectrical Pumped Storage uses conventional dammed
hydroelectrical technology to fill a reservoir with water while there is
access to inexpensive electrical power. The water is then released to power
turbines when electricity is required (during times of day when the cost per
KWh is higher).
63

other

ENERGY STORAGE
THERMAL

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Conversion efficiency varies by technology

GEMASOLAR PLANT

Image courtesy of Torresol Energy.

Thermal energy storage is storage of energy in the form of heat. Some
concentrated solar power plants use liquid sodium or other thermal
storage mediums that store heat for long periods and allow for the
operation of steam turbines for as many as 17 hours after the sun has set.
These systems have the potential to provide base load power from the sun.
Alternatively, energy can be stored by cooled liquids during off-peak
hours (and when temperatures are cooler) that can then be used for air
conditioning purposes in the daytime.

64

other
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

ENERGY STORAGE
UPDATED GRID

ELECTRICAL TRANSMISSION PYLONS

Photo by Robert Ferry.

With a large enough, well interconnected, and technologically
sophisticated power grid, intermittent energy generation can be managed
within limits by allowing peak electrical generation capacity in some
locations to make up for lower capacity in other locations.

65

other
a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

ENERGY CONSERVATION
DEMAND SIDE MANAGEMENT

If the end use of electricity can be managed through energy efficient
architecture and through the application of smart meters, smart appliances,
and smart grids, peaks and valleys in demand can be minimized. A
widespread application of intelligent energy infrastructure will serve to
mitigate the problem of renewable energy source intermittency.
Smart grid technology allows end users to monitor in real time the amount
of energy available in the grid at any point in time and plan their use
patterns accordingly. Appliance control technologies can be designed to
perform this function automatically (you load your washing machine and
press the start button, but it instead informs you that it will be waiting for
two hours before beginning its operation because it senses a demand peak
at the moment).
Fully realized systems will price consumer energy consumption according
to KWh spot prices as they fluctuate with demand.

66

a field guide to renewable energy technologies land art generator initiative

Over the past 200 years non-renewable
energy resources have helped to bring
about great advancements. But their
consumption has also brought great
blight upon the health of the planet and
her inhabitants, and our easy access to
them is soon running out. But change is
just around the corner...
Right now is a great time to help
contribute to this change. The more
we can increase public awareness and
acceptance of renewable energy and
local applications, the more direct our
path will be to a truly sustainable world.

67

water

wind

solar
All images are the copyright of the owners listed in each credit.

bio

This work is licensed under a Creative Commons
Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivs 3.0 Unported License.

other

a field guide
to renewable
energy
technologies

This guide is available for free download in pdf format at

www.landartgenerator.org
EDITION

February 2012 1st edition
AUTHORS

Robert Ferry & Elizabeth Monoian
A project of Society for Cultural Exchange &
Land Art Generator Initiative

THANK YOU to all of the institutions, companies, and individuals who have
generously allowed the use of their images.

BACK COVER IMAGE
THE WINDMILL, HAMMERSTEIN’S PARADISE GARDENS, NEW YORK (1900–1906)

Image in the public domain. Courtesy of the Detroit Publishing Company Collection
& the Library of Congress.

