 

BEYOND NEWBORN HEARING SCREENING: 

Recognizing the Signs of Late Onset Hearing Loss in Infants and 

Young Children 

 
 
 

Leisha Eiten, M.A., CCC-A, Boys Town National Research Hospital 
 
With 39 out of 50 states mandating universal newborn hearing screening (UNHS), and newborn hearing 
screening data being collected from all 40 states, it would be easy to assume that the identification of 
permanent childhood hearing loss is guaranteed.  Yet, the fact is that some childhood hearing losses 
have a later onset and will not be identified through newborn screeninSg methods.  This article responds 
to some basic questions about late-onset hearing loss in infancy and childhood. 
 
What is the prevalence of childhood hearing loss?  
 
Current UNHS statistics indicate an overall hearing loss prevalence rate of 1-2 per 1000 at birth.  These 
prevalence statistics are consistent across the US and are not dependent on the particular hearing 
screening method being used.  Statistical information about the prevalence of hearing loss in older 
children is difficult to find and interpret for a number of reasons.  Late onset or progressive hearing loss 
can be due to hereditary factors, infection, trauma, noise exposure or teratogens.  Studies also vary in 
how significant hearing loss is defined.  As a result, the prevalence of late onset hearing loss is not well 
defined.  In general there is a trend toward increasing rates of hearing loss as children get older.   
 
Can newborn hearing screening miss hearing loss that is present at birth? 
 
It is possible for some children to have a mild or minimal hearing loss at birth and pass universal hearing 
screening.  This is due, at least in part, on the underlying assumptions about newborn hearing screening.  
Any type of universal screening program needs to achieve a low false-alarm rate and a high hit rate.  
The goal for UNHS is that few children are referred for additional, more expensive testing who do not 
need it and those who are referred have a high likelihood of having hearing loss.  To meet these 
requirements, current UNHS methods may not identify children with mild hearing losses.  If no further 
audiological monitoring is being completed within the childs medical home, the result could be late 
identification of milder degrees of hearing loss. 
 
In some instances, mild hearing loss that is present at birth may progress to more severe hearing loss 
after the child goes home from the hospital.  Rapidly progressive hearing loss can be associated with 
several congenital conditions, including Cytomegalovirus (CMV) and Large Vestibular Aqueduct (LVA) as 
well as some genetically inherited losses. 
 
What are the most common causes of late-onset hearing loss? 
 
The major categories of late-onset loss are acquired, structural, and genetic. 

 

 

Structural:  Structural causes of late-onset hearing loss may occur with a number of syndromes.  
Structural deformities of the cochlea such as LVA and Mondini malformation are congenital but not 
always related to a specific syndrome.  Cochlear malformations affect hearing differently in different 
children.  Some hearing losses may occur earlier and others may not present until later childhood.  
Structural malformations of the inner ear are associated with sudden and extreme progression and 
fluctuation of hearing.   

Genetic:  Genetic causes of late-onset hearing loss may be syndromic or non-syndromic.  Full 
explanations of specific syndrome characteristics can be found online on OMIM, the Online Mendelian 
Index in Man at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/entrez/query.fcgi?db=OMIM. 

Syndromic losses include: 

  Pendreds Syndrome, which is associated with LVA 
  Branchio-Oto-Renal Syndrome (BOR), associated with Mondini deformities 
  Alports Syndrome with progressive renal failure and late occurring, progressive hearing 

Acquired:  Among acquired late-onset losses, congenital CMV (both symptomatic and non-symptomatic) 
is the most common and accounts for around 1/3 of all hearing loss in children.  Hearing loss associated 
with CMV may be both late onset and progressive within the first years of life.  Even asymptomatic 
congenital CMV infection carries an increased risk of hearing loss.  Hearing loss prevalence rates of 7-
15% in asymptomatic cases have been reported.  Congenital symptomatic CMV infection carries greater 
risk for hearing loss and a higher percentage of children with active CMV symptoms at birth have hearing 
loss identified through UNHS, with further progression reported within the first 2-3 years (Fowler, et al 
1997; Barbi, et al 2003).  Other childhood illnesses may also cause hearing loss.  These include viral or 
bacterial meningitis, mumps and other viral infections that cause a high fever or central sequelae.  Head 
trauma with skull fracture is one type of traumatic late-onset loss.  Chemotherapeutic agents containing 
platinum, such as cisplatin, are among the best known ototoxic medications. 

  Stickler Syndrome, a connective tissue syndrome with late occurring vision problems and 

  Usher Syndrome with progressive blindness and deafness.  Usher Type I is associated 

with more severe hearing loss, lack of vestibular function and blindness.  Types II and III 
typically show less severe hearing loss, less severe vestibular effects and more residual 
vision, with Type III occurring rarely 

  Neurofibromatosis Type II with progressive hearing loss resulting from auditory nerve 

loss 

hearing loss 

tumors 

  Other neurodegenerative syndromes may be associated with late onset hearing loss, but 

are not as common as the syndromes listed above (e.g. Refsum Disease) 

Non-syndromic losses include: 

  Dominant-progressive hearing loss 
 
  Connexin 26, which may have late-onset hearing loss in rare occurrences.  A small 

Family history of late-occurring hearing loss 

number of studies have shown progressive hearing loss with Connexin 26 

 
What are the main risk factors associated with late-onset loss? 

Family history of late-onset hearing loss 

  Congenital CMV infection 
  Meningitis or mumps infections 
 
  Syndromes associated with late-onset hearing loss  
  Head trauma, especially with basal or temporal bone fracture 
  Chemotherapy, especially when administered in conjunction with radiation 

 
How can Primary Care Providers monitor for late-onset loss? 
 
Performing surveillance and screening within the medical home is the best way to monitor infants and 
young children for late-onset hearing loss.  Primary Care Providers are the medical providers who see the 
child most often and are able to review auditory skill development and developmental milestones at well-

child visits.  An immediate referral for audiological evaluation is warranted if parents express concerns 
about a childs hearing responsiveness or speech and language development.  For young children and 
infants under 3 years of age, typical in-office hearing screening methods are not effective and a referral 
to a pediatric audiologist is recommended.  All children with an identified risk factor for late-onset hearing 
loss should receive a comprehensive audiological assessment as soon as behavioral testing can be 
completed.  Even if that child has passed newborn screening and no parental concerns have been 
expressed, a comprehensive evaluation can identify subtle or progressive losses which require 
remediation and monitoring.  A combination of electrophysiological and developmentally-appropriate 
behavioral tests can be used to test hearing at any age and any developmental level. 
 
Early identification of hearing loss leads to better speech, language and learning outcomes for children.  
Knowledge of the risk factors for late-onset hearing loss and continued vigilance in screening, monitoring 
and referral are vital.  The goal is to insure that the listening and learning needs of all children are met. 

 
Fowler, K., McCollister, F., Dahle, A., Boppana, S., Britt, W., Pass, R. (1997). Progressive and fluctuating 

sensorineural hearing loss in children with asymptomatic congenital cytomegalovirus infection. 
The Journal of Pediatrics, 130(4);624-630. 

 
Supported by the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders (NIDCD R25 
DC006460-03) 

References: 
 
Barbi, M., Binda, S., Caroppo, S., Abrosetti, U., Corbetta, C., Sergi, P. (2003). A wider role for congenital 

cytomegalovirus infection in sensorineural hearing loss. Pediatric Infectious Disease Journal, 
22(1);39-42. 

 

