Data Communications
Prof. A. Pal
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture 18
Switching Techniques: Circuit Switching
Hello viewers welcome to today’s lectures on switching techniques. So far we have
assumed that two devices or equipment are directly communicating with each other and
for that purpose whatever protocol and techniques are necessary we have discussed like
the HDLC which we have discussed in detail. However, there are many situations where
two equipments are not directly connected so in such a case they perform communication
through a number of intermediate equipment or devices. So in such a situation the
technique that is adopted is known as switching technique and the switching techniques
can be broadly divided into two types; circuit switching and packet switching.
(Refer Slide Time: 03:00)

In today’s lecture we shall discuss about circuit switching. This is the outline of the
lecture. First we shall discuss why circuit switching, then in the context of circuit
switching we shall introduce to you Switched Communication Network that is the model
that is being used for communication. Then I shall discuss about the circuit switching
fundamentals their advantages and disadvantages then various concepts of switching that
is used in circuit switching such as space division switching and one application of that is
crossbar switches and Time Division Switching. Of course both of them have combine
having space and Time Division Switching. Then we shall discuss about how routing of
signal takes place in circuit switched networks and finally we shall discuss signaling in
circuit switched networks.

(Refer Slide Time: 03:15)

On completion of this lecture the student will be able to understand the need for circuit
switching, specify the components of a switched communication network, understand
how circuit switching takes place, understand how switching takes place using space
division and Time Division Switching, understand how routing is performed and finally
they will be able to understand how signaling is performed. So, let us consider the first
question how two devices perform communication when there are many devices?
Suppose you have got a number of equipments or stations say A B C D so in such a case
A wants to communicate with B C D may not be simultaneously but at a time A wants to
communicate with B or A wants to communicate with C or A wants to communicate with
D one possible alternative is to establish connection from A to B, A to C and also from A
to D.

(Refer Slide Time: 4:36)

Similarly it is necessary to establish communication from B to C, B to D and finally C to
D so we have to provide a number of links and it can be the shown that the total number
of links required for n such stations is equal to n into n minus 1 by 2 so that number is
very large. For example, here you have got four stations (Refer Slide Time: 5:10) so you
will require 4 into 3 by 2 is equal to 6 so if you count you will find that total number of
links is 6 that is 1 2 3 4 5 6 so you have got 1 2 3 4 5 and 6 so 6 links are necessary.
Hence this is known as mesh topology. Obviously when you have got a large number of
stations this kind of mesh topology is not practical. for example, if you have got hundred
nodes then you will get 100 into 99 by 2 so many links that means 99 into 99 so many
links will be necessary to establish a communication from any node to any node or any
station to any station so this is not a good choice.

(Refer Slide Time: 03:52)

So what is the alternative? One alternative is to use switched communication network. So
whenever you have got large number of devices then mesh topology is not practical so a
better alternative is to use switching techniques leading to switched communication
network.
(Refer Slide Time: 06:03)

So let me introduce to you what we mean by switched communication network.

(Refer Slide Time: 07:00)

In switched communication network we will find end devices namely essentially
computers, peripherals, communication equipments such as cell phones, laptops PDAs
and various other things and these are known as stations. The switching devices are
called nodes. That means we are using some additional devices intermediate devices
known as nodes and in such a situation some nodes connect to other nodes and some
nodes are attached to stations. Let me show you the network.
(Refer Slide Time: 07:06)

Here as you see these are the end stations A B C D E and on the other hand 1 2 3 4 5 6
are communication networks nodes so these are the nodes used as switches as

intermediate points for communication. How it is done? As you can see network topology
is not regular so as shown earlier there is the mesh topology there are other topologies
such as bass topology, ring topology, star topology etc. The bass topology is like this say
we have got a bass and on to that we can connect all the stations this is your bass
topology. So, in switched communication network you don’t have bass topology you
cannot use ring topology in which the stations are connected in the form a ring. So you
can see that each station is connected to the neighbor neither is star like this so we find
that in this case the topology is not regular. It uses FDM and TDM for node-to-node
communication.
So here you find node-to-node communication as you can see shown in different colors
from this station to node communication link. Here we find that this is narrower and this
is wider. Actually this one to two or one to three these are node-to-node links and this
links are of higher bandwidth. Since these links are with higher bandwidth and to make
maximal use of the bandwidth we use FDM or TDM techniques. We have already
discussed about the FDM and TDM techniques. We have also discussed how we can use
the higher bandwidth of links so these links are used as FDM and TDM.
There exist multiple paths between a source destination pair for better network reliability.
Here we find (Refer Slide Time: 9:25) it provides you a much higher reliability. for
example, if A wants to communicate with C it can communicate through the nodes 1 3
and 5 but if suppose one of the link is down or one of the nodes is down in such a case if
A can communicate through the node 1 2 6 and 4 or it can communicate through 1 2 4 5
so in this way several alternative routs are possible which increases the reliability of the
network and that is one objective of the switched network communication so that it
provides you higher reliability providing multiple paths.
Here another important feature is the switching nodes are not concerned with the contents
of data. That means whatever data is being sent by a station that is being communicated
by the node. In other words nodes can be considered as dumped devices. Whatever
received is being transmitted to other node or to the destination station node. So either
ways it is possible, a station will send to a node and the node will either send to another
node or it will go to another station as it is shown here (Refer Slide time: 10:43) and in
such a case the nodes do not modify the information or data. Their purpose is to provide a
switching facility that will move data from node-to-node until they reach the destination.
So their purpose essentially to communicate the data which is received from one end and
sent to another end connecting to a node or a station. This is the basic model of the
switched communication network and as I mentioned various switching techniques.
These are circuit switching, message switching and packet switching so there are three
alternatives.

(Refer Slide Time: 12:24)

In this lecture as I mentioned we shall be concerned with circuit switching and in circuit
switching the communication via circuit switching implies that there is a dedicated
communication path. So I am high lighting this so it is dedicated and this dedicated is
important because without setting up a dedicated no communication is possible in circuit
switched network. So it is the dedicated communication path between two stations. The
path is a connected sequence of links between network nodes. So it can be a connected
sequence of links. That means it is not necessary that there will be a direct link direct path
there may be a path to a number of nodes. So it can be a connected sequence of links
between network nodes. And on each physical link a logical channel is dedicated to the
connection. This is another important feature.
The circuit switching involves three important phases for communication. First one is
known as circuit establishment, then data transfer and third is circuit disconnect. The
circuit establishment phase is used to establish end to end connection before any transfer
of data. So before any transfer of data is performed you have to set up a direct link and
some segments of the circuit may be dedicated link while some other segments may be
shared. So there are two alternatives it can be dedicated or it can be shared.

(Refer Slide Time: 12:30)

Then in data transfer the transfer data is from the source to the destination. Once the link
is established whatever data is to be transferred is transferred from the source to
destination through the dedicated link already established in that circuit establishment
phase. then the data may be analog in nature or digital in nature either is possible
depending on the nature of network and the connection is generally full-duplex.
As I mentioned whenever two stations are connected usually the communication is fullduplex in nature. And finally once the data transfer is complete, circuit disconnect is
performed that terminates the connection at the end of data transfer; signals must be
propagated to deallocate the dedicated resources. So whatever link was established the
deallocation is done for that. Here it is shown how it is being performed.
So here the call request signal is going from A through node 1 to 2 then call request also
goes from node 2 to node 4 then another call request goes from node 4 to node 5 for
establishing connection from A to C. then once the call acknowledgement comes through
the already established path that is after the call request comes data is sent from A to C
through nodes 1 2 4 and 5 so this is how data is sent and after the data transfer is
complete the acknowledgement signal sequence comes from the other end from station C
to station A and the circuit disconnect is performed. This is how the data transfer takes
place in circuit switching.

(Refer Slide Time: 14:20)

This circuit switching technique was originally developed for handling voice traffic but is
now also used for data traffic.
As I mentioned this circuit switching concept was originally developed for public switch
telephone network, for voice communication but now it is also used for data transfer. And
as I already mentioned I am emphasizing that once the circuit is already established the
network is transparent to the users. That means what data is being sent will be sent and
information is transmitted at a fixed rate without no delay other than the required
propagation through the communication medium. That means after the link is established
there is no other delay in fault except the preposition time. Depending on the distance,
depending on the medium that is being used there will be some propagation time but
apart from the propagation time there is no other delay involved in this circuit switching
technique. And as I mentioned best known example is the Public Switched Telephone
Network that is being used in communication network so Public Switched Telephone
Network (PSTN) is the best example of circuit switching technique.

(Refer Slide Time: 15:25)

Now let us look at the advantages of this circuit switching technique. First it is fixed
bandwidth and guaranteed capacity. That means there is an end-to-end link and since
end-to-end link is there the bandwidth is fixed and it does not change.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:06)

And here the advantage is it gets guaranteed capacity. That means after the establishment
of the link is known then both the ends know what is the possible transfer rate and there
is no possibility of congestion. Since the links are having dedicated link there is no
possibility of sharing, there is no possibility of congestion. And the second important
advantage is there is low variance in end-to-end delay, there is a constant delay. As I said

this delay is essentially the propagation time so there is no other delay involved in this
communication.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:49)

Now let us look at the disadvantages. In this world nothing is one sided there will be
some disadvantage. The disadvantages are; the circuit establishment and circuit
disconnect introduces extra overhead and delay. As I have shown before any data transfer
is performed it is necessary to perform circuit establishment and at the end of transfer we
have to perform disconnection. So, disconnection has to be done. Both of these will take
some extra overhead and as a result it will involve some delay also particularly before
any data transfer can be performed. It allows you constant data from source to destination
and channel capacity is dedicated for the duration of the connection even if no data is
transferred. That means after circuit establishment if data is not transferred obviously the
bandwidth is wasted.
For example, you have a set of long distance call and after setting up the call if you don’t
talk even when you don’t talk you pay for the link or bandwidth. This is one
disadvantage. And it has been found that for voice connection although the utilization is
high the statistics show that 64 to 73% time one speaker is speaking, 3 to 7% time both
the speakers are speaking and 20 to 30% of the time both are silent.
Therefore as you can see even in voice communication the utilization is not very high it is
only 64 to 73% but for data communication which is burst in nature this inefficiency can
be very high. Particularly most of the time no data is generated and only sometimes a
burst of data is generated in data communication. So, in a typical user host data
connection the line utilization is very poor. And the irony is that whenever the user is not
using the bandwidth that others cannot use. This is another important disadvantage of
circuit switching.

Now let us focus on the function of the switching nodes which play a very important role
in circuit switching.
(Refer Slide Time: 21:29)

Let us consider the operation of a single circuit switch node comprising a collection of
stations attached to a central switching unit which establishes a dedicated path between
any two devices that wishes to communicate. A single node network or a particular node
will have these three functions, it will have a digital switch which provides a transparent
signal path between any pair of attached devices usually full-duplex, it will provide the
network interface, it represents the functions and hardware needed to connect digital
devices to the network like telephones so you have to interface your devices like
computers, telephones and modems to the network and for that purpose some interface
has been provided. And finally we require the control unit which maintains and tears
down a connection.
Here is the block diagram or of a circuit switch node. One node is shown here.

(Refer Slide Time: 21:41)

Here as you can see these are the lines through which the stations are connected so all the
stations are connected through these links and through this interface so this interface is
used for linking a number of stations and there is a control unit which performs the
linking with the help of this digital switch. So the control unit controls this digital switch
with the help of which the interface can be…….., for example in this case there is a link
between say 1 and this is 2, (refer Slide Time: 22:35) this is 3, this is 4, this is 5, this is 6,
7 and 8 you have eight lines and this 1 is connected to 6, 2 is connected to 4 and 3 is
connected to 1 and then 5 is connected to 7 so this digital switch connects each pair with
the help of the control unit. So this is the basic function that is being performed by circuit
switch node.
Now switching can be done in a number of ways. One technique is known as space
division switching. This was originally developed for the analog environment. You know
that telephone network was originally used for voice communication and as a
consequence it was developed for analog environment but subsequently it was carried
over through digital domain as in nowadays. So, in a space division switch the signal
paths are physically separated. Therefore physically separate paths are provided for each
of these links or paths from one to another so it is divided in space essentially it is a
crossbar matrix.

(Refer Slide Time: 23:08)

Let us have a look at the cross bar matrix.
(Refer Slide Time: 24:02)

So here you see you have got inputs and outputs. These are input lines and the output
lines and it is organized in the form of a two dimensional matrix and as you can see at the
crossing of each particle on horizontal line there is a cross and essentially at each cross
you have got an electromechanical switch or micro switch it is nothing but a micro
switch. So with the help of a micro switch either a connection can be established between
a vertical line with a horizontal line. for example here this is 6 and this is 8 so if this is
closed that means if this cross here is closed this mirco switch is closed then a path is

established between 6 and 8 (Refer Slide time: 24:55). So at any junction if the switch is
closed a path is established between the horizontal line and the vertical line connecting
that particular cross. So you see this is how the cross bar switch operates. However, it
uses electromechanical lineage or micro switches.
(Refer Slide Time: 25:22)

The basic building block of the switch is a metallic crosspoint or semiconductor gate that
can be enabled or disable by a control unit. That means the control unit performs the
function. as I have shown earlier there is a control unit and this control unit is controlling
the digital switch and digital switch in case of space division switching is this cross bar.
So this is how the cross bar switch works and originally these cross bar switches were
having metallic crosspoint or semiconductor gates that can be enabled or disabled by the
control unit.
Of course the early electromechanical switches were not very reliable they were bulky
they used to consume lots of power. But with the advancement of VLSI technology
nowadays the cross bar switches can be implemented with the help of semi conductor
devices. For example, the Xilinx crossbar switch using Field Programmable Gate Arrays
is available and it is based on reconfigurable routing infrastructure and in this Field
Programmable Gate Arrays based switches you can have the high capacity non-blocking
switches and it provides very high capacity varying from 64 by 64 or 1k by 1k so you can
have a very big cross bar switch such as o1k by 1k which operates at a very high speed
200 Mbps. Obviously the data rate is quite high and nowadays possible by using this
Field Programmable Gate Arrays and available from Xilinx.

(Refer Slide Time: 27:27)

Let me introduce the concept of blocking and non-blocking before I discuss the other
functions of the cross bar switch. An important characteristic of a circuit switch node is
whether it is blocking or non-blocking.
A blocking network is one which may be unable to connect two stations because all
possible paths between them are already in use. That means you may have number of
paths. For example, I have shown eight inputs and eight outputs if you are not able to
connect a particular pair because all the pairs are already used in such a case you call it
blocking. On the other hand a non-blocking network permits all stations to be connected
in pairs at once and grants all possible connection requests as long as the called party is
free. That means as long as the called party is free the non-blocking switching allows
connection between any pair of stations or inputs and outputs.
For a network which supports only voice traffics a blocking configuration may be
acceptable since most phone calls are of short duration.
What I am trying to emphasize here is that a blocking network is acceptable in voice
environment because most of the time people are not talking that means the usage is
much less. On the other hand in data applications the connection remains active for hours.
Usually whenever we are talking over a telephone we usually talk for a few minutes and
then disconnect the call. On the other hand for data applications the connection may be
active for hours and non-blocking configuration is desirable. What I am trying to tell is
for voice application blocking network is acceptable or for data communication the nonblocking network is desirable.

(Refer Slide Time: 29:52)

Now let us focus on the crossbar switch and what kind of limitations it has got. As you
have seen the number of crosspoints switch grows with the square of the number of
attached stations. Obviously as the number of inputs and outputs increase exponentially
at the rate of square……. for example if you are having let us assume 1000 input or 1000
output or 1000 by 1000 switch so in such a case we will require one million crosspoints.
That means a crosspoint is nothing but a electromechanical relay or an electronic switch
and in this case for 1k by 1k switch you will require one million that means ten to the
power six crosspoints so it is costly for a large switch. And another important
disadvantage is that the failure of a crosspoint prevents connection between the two
devices whose lines intersect at that crosspoint.
Let us go back to the diagram of the cross crossbar switch which will explain that.

(Refer Slide Time: 31:11)

Suppose this particular crosspoint or the switch has become faulty, if this becomes faulty
it is not possible to connect five with four so five and four cannot be connected if this
becomes faulty. So even when four is not busy the connection cannot be established
between four and five if there is failure fault here. That means the failure of a cross point
prevents connection between the two devices whose lines intersect at the crosspoint.
Another important disadvantage is that the cross points are inefficiently utilized. What do
you mean by that? We have seen that for a 1000 by 1000 network you will require one
million crosspoints. But are the one million crosspoints used efficiently? Unfortunately
no, even when it is used heavily may be 40 to 50 crosspoints are used but all the other
crosspoints remain idle. So only a small fraction are engaged even if all of the attached
devices are active that even when all the attached devices are active. That means
whenever you are active that means you have got n square crosspoints but at a time when
all pairs are connecting only n crosspoints remain busy so you see n square minus n
crosspoints remains idle so that is a large number. What is the solution to this? What is
the other alternative by which the efficiency can be increased? One better alternative is to
use multistage switches.

(Refer Slide Time: 33:22)

What is being done here is by splitting the cross bar switch into smaller units and
interconnecting them it is possible to build multistage switches with fewer crosspoints.
Here that example is shown which is nothing but a small 8 by 8 switch we have got eight
inputs and eight outputs. Instead of a single stage crossbar switch here you have got three
stage crossbar switches. As you can see here this is a 4 by 2 switch, this is a 2 by 2 switch
these are all crossbar switches and they are internal linked in this way.
Now how many crosspoints are here? If it is a single phase you will require 64 cross
points. So in this particular case as we shall see 4 into 2 is equal to 8 plus 8 is equal to 16
plus 4 is equal to 20 and another 20 so you will require 40 crosspoints so this is the
reduction. If it is large crossbar switch and if you use multistage switches then the
reduction is more significant. So in the previous example as I have explained the number
of crosspoints needed reduces from 64 to 40.

(Refer Slide Time: 34:31)

Another important advantage is that there is more than one path through the network to
connect two endpoints and this increases the reliability. For example, in this case suppose
one wants to communicate with five how connection can be done? One can be connected
through in this path using this path (Refer Slide Time: 35:03) or it can be connected using
this path so multiple paths are existing that increases the reliability. So if there is a failure
in one path another path can be used for establishing the connection so this is an
important advantage. Unfortunately there is a disadvantage because multistage switches
may lead to blocking but this problem can be tackled by increasing the number or size of
the intermediate switches which also increases the cost. That means although the
probability of blocking is reduced it will remain in case of multistage switches. Let us see
how it happens.

(Refer Slide Time: 35:52)

For example we would like to establish connection from 1 to three, two to four three to
sox and four to eight which is shown here. So 1, 2, 3 connection is established here then 2
to 4 connection is established in this manner but now how the connection can be done for
3 to 6. Now we find that 3 and 4 cannot be connected to 6 and 8 the reason is from this
switch (Refer Slide Time: 36:26) there is no other path available at this moment for
connecting 3 and 4 to 6 and 8 because from this crossbar switch there are two outputs and
both the outputs are now engaged for linking 1 to 3 and 2 to 4 and no other bars are
available so it leads to blocking. So, whenever we are using multistage switches
essentially it becomes blocking although it reduces the number of crosspoints. Now let us
consider another implementation based on Time Division Switching.

(Refer Slide Time: 37:02)

We have already discussed about TDM or Time Division Switching which is essentially
based on Time Division Multiplexing and here both voice and data can be transferred
using digital signals and all modern circuit switches use digital Time Division
Multiplexing techniques for establishing and maintaining circuits and synchronous TDM
allows multiple low speed bit streams to share a high speed line. We shall explain how
exactly this is being done.
A set of inputs is sampled in a round robin manner; the samples are organized serially
into slots to form a recurring frame of slots as we saw in TDM synchronous Time
Division Multiplexing. Then during successive time slots different I by O pairings are
enabled allowing a number of connections to be carried over the shared bus. Let us see
how exactly it is being done.
To keep up with the input lines the data rate on the bus must be high enough so that the
slots recur sufficiently frequently. That means we have to use high speed for Time
Division Multiplexing switch. For example, for 100 full-duplex lines at the rate of 19.200
Kbps the data rate on the bus must be greater than 1.92 Mbps. So the source destination
pairs corresponding to all active connections are stored in the control memory I shall
explain how exactly this is being done thus these slots need not specify the source
destination address because it is stored in the control memory.

(Refer Slide Time: 38:09)

So here for example we have a simple TDM where the switching is not done.
(Refer Slide Time: 38:55)

So in this case it is 1 2 3 4 where 1 is sending in data in slot A, 2 is sending in slot B, 3 is
sending in slot C and 4 is sending slot D and slot A is again taken to 1 and slot B data
goes to 2, slot C data goes to 3 and slot D data goes to….. this is the simple Time
Division Multiplexing. Obviously this will not serve our purpose so we have to use
something in between. The first thing that can be done is TSI. TSI stands for Time Slot
Interchange.

What Time Slot Interchange does is it essentially does the interchange of the slot. for
example, the connection is necessary from one to four so the data from 1 should go to 4
so this data is now in slot 4 then what comes from 2 goes to 1 so B goes to slot 1 data,
then 3 to 3 here there is no change and from 4 it goes to 1 so B goes to 1 so it is 1 to 4, 2
to 1, 3 to 3 and you can see D to A so this is how it is being interchanged so this data now
goes in the proper form. You can see here BDCA (Refer Slide Time: 40:45) so you see
all the data is going in this manner. So you find that this data communication is taking
place in this manner.
Now how exactly it is being done? It is being done in this manner.
(Refer Slide Time: 41:09)

So here you can see the data is coming in slots then it is stored in some memory so in this
memory the writing is done in a sequential manner that means 1 2 3 4 and then reading is
done selectively. That means here the writing takes place sequentially and reading takes
place sequentially that’s how the Time Slot Interchange takes place and data goes from 1
to 4, 2 to 1, 3 to 3 and 4 to 1. This is how it takes place in Time Slot Interchange.

(Refer Slide Time: 41:50)

Another alternative is the TDN bus switching. So here we use a high speed bus and here
the data comes at low speed and then is connected to a high speed bus. And for example
at slow speed whenever this switch is closed then this switch is closed 1 to 4, whenever
this switch 2 is closed then this 1 is closed and from the high speed bus the data goes
from this input to the output. So, for example here whatever data rate is here on this bus it
will be four times of that because it is doing the Time Division Multiplexing of data and
it is being read on 1 2 3 and 4 in this fashion. So it is essentially some kind of
Asynchronous Time Division Multiplexing that is being performed but however it is done
in a different way. From a high speed bus with the help of the control unit the reading is
taking place at different times. Therefore at different times it is coming from here 1 2 3 4
and here at different times it is being read by 1 2 3 4 in a different sequence. This is how
the TDM bus switching operates.

(Refer Slide Time: 43:10)

However, you can combine the space and Time Division Switching. we have already
discussed the Space Division Switching and Time Division Switching and it can be
combined here. So these are the typical TDM switches Time Division Switches and here
it is Space Division Switches which is nothing but a crossbar. Therefore as you can see
here this interchange can be done with the help of this crossbar switch.
Earlier we have seen the interchange was done with the help of memory or a first bus
here the cross bars switch does the necessary interchange. That means from any one of
the switch it will come here and then it can be taken to anyone of these multiplexes. So
here it is a multiplexer and here it is a demulitplexer. So, from any one of these
multiplexers it will come here and with the help of this cross bar switch it can be taken to
one of the demultiplexer and as you can sequence it can go to anyone of these lines. This
is how the space and time division switching are combined in implementing the circuit
switch nodes. And as I mentioned the most important application of circuit switching is
in telephone, the telephone network.

(Refer Slide Time: 44:25)

I have already discussed about the telephone network which is organized in a hierarchical
manner. As you know you have got end offices and with the help of local loop these are
connected to the end stations. So here you have the end stations which are connected
through the local loop with the end offices and the end offices are connected to the
Tandem offices and you have got trunk lines these are lines where we shall use the FDM
or TDM techniques and then Tandem offices are connected to regional offices.
So there is some kind of hierarchy here. That means say one end office will connect to a
number of stations so a number of stations will be connected. Similarly, a Tandem office
will connect to a number of end offices. These are end offices (Refer Slide Time: 45:36)
so these are stations or telephones you can say and this is your end office and these are all
local loops and these offices are connected to the Tandem offices and the Tandem offices
in turn are connected to the regional offices so several such Tandem offices are connected
to regional offices. Therefore in this way there is a hierarchical network used in Public
Service Telephone Network (PSTN).
Now let us consider the routing operation performed in circuit switch networks. As I
mentioned in large circuit switch network connections often require a path through more
than one switch that is the typical property of the switched communication network.

(Refer Slide Time: 46:32)

And here the basic objective is the efficiency and resilience. What do you really mean by
efficiency? Here we would like to utilize the minimum number of switches. Obviously
we would like to optimize on the hardware cost. On the other hand the resilience wants
high reliability. High reliability means for example you may decide the switch capacity
on the basis of average traffic. However, there are situations where the traffic will be
above average. So traffic handling with the help of this network actually decides the
resilience. Whenever there is some failure in the network even in such a situation the
network should be able to handle with some degraded performance. If there is a
catastrophic situation that occurs like flood or earthquake or something else then the
traffic on the network suddenly increases or even when some exam results are out
obviously it leads to lot of telephone calls. So network should be able handle that which
requires resilience.
For routing purpose there are two basic approaches. One is known as static routing and
other is known as dynamic routing. in static routing routing function in public switch
telecommunication networks has been traditionally quite simple and static, normally it is
very static in nature and as we have already seen the switches are organized as a tree
structure. Since it is organized in a tree structure there is a fixed well defined path from
one point to another point through a number of switches. However, to add some
resilience to the network additional high usage trunks are added to cut across the tree
structure to connect exchanges with high volumes of traffic between them.

(Refer Slide Time: 48:32)

That means to have some resilience some additional high usage trunks added some
redundancies are added so that in case of failure in case of heavy traffic this can be
tackled. However, it cannot adapt to changing conditions. As I mentioned there may be
some changing conditions because of some catastrophic situations or some special
situations. So for these special situations this static routing cannot perform and obviously
this leads to congestion in case of failure. Whenever there is some failure will lead to
congestion. That means the connection cannot be established between two users.
To overcome the limitations and to cope with growing demands all providers presently
use dynamic approach and routing decisions are influenced by current traffic conditions.

(Refer Slide Time: 50:05)

In dynamic routing it is not fixed and static it is based on the current traffic and
conditions. So, switching nodes have a peer relationship with each other rather than a
hierarchical one. That means in such a case it is not the hierarchical network. The nodes
or switching nodes have peer relationship among all other nodes, they exchange
information to find out traffic conditions and other things and as a result based on that the
routing is done. Routing is more complex and more flexible and obviously it will be
complex. Since it is not fixed it is based on the current conditions and it has to tackle the
catastrophic or special situations. However, it has to be more flexible as well.
There are two basic techniques is used one is known as alternate routing another is
known as adaptive routing. Let us see how they work. First let us consider the alternate
routing approach. Here the possible routes between two end points are predetermined. So
it is the responsibility of the originating switch to select the appropriate route for each
call.

(Refer Slide Time: 51:36)

That means in this case based on busy traffic hours the routes are decided. For example,
may be in the morning hours all people are going to office or schools and in the evening
hours people are returning from offices or schools and based on that you know that traffic
control is done, the route timings can be set in normal traffic control. Here also
something similar thing can be done that is based on the statistics of history the direction
of traffic can be decided at a particular time instance. In this case in practice usually a
different set of preplanned routes are used for different time periods. For example, in
morning period one route is established, in the evening period one route can be
established or depending on the traffic condition and different paths and that can be based
on history and statistics. So it takes advantage of different traffic patterns in different
time zones and at different time of the day.
(Refer Slide Time: 52

This is more appropriate in USA. For example, it has got different time zones and based
on different time zones the office hours are different in different places so accordingly the
routes can be set up in a predetermined manner and the routing can be done depending on
the date and time and hour of the day.
(Refer Slide Time: 53:36)

Then we have the alternate routing approach. In alternate routing approach several
alternate routes are predetermined which are used for communication. For example, you
can have a fixed alternate route, for example from A to D it can be that is from A to node
1 then to 2 then to 6 then it goes to D that means it is through the nodes 1 2 and 6 so this
is fixed alternate routing. But it can be dynamic alternate routing. For example, another
alternate route instead of 1 to 6 it can be 1, 3, 5 and 6 so this is the alternative. These
alternative routes are available may be initially the shortest route is tried and if there is
blocking then the alternate routes are explored in alternative approach.
On the other hand adaptive routing approach is designed to enable switches to react to
changing traffic conditions on the network and it allows you better management
overhead, switches must exchange information and it has potential for more effectively
optimizing the use of network resources.

(Refer Slide Time: 54:55)

For example dynamic traffic management is being used by some telephone companies. A
central controller collects data at the interval of ten seconds to determine preferred
alternate routes. So it gathers statistics then the routes are decided. So apart from routing
the nodes must send control signal to manage the network by which calls are established,
maintained and terminated. So, to perform these functions; establishment, maintenance
and termination various types of signals are to be generated.
For example, supervisory signals which essentially gives you the availability of sources
then at risk for example at different stations a particular node has some telephone number
that telephone number has to be sent so this is the address that has to be communicated
and the call information as whether it is busy or something has happened or network
management has to be done which is used for the purpose of maintenance and
termination.

(Refer Slide Time: 56:10)

And signaling can be done in two different ways; inchannel, it can be in band or out of
band and same band frequencies used by voice signals are used to transmit control signals
and in out of band it uses different part of the frequency band but uses the same facilities
as the voice signal.
(Refer Slide Time: 56:25)

On the other hand the common channel is dedicated signaling are used to transmit control
signals and are common to a number of voice channels. So we have discussed by the
circuit switching technique and it is time now to give you review questions. Here are the
five review questions.

(Refer Slide Time: 57:02)

1)
What are the three steps involved in data communication through circuit
switching?
2)
Mention the key advantages and disadvantages of circuit switching technique
3)
Why data communication through circuit switching is not efficient?
4)
Compare the performance of space division single stage switch with multistage
switch
5)
Distinguish between inchannel and common channel signaling techniques used in
circuit switched networks.
Now I shall quickly give you the answers of the questions of the lecture minus 17.

(Refer Slide Time: 57:37)

1)

Why are asynchronous protocols losing popularity?

Asynchronous protocols are losing popularity because of their high overhead of more
than twenty percent as we will explain in details on the other hand synchronous protocols
provide significantly lower overhead that is why asynchronous protocols are losing
popularity.
(Refer Slide Time: 58:03)

2)

Why bit-oriented protocols are gaining popularity?

Bit-oriented protocols allow packing more information compared to character-oriented
protocols that is why bit-oriented protocols are gaining popularity.
(Refer Slide Time: 58:21)

3)

In HDLC what is bit stuffing and why is it needed?

The presence of the bit sequence 01111110 used as flag to indicate the start and end of a
frame may lead to division of a single frame into more than one frame wrongly. This
problem is overcome by using bit stuffing. A 0 is introduced after each occurrence of five
consecutive ones in the information field of a frame.
(Refer Slide Time: 58:53)

4)

What is piggybacking and how it is being used in HDLC?

As i have mentioned the acknowledgement can be sent along with the information from
the other end. That is being used in the piggybacking. So with this we come to the end of
the lecture, thank you.

