Data Communications
Prof. A. Pal
Department of Computer Science & Engineering
Indian Institute of Technology, Kharagpur
Lecture-11A
Multiplexing
Hello viewers welcome to today’s lecture on multiplexing techniques. In this lecture we
shall discuss various issues of multiplexing.
(Refer Slide Time: 1:05)

First we shall discuss why multiplexing? Why do you really need multiplexing?
Then I shall introduce to you the basic concepts of multiplexing and as we shall see
multiplexing can be divided into two different types; Frequency Division Multiplexing
and Time Division Multiplexing. And as we shall see the frequency multiplexing
technique has two different variations the Frequency Division Multiplexing and
Wavelength Division Multiplexing. And the other one is the Time Division Multiplexing
again has two different types synchronous and asynchronous which we shall discuss in
detail.
Finally we shall discuss about inverse Time Division Multiplexing which is also in use
today. And on completion of this lecture the students will be able to explain the need for
multiplexing, they will be able to distinguish between the multiplexing techniques, they
will be able to explain the key features of Frequency Division Multiplexing and Time
Division Multiplexing, they will be able to distinguish between synchronous and
asynchronous Time Division Multiplexing and explain the concept of inverse TDM.

(Refer Slide Time: 2:23)

Why multiplexing?
It is best on several observations. First one is it has been found that most individual data
communication devices typically require modest data rates. For example, when you are
sending the requirement is only 4 Kbps and obviously 4 KHz that is the bandwidth of
course whenever you convert it in digital form then it comes to 64 Kbps then of course
that one is also not very weak. Similarly the average data rate required is also not very
high.
On the other hand the communication media usually have much higher bandwidth. For
example, we can use coaxial cable, optical fiber, microwave which has several mega
bytes per second, hundreds of mega bytes of bandwidth and as a consequence the
communication media provide you much higher bandwidth. On the other hand individual
users have lesser data to send. And as a consequence the two communicating stations do
not utilize the full capacity of a data link. That means if you have got two users like say
one and two and they are linked by some kind of a communication link may be optical
fiber, coaxial cable or whatever it may be they are not able to utilize the link capacity
fully.

(Refer Slide Time: 4:09)

Another observation is that higher the data rate the most cost effective is the transmission
facility. For example if the data rate is small then the cost per byte or per kilo byte is
more and if the capacity is large say several Gigabytes then the cost per byte or cost per
kilo byte is much less.
(Refer Slide Time: 5:06)

That means if we use a link of higher capacity then we get it at a much lower cost so that
is the observation. So, based on this observation it has been found that we can use a
technique known as multiplexing. Let us see how? When the bandwidth of a medium is

greater than individual signals to be transmitted through a channel a medium can be
shared by more than one channel for signals by using multiplexing.
Essentially what we are trying to do is we are trying to share the channel capacity or
bandwidth of a particular media by several signals by several users. And for efficiency
the channel capacity can be shared among a number of communicating stations. That
means we have to utilize the channel capacity fully and for that purpose multiplexing can
be done. And as you know most common use of multiplexing is in long haul
communication using coaxial cable, microwave and optical fiber. As you know for long
distance communication normally we use optical fiber or a terrestrial microwave or
satellite microwave or optical fiber and all these transmission media have high bandwidth
and this has to be shared by using multiplexing.
(Refer Slide Time: 7:17)

I shall start with a very simple example. A telephone line which has bandwidth of only
2400 hertz is used for data transfer between two stations and as you can see you can
divide it if your data rate is small which can be satisfied by 1200 Hz then you can divide
it into two parts say half of 1200 say 600 to 1800 and another is 1800 to 3000 then the
first twelve hundred can be used to transfer data from user A to user B that means in one
direction and the other one can be used for transfer of data between user B to A. So what
you can do is you can achieve bidirectional data transfer with the help of a single
channel. And only thing that you have to do is divide the bandwidth as only one part is
used for one direction of the transfer and that can be done by using multiplexing. For
example, we can use Frequency Division Multiplexing FDM.

(Refer Slide Time: 7:56)

Let us see the basic concept of multiplexing. What we do we is we use a device known as
multiplexer which combines signals coming from n channels. Here you are getting signal
from n channel one to up to n. Signals coming from n channels are combined together
and sent through one media. As you can see you can have got only one medium so
signals coming from n channels are combined to be sent through a single medium and at
the other end what you are doing there is a demultiplexer. And the demultiplexer
performing the reverse operation is separating out the signals coming through a common
channel and is sending them to n different channels as you can see 1 to n. this is the basic
operation. So you require a multiplexer and a demultiplexer. Hence this multiplexer and
demultiplexer does the operation of combining and separating out. It can be done in two
ways.

(Refer Slide Time: 9:05 - 10:18)

First one is Frequency Division Multiplexing. Here as you can see the signals coming
from n channels 1, 2 up to n channels are multiplexed and they assign simultaneously
through a single channel. As you can see through the same medium we can send n
different signals and obviously we are doing Frequency Division Multiplexing. The
signals coming from different signals are frequency translated to different frequency.
At the other end the multiplexer will receive the signals and they will separate out the
channels using suitable devices. So here as you can see all are sent in parallel. So far as
time is concerned if you look from the timing point of view all these signals are
combined to form a composite signal. Therefore here we are forming some kind of
composite signal and that composite signal is again the demultiplexed at the other end by
suitable technique by Frequency Division Multiplexing.
The second approach is Time Division Multiplexing. Here as you can see the signals are
sent in such a way that in different time slots we are sending signals from channel one
then we are sending signal from channel two then channel three and so on and this is
being repeated. So in Time Division Multiplexing signals are multiplexed in terms of
time. So, for some time duration a particular signal is sent then another signal is sent for
another duration then another signal is sent for another duration as you see here (Refer
Slide Time: 11:09) then at the other end the demultiplexer separates out signals from
channel one to channel two and so on. These are the basic approaches.

(Refer Slide Time: 11:23)

So, far as the Frequency Division Multiplexing is concerned we use analog signal that
means we generate signal by using FDM and WDM technique. The analog signal is used
in two different techniques FDM and WDM. As we shall see the Time Division
Multiplexing is done by using digital signaling and that’s why it is called TDM and ATM
stands for Asynchronous Time Division Multiplexing. So we can say that analog signal is
used for Frequency Division and Wavelength Division Multiplexing and digital signaling
is used for Time Division and Asynchronous Time Division Multiplexing.
Let’s see the Frequency Division Multiplexing technique in detail.
(Refer Slide Time: 12:35 - 13:15)

What you do is first divide the available bandwidth into a single physical medium into a
number of smaller independent frequency channels. So the available bandwidth is divided
into a number of smaller independent frequency channels. That is the first thing that is
done. Then using modulation independent message signals are translated into different
frequency bands. As you have seen, by using modulation this can be done. That means
independent message signals can be translated into different frequency bands.
Then third thing that is done is all the modulated signals are combined into a linear
summing circuit to form a composite signal for transmission through the medium which
has higher bandwidth. Finally the carriers are used to modulate the individual message
signals. The carriers used to modulate the individual message signals are called the subcarriers as we shall see. So here we are not using a single frequency carrier but a number
of frequency carriers.
(Refer Slide Time: 13:33)

And as I mentioned we can use one of the three different techniques; Amplitude
Modulation, Frequency Modulation or Phase Modulation. Thus one of the three
techniques can be used to generate analog signal and to translate the individual
frequencies to different frequency bands by using different carrier frequencies.

(Refer Slide Time: 15:07)

On the other hand, if your data is digital in nature then you can use ASK, FSK or PSK or
a combination of ASK PSK to generate analog signal which is known as QAM. So,
depending on whether your data is analog or digital you will be using Amplitude
Modulation, Frequency Modulation or Phase Modulation if your data is analog in nature.
On the other hand if your data is digital in nature then you will use ASK, FSK, PSK or
QSK to generate the analog signal.
So the basic Frequency Division Multiplexing operation is explained in this diagram.
Here you have got source one, source two and source n that is 1 to n sources. Now the
frequency band each of the signals is shown here. That means it is like this in the
frequency domain (Refer Slide Time: 15:00).
Now as you do the modulation by using a frequency f5 as we know after Amplitude
Modulation the bandwidth becomes like this, around f5 the demand will become double
and the frequency of the carrier is f5. That means here the frequency of the carrier is f5.
Now we are modulating different signals with different frequencies so these are known as
sub-carriers f1, f2 and fn.
Hence as you can see here if the transmitted bandwidth is from here to here we can send
all the signals f1, f2 and fn that is all signals can be transmitted through the media. So here
after modulation we are combining and then sending through the transmission media. If it
is air then you don’t have to do this because all the signals will be sent through the air
and at the receiving end the separation can be done by suitable technique. As it is shown
here we are receiving the different signals f1, f2 up to fn so these signals are received and
then with the help of demodulator they are separated out and the demodulator then
separates out each of these carriers f1, f2, fn so here we get different frequency bands.

For example, here the carrier frequency f1 is filtered, here the carrier frequency f2 is
filtered, here the carrier frequency fn is filtered so they are filtered out then they are sent
to different destinations. Here it is shown in more detail as carrier frequencies fc1, fc2 and
fc3.
Apart from having separate bandwidths for each of these signals coming from different
sources some extra overhead source is there known as guard band. This guard band is
necessary so that channels are separated by strips of by unused bandwidth to prevent
inter-channel cross talk.
(Refer Slide Time: 17:28)

If the channels are very close then the signal of one channel will disturb the signal of
another channel. Sometimes we observe that in whenever we receive radio signals that
adjacent channels are so close that the filtering is not done properly then it disturbs the
signal of adjacent channels so that kind of thing can happen. So to avoid that we have to
use guard bands between each of these bandwidths each of these signals.
So we have to take care of not only the bandwidths of each of these sub-carriers but also
the bandwidth of the guard bands together to decide the bandwidth of the channel. That
means the channel must have a bandwidth which is sum of the individual channel
bandwidths plus the guard band bandwidths.
Frequency Division Multiplexing has found applications in our day to day life. As you
know the transmission of AM and FM radio is done by using this technique. And with the
help of radio receiver you can tune different channels. That means we can select different
frequencies and listen to that particular channel. So it is used in AM and FM radio
broadcasting. Similarly it is also used in TV broadcasting. And in TV broadcasting also
you can select different channels with the help of the tuner of your TV and watch
different channels. And in cable television same thing is done through a coaxial cable.

You know each channel will require about 6 MHz and the cable can provide you a
bandwidth of about 500 MHz.
(Refer Slide Time: 19:50)

So, through a single coaxial fiber coaxial cable that is being used for cable television you
can send as many as hundred different channels and then you can separate out with the
help of the receiver, the tune as in the receiver which are nothing but band pass filters. So
we see that analog transmission is necessary in all these cases so that the signal has a
band pass nature and then different frequency bands can be multiplexed through the
transmission media.
Wavelength Division Multiplexing is commonly used in case of optical fiber. Particularly
we have observed that optical fiber medium provides enormous bandwidth. Since it
provides enormous bandwidth WDM is the most viable technology that overcomes the
huge opto electronic bandwidth mismatch.
Here the mismatch is coming because the optical fiber has very high bandwidth and for
individual users bandwidth requirement is much much smaller so we have to send a large
number of signals through the optical fiber or the optical fiber bandwidth has to be shared
by the signal of large number of users. How that can be done? That can be done by
Wavelength Division Multiplexing. It is somewhat similar to Frequency Division
Multiplexing. But at these higher frequencies normally we refer to Frequency Division
Multiplexing as Wavelength Division Multiplexing because wavelength value is smaller.

(Refer Slide Time: 21:40)

Wavelength Division Multiplexing optical fiber network comprises optical wavelength
switches routers connected by point-to-point fiber links. That means there are switches
and routers that means you have got switch or router and you have optical fiber cable and
then the switch can receive number of signals and switch can also separate out large
number of signals. This is how it is being done this is your optical fiber cable (Refer Slide
Time: 22:07). Now end users may communicate with each other through all optical
channels known as light paths which may span over more than one fiber links. Here I
have shown only one link but you may not have only one link, in between there may be
more switches and as a consequence the optical signal the light signal can pass through a
number of switches and the optical domain can reach the other side. This can happen
whenever you have got optical switches. This Wavelength Division Multiplexing is
becoming very very popular and the basic concept is shown here. here again we have got
different sources (Refer Slide Time: 22:57) and they are modulated with different carrier
frequencies or wavelength as you can see so the bandwidth of in terms of wavelength a
particular source say i is from w lambda 1 to lambda j.

(Refer Slide Time: 23:59)

So here for example this is the signal coming from channel one lambda one to lambda
two channel to lambda three to lambda four (Refer Slide Time: 23:17). You can see there
is some guard band in between then for channel n lambda 2n – 1 to 2n. So these different
wavelengths can be multiplexed and sent through an optical fiber cable. So this signal is
going through optical fiber cable, optical signals of different wavelengths. And at the
receiving end they can be separated out and the filtering can be done and we can get
different frequencies different wavelengths. As you can see here lambda i to lambda j is
meant for a particular channel.
You may be asking how the filtering may be done in optical domain. You may remember
in your school days you have done experiment with prism. So here as you can see the
light coming out from the other side of the prism depends on the incidence angle and the
wavelength. So the lights can be made incident to side with different angles so that all of
them come out with the same angle from the other side then it can be sent through optical
fiber cable and at the other end again they can be separated out by using another prism.
This is a very simple example which shows how Wavelength Division Multiplexing can
be done, how the different light signals can be combined and then can be sent through a
single optical fiber and again they can be separated out at the other end with the help of
prism. Therefore some what similar devices can be used in practice in Wavelength
Division Multiplexing.
Then coming to the digital one, in the Time Division Multiplexing we have discussed the
FDM and WDM which uses analog signaling as you have seen. Now we shall consider
the two types in Time Division Multiplexing synchronous and asynchronous which is the
digital signaling. So Time Division Multiplexing is possible when the bandwidth of the
medium exceeds the data rate of digital signals to be transmitted. So here the bandwidth
of the medium exceeds the data rate of the signals to be transmitted. So the possibility
arises because of the same reason as Frequency Division Multiplexing however it is done

in a different way. Here what you can do is multiple digital signals can be carried on a
single transmission path by interleaving portions of each signal in time. So we shall
interleave different signals one after the other and send through the medium.
(Refer Slide Time: 26:31)

So interleaving can be done at the bit level or in block of bytes. It might be possible to do
the interleaving at the bit level say one bit of one signal, second will be the bit of another
signal and the third bit of another signal and so on. Hence interleaving can be done in this
way or interleaving can be done in terms of blocks of bytes. And of course as we know
here we have to generate data in digital form and you have to do suitable encoding like
digital data to digital signal encoding or if your data is analog in nature then you have to
convert into digital form by using pulse code modulation or delta modulation get the
digital signal then you can do Time Division Multiplexing.

(Refer Slide Time: 27:02)

(Refer Slide Time: 27:19)

So here what we do is the incoming data from each source are briefly buffered and each
buffer is typically one bit or one character in length. So first the signal is received then
the signals are buffered before doing the multiplexing then the buffers are scanned
sequentially to form a composite data stream. So we can say that the scanning is done one
after the other from different buffers to form a composite signal. The scan operation is
sufficiently rapid so that each buffer is emptied before more data can arrive. Here this is
being explained (Refer Slide Time: 28:14) and another requirement is that composite data
rate must be at least equal to the sum of the individual data rates.

(Refer Slide Time: 28:30)

That means the composite data rate that is being formed here should be more than the
sum of the individual data rates. So here some kind of framing is done. As you can see
interleaving is done and here (Refer Slide Time: 28:50) have received coming from
source one their sum apart of data from source one in time grid, data from source n and
so on so these are scanned one after the other then a frame is sent then comes the next
frame. Again it is taken from another source like one bit or more number of bits then
from channel two s2 source two it is one bit or more number of bits in this way it goes up
to channel length and again it is repeated so this is how scanning is done.
Now question arises whenever you do the framing say you are doing some kind of
framing, say this is from source one (Refer Slide Time: 29:50), this is from source two,
this is from source three in this way source n then of course another stream is coming,
this is one frame and this is another frame source one, source two and this is being sent.

(Refer Slide Time: 30:11)

Now question arises how the other side that is the receiving end identifies that this is the
beginning of the frame and after the beginning of the frame is identified then of course
the data from each of these sources can be taken out provided they operate at the same
frequency. So here the requirement is that transmitter and receiver must operate at the
same frequency and more over this will be able to identify the beginning of the frame.
That is being done by using a separate channel you can say and through this channel the
sync characters are sent. Therefore at the beginning of each channel the sync character is
sent, synchronization character is sent and usually the synchronization character is a
sequence of 1 0 1 0 and so on. So you may send eight bits 1 0 1 0 1 0 1 0 that forms the
synchronization character. And after this is detected at the receiving end subsequent slots
are for different data. So this is considered a channel say channel 1 and this again channel
1 so in this way channel 1 is repeated. So, for the source s1 data is taken from the channel
1 then data is taken from channel 2 this is your channel 2 from source 2 (Refer Slide
Time: 31:50) and it is predefined that data will be present in this time slot from source
one and in this time slot from source two and so on.
Sometimes it so happens that the data rate is not matching which is coming from the
source. For example, for the purpose of multiplexing your requirement is say 8000 Bps.
on the other hand from the source the data is coming at the rate of 7200 Bps so data rates
are different. In such a situation what will you do? In such a case a technique known as
pulse stuffing is used so that the synchronization of different data rates are possible. So
what is done is some dummy bits are inserted to generate data rate of 8000 Bps then they
are sent by the receiver at the receiving end then the additional bits which are received
are separated out to get back the original data which has the data rate of 7200 Bps. This is
how pulse stuffing is done. Later on we shall take up an example to discuss it.
So here the synchronous Time Division Multiplexing is shown.

(Refer Slide Time: 34:05)

Here as you can see the data is coming from four sources. Here you have got AAA
coming from source one BBB from source two, CC from source three and D from source
four. Now as you can see first frame has filled up all the slots A B C and D. That means
first it is taken from A, then it is taken from B, then it is taken from C and D so all the
slots of first frame is filled. However, as far as the second frame is concerned second A,
second B, second C is filled up but there is no data in the fourth frame so this remains
empty. So far as the third frame is concerned as you can see you have got only two data
A and B coming from source A and source B, and source C and source D has no data so
they remain empty. so we find that in synchronous Time Division Multiplexing some of
the slots may remain empty if the source has no data to send as it has happened in this
particular example (Refer Slide Time: 34:44)
As you can see in the four frames the first frame is filled up, in the second frame one slot
is empty, in the third frame two slots remain empty, in the fourth frame three slots remain
empty so this leads to inefficient utilization of the channel bandwidth or the medium
bandwidth, how do you overcome it? This limitation is overcome by using a technique
known as Statistical Time Division Multiplexing, it is also known as Asynchronous Time
Division Multiplexing or Intelligent Time Division Multiplexing. So, wastage that
happens in the case of synchronous time division multiplexing usually is referred to as
TDM Time Division Multiplexing.
Now this problem is overcome in statistical or Asynchronous or Intelligent Time Division
Multiplexing, how? In statistical TDM time slots are allocated dynamically on demand.
That means in the previous case we have seen each slot is pre-assigned for a particular
source. But here it is not so. Here the slots are located dynamically on demand as and
when required by different sources and it takes advantage of the fact that not all the
attached devices may be transmitting all the time. It is based on the observation that all
the sources may not be transmitting all the time. For example, whenever we talk through

telephone sometimes we keep quiet, sometimes we talk quickly, sometimes we talk
slowly so this is quiet common and sometimes we think something and then speak so
somewhat similar situation exists.
Therefore this kind of particular statistical behavior is exploited in asynchronous Time
Division Multiplexing and this is explained in this particular example.
(Refer Slide Time: 36:55)

(Refer Slide Time: 38:12)

Here what has been done is data is again coming from four different sources and here
different time slots are shown. In the first time slots as you can see we have got data from

channel source C and source A. this is your A1, (Refer Slide Time: 37:28) this is your C1
as filled in our first frame and this slot remains empty and this slot also remains empty.
That means two slots remain on frame one remains empty if it is synchronous TDM.
Then in the next frame as you can see we have got three data. That means there is no data
from source A but however you have got data from source B, C and D so this is your B1,
C2 and D1 so these are filled up with this data. On the other hand in frame three as you
can see we have data from source B and source D so slots allocated to source B and
source D are filled up but the other slots remain empty.
Similarly in the fourth slot as you can see the slot A is filled up. Slot corresponding to A
is filled up, slot corresponding to C is filled up and on the other hand the other two slots
remain empty. So this is how it is sent in synchronous Time Division Multiplexing and
this is the time required from here to here. So this is the overall time required in
synchronous TDM.
Now let us see how we can use Asynchronous TDM where we need not really follow the
same sequence. For example, data coming from any source can be sent. For example,
here we can send A1 C1 and then again we can send B1 C2 and as you can see here the
frame has got only two slots. So in frame one you have sent A1 and C1 and in frame two
you have sent B1 and C2 so essentially the bandwidth requirement is less here. So here
the bandwidth requirement was corresponding to four time slots but here you have got
corresponding to two time slots. So it is A1 C1 and in frame two we shall send B1 C2
then in the next time frame we shall sort D2 then A2 and finally in the fifth frame we
shall sort C3 so total time required is less than as it was in synchronous TDM. And as a
consequence the bandwidth requirement for transmission of data through Asynchronous
TDM will be much less. But there is a problem in this case.
Here (Refer Slide Time: 40:20) as you have seen there is no fixed slot. A1 is coming
here, then C1 has come here then as you see in the same slot you send B1, here in the
same slot we are sending D1 here, in the same slot we are sending D2, here in the same
slot we are sending C3 etc. So we see that here there is no pre-allocated slot for a
particular source. How the other side will know that this data has come from source
number S1? That’s the problem. That problem has to be overcome by providing this
information.
Hence since the data arrived from and is distributed to the IO lines unpredictably. That
means unpredictably or asynchronously the address information is provided to assure
proper delivery so that the data can be delivered to the proper destination at the other end.
This leads to more overhead per slot. So what we have to do is apart from data we have to
send the address. If there is only single channel we can send address followed by variable
length data that means one source per frame which means we are sending one source per
frame. However, the most general case is that we can send several data from several
sources per frame.

(Refer Slide Time: 42:11)

For example, (Refer Slide Time: 41:58) data for each source can have address field,
length field and data field. So there are three different fields corresponding to data
received from a single source and these are the overheads namely the address and length
because the other side has to identify that the data corresponds to this address and also the
length field has to be known so that we can identify the next slot. And to minimize the
overhead for address sometimes we use relative addressing rather than absolute
addressing depending on the number of sources.
Suppose you have got eight sources so if there are eight sources instead of providing the
full address three bits are sufficient. So you can take the modulo of the number of the
sources so three bits will be left out and the lower order three bits will be sufficient and
that can be used as address if we have got eight sources. Similarly we can say that if the
number of bytes is 1 then it is 0 0, number of bytes is 2 then 0 2 so like that it can also be
appended at the part of the address field. So in this way we can try to reduce the overhead
but whatever we do there will be some overhead which cannot be escaped so there will be
some overhead in Asynchronous Time Division Multiplexing because you have to send
the address information along with the data. However, it has got the advantage that it
makes better utilization of the channel.

(Refer Slide Time: 44:00)

Particularly in Asynchronous Time Division Multiplexing the data rate at the output is
less than the data rate at the inputs. That is the primary condition for Asynchronous Time
Division Multiplexing. However, there are situations there are peak periods where
usually more data is generated at other times. So in the peak period that condition may be
violated. That means the incoming data rate may be more than the outgoing data rate
possible. So in such a case the only alternative is to use buffers of suitable size then the
data can be temporarily stored before sending. Therefore this problem of asynchronous
Time Division Multiplexing is overcome by use of buffers. Obviously there is a trade-off,
it is the trade-off between the buffer size and how much extra data can be stored or what
is the maximum input data rate that can be supported where the output data rate is fixed.
Nowadays cost of memory devices has come down and as a consequence you can afford
to have more memory. On the other hand the channel capacity is quite costly. This is
usually overcome by having more and more memory. for example, let’s assume n is the
number of inputs, r is the data rate of each source, m is equal to effective capacity of the
output obviously m will be less than n into r and alpha is the mean fraction of time each
input is transmitting. That means each source is not transmitting all the time that is our
basic premise and obviously alpha varies from 0 to 1. Then a measure of the compression
C is the ratio of the M that is the effective capacity of the output by nr. Obviously it will
have values less than 1 but it will also have value in between alpha and 1.
So we can see here this compression that is possible that means you can have lesser
output bandwidth than the sum of the input bandwidths and that ratio is c equal to M/nr
and that can be achieved based on experiments where you can decide the value of M for a
particular application that will definitely depend on the value of alpha and also n and r.
Therefore the performance of Synchronous Time Division Multiplexing can be decided
based on the statistical phenomenon the mean fraction of time each input is transmitting
and based on that we also can add buffers to improve the performance.

Our discussion on multiplexing will not be complete if we don’t discuss about another
very important technique which is known as Inverse Multiplexing.
(Refer Slide Time: 48:39)

We have seen that multiplexing is used when the bandwidth of the channel is more than
the bandwidth of the input sources. But here we are performing something different.
Suppose an organization is sending voice, video and data through the same media the
multimedia signal so now voice bandwidth requirement can be 64 Kbps, video bandwidth
requirement is typically 1.54 Mbps and data bandwidth can be say 128 Kbps so this is the
requirement but usually you don’t send video all the time. Sometimes you are sending
voice, several voice signals, several data signals, sometimes you are doing video
conferencing sending video signals so at different instance of time your requirement is
different. one possibility to satisfy your requirement is you can use a link, you can have a
list line with capacity of 1.54 Mbps so you can send data and whenever you are sending
voice or video you will be sending through this particular channel and obviously you will
not be utilizing the full capacity of the list line or the medium that we have evacuate.
What an organization can do in such a case is they can have the bandwidth on demand.
What they can do is they can have several 128 kilobits channel available and the number
can be made available depending on the requirement. So the bandwidth required can be
available in terms of say 128 into n. that value of n is decided by the requirement at a
particular instant. So what we are doing is that input data is de-multiplexed then
multiplexed at the other end to generate video. That means the video data can be sent
through several channels and at the other end they can be combined to generate the video
data. So this particular concept is becoming more popular to proper utilization of the
bandwidth and also for cost effectiveness. These are various techniques of multiplexing
that we have discussed.

Now it is time for some review questions.
(Refer Slide Time: 48:39)

1) In what situation multiplexing is used?
2) Distinguish between the two basic multiplexing techniques?
3) Why guard bands are used during Frequency Division Multiplexing?
4) Why sync pulse is required in Time Division Multiplexing?
5) What limitation of TDM is overcome in Asynchronous Time Division Multiplexing
and how?
6) Design a Time Division Multiplexing system having output bandwidth of 256 Kbps to
send from 4 analog sources of 2 KHz bandwidth and 8 digital signals of 7200 bps.
So here you will design a Time Division Multiplexing system by making use of pulse
stuffing and other techniques. The answers to these questions will be different in the next
lecture. And here are the answers to the lecture – 10.

(Refer Slide Time: 53:01)

1) Which modulation technique is used in optical communication?
As I mentioned in the previous lecture that On/Off key is used in optical communication.
We are sending light signal. I mean whenever it is 1 and whenever it is 0 you are not
sending any light signal that’s why it is called On/Off key and this is being used in
optical communication.
2) What are the three modulation techniques possible in modems?
The three modulation techniques possible in modems are Amplitude Shift Keying,
Frequency Shift Keying and Phase Shift Keying or a combination known as QAM. Later
we shall discuss on modem in more details and we shall see how these different
modulation techniques are used in different standards. it is not really three we can say it
is 4. However, he QAM can be considered as a combination of ASK and PSK.

(Refer Slide Time: 53:47)

3) Why PSK is preferred as the modulation technique in modems?
In PSK scheme it is possible to send a signal having more than one value. The approach
is known as Quadrature PSK. That means here the baud rate is more than the data rate.
That means we can achieve higher data rate by using the QPSK so that’s why PSK is
preferred.
(Refer Slide Time: 54:09)

4) Out of the three digital to analog modulation techniques which one provides higher
data rate?

For a given transmission bandwidth higher data rate can be achieved in case of PSK. In
other words in PSK higher channel capacity is achieved although the signaling rate is
lower. So that is all in this lecture. In the next lecture we shall discuss about some
application of multiplexing techniques like telephone systems and other things, thank
you.

