The CPU and Primary Storage
See that box sitting next to your computer (if you're using a personal computer)? There's
a lot of neat stuff in there that makes all your computing possible. The most important
part of that box is the Central Processing Unit (CPU) or the "brains" of the computer.
Every computer, no matter how big or small, has one, just like every person and animal
has one.

Primary Storage
Every time you use a personal computer, the Operating System software and
Applications software that you use must be moved from the hard drive (secondary
storage) to the primary storage area called Random Access Memory (RAM). The text
does an excellent job of explaining how this storage area works: see page 166.
You should be aware that the software necessary to operate your computer gets bigger
and bigger all the time. While not every instruction included in a program is moved into
RAM when you first open the program, many instructions are. The rest of the instructions
are stored in the secondary storage area (hard drives or floppy drives) until you need
them. If you never use them, they aren't moved into RAM. We'll cover this concept more
in Chapter 7.
If your personal computer starts to run slower and slower over time, it could be because
your programs are requiring more space in the RAM memory than you have available.
The slang term is "RAM Cram." That is, you're trying to cram too many instructions into
too little RAM and your computer just slows down as it moves instructions back and
forth between primary and secondary storage. Sometimes, instead of buying a whole new
computer, you can significantly improve the performance of your current computer by
increasing the amount of RAM. It's relatively cheap and easy to do so.

Types of Semiconductor Memory
Read Only Memory (ROM) is the part of the computer that holds instructions necessary
to start your computer. The instructions located in this part of the computer are set when
your computer is built, and you can't change them. That's why it's called "Read Only."
ROM chips are used in more products than just computers: cars, hand-held calculators,
microwave ovens, stereos, alarm clocks, and cellular telephones have them. Most of these
chips are either of the PROM or EPROM sub-class of ROM chips.
The important characteristic that distinguishes ROM memory from RAM memory is
demonstrated by what happens when the computer is turned off or suddenly loses power.
Instructions contained in ROM are non-volatile, which means they aren't lost when the
computer is turned off. Instructions contained in RAM are volatile, meaning that they are
erased from the primary storage area when the power is turned off. That's why your
computer must reload the operating instructions and software programs whenever you

7

turn the computer back on. If you haven't saved data to the secondary storage area (hard
disk drive or floppy disk), you'll lose it from RAM also.

The Arithmetic-Logic Unit and Control Unit

Figure 2.1
Steps in the machine cycle.

The Arithmetic-Logic Unit (ALU) does one of two things: it performs mathematical
calculations or it compares things. The Control Unit does most of the rest of the work by
telling other components of the computer what to do and when to do them. It tells the
components what to do through a series of instructions that are processed one at time.
That may sound slow, but remember the speed we discussed earlier. Even though the
instructions are processed one at a time through the machine cycle, they are processed so
fast that we can't keep up. Remember computers are capable of processing a million
instructions per second!
Figure 2.1 shows the machine cycle that every instruction goes through every time it's
processed. The machine cycle is very methodical, very precise, and very fast!

8

