Module
4
Switched Communication
Networks
Version 2, CSE

IIT Kharagpur

Lesson
1
Switching Techniques: Circuit
Switching
Version 2, CSE

IIT Kharagpur

Specific Instructional Objectives
At the end of this lesson the student will be able to:
•
•
•
•
•

Understand the need for circuit switching
Specify the components of a switched communication network
Explain how circuit switching takes place
Explain how switching takes place using space-division and time-division switching
Explain how routing is performed
• Explain how signalling in performed

4.1.1 Introduction
When there are many devices, it is necessary to develop suitable mechanism for
communication between any two devices. One alternative is to establish point-to-point
communication between each pair of devices using mesh topology. However, mesh
topology is impractical for large number of devices, because the number of links increases
exponentially (n(n-1)/2, where n is the number of devices) with the number of devices. A
better alternative is to use switching techniques leading to switched communication
network. In the switched network methodology, the network consists of a set of
interconnected nodes, among which information is transmitted from source to destination
via different routes, which is controlled by the switching mechanism. A basic model of a
switched communication is shown in Fig. 4.1.1. The end devices that wish to communicate
with each other are called stations. The switching devices are called nodes. Some nodes
connect to other nodes and some are to connected to some stations. Key features of a
switched communication network are given below:
• Network Topology is not regular.
• Uses FDM or TDM for node-to-node communication.
• There exist multiple paths between a source-destination pair for better network
reliability.
• The switching nodes are not concerned with the contents of data.
• Their purpose is to provide a switching facility that will move data from node to node
until they reach the destination.
The switching performed by different nodes can be categorized into the following three
types:
• Circuit Switching
• Packet Switching
• Message Switching

Version 2, CSE

IIT Kharagpur

Figure 4.1.1 Basic model of a switched communication network
In this lesson we shall discuss various aspects of circuit switching and discuss how the
Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN), which is based on circuit switching, works.

4.1.2 Circuit switching Technique
Communication via circuit switching implies that there is a dedicated communication path
between the two stations. The path is a connected through a sequence of links between
network nodes. On each physical link, a logical channel is dedicated to the connection.
Circuit switching is commonly used technique in telephony, where the caller sends a
special message with the address of the callee (i.e. by dialling a number) to state its
destination. It involved the following three distinct steps, as shown in Fig. 4.1.2.
Circuit Establishment: To establish an end-to-end connection before any transfer of data.
Some segments of the circuit may be a dedicated link, while some other segments may be
shared.
Data transfer:
• Transfer data is from the source to the destination.
• The data may be analog or digital, depending on the nature of the network.
• The connection is generally full-duplex.

Version 2, CSE

IIT Kharagpur

Circuit disconnect:
• Terminate connection at the end of data transfer.
• Signals must be propagated to deallocate the dedicated resources.
Call-request
Signal

Time

Node 1
Acknowledgement signal

Node 2
Message
Node 3
Node 4
Call-accept
Signal

Figure 4.1.2 Circuit Switching technique
Thus the actual physical electrical path or circuit between the source and destination host
must be established before the message is transmitted. This connection, once established,
remains exclusive and continuous for the complete duration of information exchange and
the circuit becomes disconnected only when the source wants to do so.

4.1.3 Switching Node
Let us consider the operation of a single circuit switched node comprising a collection of
stations attached to a central switching unit, which establishes a dedicated path between
any two devices that wish to communicate.
Major elements of a single-node network are summarized below:
•
•
•

Digital switch: That provides a transparent (full-duplex) signal path between any
pair of attached devices.
Network interface: That represents the functions and hardware needed to connect
digital devices to the network (like telephones).
Control unit: That establishes, maintains, and tears down a connection.

The simplified schematic diagram of a switching node is shown in Fig. 4.1.3. An
important characteristic of a circuit-switch node is whether it is blocking or non-blocking.
A blocking network is one, which may be unable to connect two stations because all
possible paths between them are already in use. A non-blocking network permits all
stations to be connected (in pairs) at once and grants all possible connection requests as
long as the called party is free. For a network that supports only voice traffic, a blocking
configuration may be acceptable, since most phone calls are of short duration. For data
applications, where a connection may remain active for hours, non-blocking configuration
is desirable.

Version 2, CSE

IIT Kharagpur

Figure 4.1.3 Schematic diagram of a switching node.
Circuit switching uses any of the three technologies: Space-division switches,
Time-division switches or a combination of both. In Space-division switching, the paths
in the circuit are separated with each other spatially, i.e. different ongoing connections, at a
same instant of time, uses different switching paths, which are separated spatially. This was
originally developed for the analog environment, and has been carried over to the digital
domain. Some of the space switches are crossbar switches, Multi-stage switches (e.g.
Omega Switches). A crossbar switch is shown in Fig. 4.1.4. Basic building block of the
switch is a metallic crosspoint or semiconductor gate that can be enabled or disabled by a
control unit.

Figure 4.1.4 Schematic diagram of a crossbar switch

Version 2, CSE

IIT Kharagpur

Example: Xilinx crossbar switch using FPGAs. It is based on reconfigurable routing
infrastructure. It is a high-speed high capacity nonblocking type switch with sizes varying
from 64X64 to 1024X1024 and data rate of 200 Mbps.
Limitations of crossbar switches are as follows:
•
•
•
•
•

The number of crosspoints grows with the square of the number of attached
stations.
Costly for a large switch.
The failure of a crosspoint prevents connection between the two devices whose
lines intersect at that crosspoint.
The crosspoints are inefficiently utilized.
Only a small fraction of crosspoints are engaged even if all of the attached devices
are active.

Some of the above problems can be overcome with the help of multistage space division
switches. By splitting the crossbar switch into smaller units and interconnecting them, it is
possible to build multistage switches with fewer crosspoints.

Figure 4.1.5 A three-stage space division switch

Version 2, CSE

IIT Kharagpur

Figure 4.1.6 Block nature of the switch
Figure 4.1.5 shows a three-stage space division switch. In this case the number of
crosspoints needed goes down from 64 to 40. There is more than one path through the
network to connect two endpoints, thereby increasing reliability. Multistage switches may
lead to blocking. The problem may be tackled by increasing the number or size of the
intermediate switches, which also increases the cost. The blocking feature is illustrated in
Fig. 4.1.6. As shown in Fig. 4.1.6, after setting up connections for 1-to-3 and 2-to-4, the
switch cannot establish connections for 3-to-6 and 4-to-5.

Time Division Switching
Both voice and data can be transmitted using digital signals through the same switches. All
modern circuit switches use digital time-division multiplexing (TDM) technique for
establishing and maintaining circuits. Synchronous TDM allows multiple low-speed bit
streams to share a high-speed line. A set of inputs is sampled in a round robin manner. The
samples are organized serially into slots (channels) to form a recurring frame of slots.
During successive time slots, different I/O pairings are enabled, allowing a number of
connections to be carried over the shared bus. To keep up with the input lines, the data rate
on the bus must be high enough so that the slots recur sufficiently frequently. For 100 fullduplex lines at 19.200 Kbps, the data rate on the bus must be greater than 1.92 Mbps. The
source-destination pairs corresponding to all active connections are stored in the control
memory. Thus the slots need not specify the source and destination addresses. Schematic
diagram of time division switching is shown in Fig. 4.1.7.

Version 2, CSE

IIT Kharagpur

Figure 4.1.7 Schematic diagram of a time division multiplexing system

Figure 4.1.8 TDM with Switching using TSI
Time-division switching uses time-division multiplexing to achieve switching, i.e.
different ongoing connections can use same switching path but at different interleaved time
intervals. There are two popular methods of time-division switching namely, Time-Slot
Interchange (TSI) and the TDM bus. TSI changes the ordering of the slots based on desired
connection and it has a random-access memory to store data and flip the time slots as
shown in Fig. 4.1.8. The operation of a TSI is depicted in Fig. 4.1.9. As shown in the
figure, writing can be performed in the memory sequentially, but data is read selectively. In
TDM bus there are several input and outputs connected to a high-speed bus. During a time
slot only one particular output switch is closed, so only one connection at a particular
instant of time as shown in Fig. 4.1.10.

Version 2, CSE

IIT Kharagpur

Figure 4.1.9 Operation of a TSI

Figure 4.1.10 TDM bus switching

4.1.4 Public Switched Telephone Networks
Public switched telephone network (PSTN) is an example of circuit-switched network. It’s
also known as Plain Old Telephone Service (POTS). The switching centres used for the
switching are organised in different levels, namely: Regional offices (class 1), Section
offices (class 2), primary offices (class 3), Toll offices (class 4) and finally End offices
Version 2, CSE

IIT Kharagpur

(class 5) as shown in Fig. 4.1.11. Level 1 is at the highest level and Level 5 is the lowest
level. Subscribers or the customers are directly connected to these end offices. And each
office is connected directly to a number of offices at a level below and mostly a single
office at higher level.
Subscriber Telephones are connected, through Local Loops to end offices (or central
offices). A small town may have only one end office, but large cities have several end
offices. Many end offices are connected to one Toll office, which are connected to primary
offices. Several primary offices are connected to a section office, which normally serves
more than one state. All regional offices are connected using mesh topology. Accessing the
switching station at the end offices is accomplished through dialling. In the past, telephone
featured rotary or pulse dialling, in which digital signals were sent to the end office for
each dialled digit. This type of dialling was prone to errors due to inconsistency in humans
during dialling. Presently, dialling is accomplished by Touch-Tone technique. In this
method the user sends a small burst of frequency called dual tone, because it is a
combination of two frequencies. This combination of frequencies sent depends on the row
and column of the pressed pad.
Regional Office

Sectional Office

Primary Office

Toll Office

End Office
Local Loops

Figure 4.1.11 Basic organization of a Public Switched Telephone Network (PSTN)
The connections are multiplexed when have to send to a switching office, which is one
level up. For example, Different connections will be multiplexed when they are to be
forwarded from an end-office to Toll office. Figure 4.1.12 shows a typical medium distance
telephone circuit.

Version 2, CSE

IIT Kharagpur

Figure 4.1.12 Typical medium distance telephone circuit

Fill In the Blanks:
1. ________ uses the entire capacity of the link.
2. In ________ switching, each packet of a message need not follow the same path
from sender to receiver.
3. In ________ switching all the datagrams of a message follows the same channel of
a path.
4. PSTN is an example of _______________ network.
5. PSTN is also known as ____________.
Ans:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.

Circuit switching
Datagram packet
virtual circuit
circuit switching
plain old telephone service (POTS)

Short Answer Questions
Q-1. What are the three basic steps involved in data communication through circuit
switching?
Ans: The steps are:
i)
Circuit establishment (before data transfer)
ii)
Circuit maintenance (When data transfer is going on)
iii)
Circuit disconnect (When data transfer is over)
Q-2. Mention the key advantages and disadvantages of circuit switching technique.
Ans: Advantages:
i)
After path is established, data communication without delay.
ii)
Very suitable for continuous traffic.
iii)
It establishes a dedicated path.
iv)
No overhead after call setup.
v)
It is transparent and data passes in order.

Version 2, CSE

IIT Kharagpur

Disadvantages:
i)
Provide initial delay for setting up the call.
ii)
Inefficient for bursty traffic.
iii)
Data rate should be same because of fixed bandwidth.
iv)
When load increases, some calls may be blocked.
Q-3. Why data communication through circuit switching is not efficient?
Ans: In data communication, traffic between terminal and server are not continuous.
Sometimes more data may come or sometimes there is no data at all. Circuit switching is
not efficient because of its fixed bandwidth.

Q-4. Compare the performance of space-division single-stage switch with multi-stage
switch.
Ans: Space-division single-stage switch requires more number of crosspoints, nonblocking
in nature but provides no redundant path. On the other hand multi-stage switches require
lesser number of crosspoints, blocking in nature but provides redundant paths.

Version 2, CSE

IIT Kharagpur

