DO GLOBAL WARMING AND CLIMATE CHANGE
REPRESENT A SERIOUS THREAT TO OUR WELFARE
AND ENVIRONMENT?
By Michael E. Mann
I. Introduction
The subjects of “global warming” and “climate change” have become
parts of both the popular lexicon and the public discourse. Discussions of
global warming often evoke passionate responses and fierce debate between
adherents to different views of the threat posed. Yet there are many nuances
regarding global warming, climate change, and the threats they represent
that are not well understood by the public. The public’s conceptual understanding hinges largely on images and paradigms within the popular
culture that are often little more than caricatures of the actual, underlying
scientific concepts. To appreciate the potential threat that climate change
and global warming represent to human society, living things, and our
environment, it is necessary that we first understand the true science
underlying these phenomena.
The purpose of this essay is to assess the implications of climate change
for the welfare of human society and our environment. I will first discuss
the science underlying global warming, climate change, and the connections between these two phenomena (Section II). I will then explore what
climate changes are projected for the future under various plausible scenarios of future human behavior (Section III), and what impacts these
changes are likely to have on society, ecosystems, and our environment
(Section IV). Finally, I will consider the economic, security, and ethical
considerations relevant to evaluating the threat of climate change (Section V) and the steps that should arguably be taken to mitigate climate
change and its impacts (Section VI). I will summarize my conclusions
Section VII.
II. Scientific Background
Global warming refers to the phenomenon of increasing average surface
temperatures of the Earth over the past one to two centuries. The concept
is related to the more general phenomenon of climate change, which refers
to changes in the totality of attributes that define climate —not only surface temperatures, but also precipitation patterns, winds, ocean currents,
and other measures of the Earth’s climate. For this reason, I will favor the
doi:10.1017/S0265052509090220
© 2009 Social Philosophy & Policy Foundation. Printed in the USA.

193

194

MICHAEL E. MANN

use of the more general term ‘climate change’ throughout this essay,
recognizing that global warming is simply one of the attributes of climate
change. Climate change can be viewed as consisting of two components,
one of which is human (i.e., anthropogenic) in origin and coincides in
timing with the industrial period of the past two centuries, and the other
of which is natural and has played a role in both past and current climate
variability. Global warming generally refers to the anthropogenic component of climate change alone, and only the surface warming associated
with it. The key scientific issues required to understand the behavior of
the Earth’s climate system are discussed below, and include the notion of
energy balance, which governs how the climate system works, the greenhouse effect (including the special case of the enhanced or human greenhouse effect), which is necessary to understanding surface temperatures
on Earth, and so-called feedbacks, which can amplify the magnitude of
climate changes. Other essential aspects of the science of climate change
are the construction and use of theoretical climate models to investigate the
behavior of the climate system, an understanding of the factors that have
governed past climate, and, finally, the inferences that can be drawn
through a comparison of model simulation predictions and available observations in the assessment of the human impact on climate.
A. Energy balance
The average surface temperature of the Earth is maintained by a balance between incoming and outgoing sources of energy or radiation. The
incoming energy is in the form of solar radiation, some of which takes the
form of the visible light that we see from the sun, but much of which is
in invisible forms of electromagnetic radiation such as ultraviolet radiation. Some of the incoming radiation scatters off the molecules of our
atmosphere, giving us, for example, the blue skies of Earth rather than the
stark black skies of the moon or planets without an atmosphere such as
Mercury. The outgoing radiation is of a very different form than the
incoming radiation. The wavelengths of radiation produced by the relatively cool Earth are longer than those produced by the relatively hot sun,
and such radiation is invisible, falling outside the frequency band of
visible light. This radiation is primarily in the form of so-called infrared
energy, which we typically associate with heat.
For every 100 units of incoming solar radiation, roughly 30 parts are
reflected back to space by either clouds, the atmosphere, or reflective
areas on the Earth’s surface. This reflective capacity can vary over time as
changes occur in the spatial extent and distribution of reflective surfaces
such as clouds and ice cover. The remaining 70 units that are not reflected
are absorbed by either the atmosphere, clouds, or the surface. To maintain
a steady temperature or equilibrium, the Earth’s surface and atmosphere
must emit the same amount of radiation that they receive from the sun.

GLOBAL WARMING AND CLIMATE CHANGE

195

Thus, the Earth must emit that same quantity of 70 units of radiation back
out to space, but this time in the form of invisible, infrared radiation as
discussed above.
Because the amount of radiation produced by a body, such as the
Earth’s surface, increases as a function of the temperature of the body,
that 70 units of radiation determines, in turn, the surface temperature of
the Earth. This relationship constitutes a sort of natural thermostat wherein
the average surface temperature on Earth is predetermined by the requirement that it radiate the same amount of radiation to space that it absorbs
from the sun.
B. The greenhouse effect
If the only considerations determining the Earth’s surface temperature
were those described above, the Earth would be a frozen (and likely
lifeless) planet. There is an additional factor, the so-called greenhouse
effect, which leads to a warming of the lower atmosphere. The existence
of the greenhouse effect is not controversial; in fact, without it, the Earth
likely would not be habitable. Trace gases with certain chemical properties (the so-called greenhouse gases) absorb some of the infrared radiation
produced by the Earth’s surface. Due to this absorption, some fraction of
the original 70 units does not directly escape to space, but is instead
absorbed by these gases. Because greenhouse gases emit the same amount
of radiation they have absorbed, but equally in all directions (i.e., as much
downward as upward), the net effect of absorption by greenhouse gases
is to increase the total amount of radiation downward toward the Earth’s
surface and lower atmosphere. To maintain equilibrium, the Earth must
therefore emit more than the original 70 units of radiation, which in turn
means that surface temperature must increase. This is the atmospheric
greenhouse effect. The analogy with how a true greenhouse works is
loose —the precise processes involved are actually different. However, the
end effect is similar. The presence of greenhouse gases leads to a warming
of the Earth’s lower atmosphere. The Earth’s surface temperature is about
60°F warmer (60°F) than it would otherwise be (0°F).
C. The human greenhouse effect
It is essential to distinguish the human greenhouse effect from the natural greenhouse effect described above. The natural greenhouse effect
results from the natural presence of greenhouse gases such as carbon
dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide in the atmosphere. Their presence in
our atmosphere is a result of the balance between natural biological and
geochemical processes which maintain modest background levels of these
gases in our atmosphere.

196

MICHAEL E. MANN

In addition to these background greenhouse gas concentrations, human
beings have been increasing greenhouse gas concentrations, principally in
the form of carbon dioxide and methane, through industrial activity, primarily in the form of fossil fuel burning and agriculture, respectively. It is
this enhanced or human greenhouse effect which is primarily responsible
for human-caused (anthropogenic) climate change.
D. Feedbacks
There are a number of so-called feedback processes within the climate
system that act to either diminish or magnify the response to any external
perturbation of the climate system (which could include a change in solar
output, or a change in atmospheric greenhouse gas concentrations). On the
whole, the feedbacks average out to be positive, which means that the
response to the perturbation tends to be larger than one would expect in
the absence of feedbacks. In particular, this means that the response to an
increase in greenhouse gas concentrations arising from human activity is
larger than one would expect without considering feedback processes. One
important positive feedback is the so-called water vapor feedback. This
feedback derives from the fact that water vapor is also a potent greenhouse gas, but its presence in the atmosphere is controlled by surface temperatures themselves through the control they have on relative humidity
levels. Hence, a given initial amount of warming leads to even more warming because of the increased evaporation of water vapor into the atmosphere caused by warming. Another important positive feedback is the
so-called ice albedo feedback. This feedback derives from the fact that
warmer surface temperatures over the Earth in general are associated with
decreased global ice cover, reducing the reflectivity of the Earth’s surface
and allowing more solar radiation to be absorbed by the Earth. The one
significant feedback in the climate system which may be a negative, rather
than a positive, feedback is the cloud feedback. The best current scientific
thinking suggests that a warmer Earth will lead to greater cloud cover, and
the main impact of the increased cloud cover is increased reflection of solar
radiation back to space from cloud tops, a cooling impact. This feedback
is more uncertain than the water vapor and ice albedo feedbacks, because
of the complexity of representing the behavior of clouds in theoretical climate models. The net effect of all the feedbacks is a positive feedback that
roughly doubles the amount of warming that is expected from increasing
greenhouse gas concentrations in the absence of feedbacks.
E. Theoretical climate models
Theoretical models of the Earth’s climate system can be used to study
the behavior of the Earth’s climate, and to investigate the response of the
climate to imposed “forcing,” including the buildup of greenhouse gases

GLOBAL WARMING AND CLIMATE CHANGE

197

in the atmosphere due to fossil fuel burning. These models are based on
applying the laws of physics (fluid dynamics and radiation balance) and
principles of chemistry and biology to describe the behavior of the components of the climate system (the ocean, the atmosphere, ice sheets, and
the terrestrial and marine biosphere) and the interactions between them.
These models vary in their complexity, from the simplest “energy balance” models, which treat the Earth’s surface as a globally uniform layer
whose temperature is determined by a balance of incoming and outgoing
radiation, to the fully three-dimensional global climate models which solve
for not only the global radiation balance, but also the physical equations
of motion governing the atmosphere, the ocean, and ice, and also solve for
the exchanges of energy and momentum both within and between the different components of the climate. In many cases, such models also include
a dynamic representation of the Earth’s biosphere and carbon cycle.
These models must divide the atmosphere and ocean into discrete grid
cells or “boxes” which are typically several hundred kilometers or more
in length and width. The models therefore cannot explicitly resolve all of
the processes that are important in the atmosphere and ocean, including
individual clouds or winds and ocean currents that are smaller in scale
than the grid spacing. Instead, such “sub-grid-scale” processes must be
represented through statistical “parameterizations” that relate the properties of the atmosphere and the ocean at scales smaller than the grid
spacing to properties that are explicitly resolved by the model. For example, the average fraction of cloud cover over a grid box can be related to
the average relative humidity and vertical temperature profile for the grid
cell. Variations in the behavior of different climate models, such as how
much warming is realized for a given increase in greenhouse concentrations, are typically due to differences in the parameterizations of subgrid-scale processes, and clouds in particular.
Despite the numerous simplifications that are required to construct a
theoretical model of the climate system, these models have proven quite
successful in reproducing basic features of the Earth’s climate. These
features include the seasonal cycle of temperature and precipitation over
the Earth, and wind patterns such as jet streams. These features also
include the pattern of atmospheric circulation known as the “Hadley
Cell” circulation, which is associated with the tendency for rising, moist,
rainfall-producing air currents in equatorial regions which descend as
dry, desert-producing air currents in subtropical regions. The models also
successfully reproduce key features of the oceans such as the Gulf Stream
in the North Atlantic Ocean. The models have also proven increasingly
successful in reproducing important features in the natural variability of
the climate system such as the El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO)
phenomenon.
Finally, climate models have been tested in their ability to reproduce key
aspects of observed climate change. In 1987, Dr. James Hansen and his team

198

MICHAEL E. MANN

at the NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies predicted the warming
expected for the next two decades. The predictions turn out to have matched
the observed warming since that time remarkably well.1 In a later study
published just after the 1991 Mount Pinatubo volcanic eruption in the Philippines, Hansen and his collaborators also used a climate model to successfully predict that global surface temperatures would cool by roughly
one half degree Celsius for the two years following the eruption.2
F. Earth’s climate history
The Earth’s climate varies on a wide range of timescales. Over tens of
millions of years, geological processes such as plate tectonics have driven
substantial changes in the composition of the atmosphere, impacting the
levels of natural greenhouse gases. During the early Cretaceous period
(roughly 100 million years ago), for example, it is believed that carbon
dioxide levels were several times higher than they are at present, and
global temperatures several degrees warmer than today, warm enough
that the poles were ice-free. As long-term geological processes slowly
drove down greenhouse gas concentrations, the Earth’s climate entered
the so-called Pleistocene climate epoch approximately two million years
ago. The Pleistocene was characterized by oscillations between widespread glacial conditions (ice ages) and more moderate, relatively ice-free
interglacial periods, driven by natural, multi-millennial cycles in the geometry of the Earth’s orbit around the sun. The most recent ice age culminated roughly twenty thousand years ago in what is often termed the
“Last Glacial Maximum.” At that time, continental ice sheets extended
well into the mid-latitude regions of Europe and North America, covering
what is now New York City in the United States, and much of southern
England. Assessments of geological and other paleoclimate data suggest
that year-round global temperatures were about 4 to 5° Celsius colder
than the twentieth-century average, with the greatest cooling observed at
polar latitudes, and little cooling over large parts of the tropical oceans.
This glacial interval terminated roughly twelve thousand years ago, giving rise to the current, relatively ice-free interglacial period known as the
Holocene. With human activity over the past two centuries having now
driven greenhouse gas concentrations to levels higher than at least the
past 700,000 years, and perhaps the past several million years, many
scientists have argued that human beings have now pushed the climate
into a new, unprecedented regime billed as the “anthropocene.” 3
1
See James Hansen et al., “Global Temperature Change,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103 (2006): 14288–293.
2
See James Hansen et al., “Potential Climate Impact of the Mount Pinatubo Eruption,”
Geophysical Research Letters 19 (1992): 215–18.
3
This term was first coined by Nobel Prize winning scientist Paul Crutzen. See, e.g., P. J.
Crutzen and E. F. Stoermer, “The ‘Anthropocene,’ ” Global Change Newsletter 41 (2000): 12–13.

GLOBAL WARMING AND CLIMATE CHANGE

199

Over this latter period of the past one to two centuries, we know that
there are substantial trends consistent with a warming Earth, with global
surface temperatures rising, global sea level rising accordingly (as seawater expands with ocean heating and land ice melts and runs off to the
sea), and snow cover decreasing (as warmer temperatures favor an increasingly short season of snow cover). Paleoclimate evidence based on “proxy”
climate data such as tree-rings, corals, ice cores, and marine sediments
indicates that the warmth of the most recent decades likely exceeds that
for at least the past thirteen hundred years, and perhaps longer.4 Mountain glaciers which have existed for many thousands of years throughout
North America, the European Alps, the Andes, the Himalayas, and even
the ice caps that comprise the “Snows of Kilimanjaro” immortalized in
Ernest Hemingway’s short story of the same title, are disappearing now
or projected to disappear within decades. Such evidence hints at the
likelihood that the climate changes we are now witnessing may have no
precedent in many thousands of years.
G. Anthropogenic impact on climate
The primary influence of anthropogenic activity on the Earth’s climate
has been the alteration of the planetary energy balance associated with
the elevation of concentrations of greenhouse gases in the Earth’s atmosphere due to fossil fuel burning and other industrial, agricultural, or
land-use practices. A less-discussed but nonetheless influential secondary
anthropogenic impact on climate is the industrial production of so-called
aerosol, particulate matter that also alters the energy balance of the Earth’s
surface and atmosphere through the reflection and/or absorption of incoming solar radiation. Most prominent among these is sulfate aerosol, which
derives from industrial sulfur dioxide emissions associated with the burning of coal and oil. Also important is nitrate aerosol, produced from smog
that comes out of the tailpipes of automobiles, from the burning of oil, or
from ammonia used in fertilizers. Both sulfate and nitrate aerosols primarily reflect incoming solar radiation, reducing the amount of sunlight
reaching the Earth’s surface, and hence producing a regional cooling
impact. Unlike greenhouse gases, however, anthropogenic aerosols only
reside in the lower atmosphere, and for a relatively short amount of time.
Thus, the cooling impact is restricted to regions where they are continually produced, such as eastern North America and parts of Eurasia. The
cooling effect has therefore primarily been confined to the Northern Hemi4
This conclusion is drawn in the Fourth Assessment Report of the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. See, e.g., chapter 6 of the Working Group I report
by E. J. Jansen et al., “Paleoclimate,” in S. Solomon, et al., eds., Climate Change 2007: The
Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University
Press, 2007).

200

MICHAEL E. MANN

sphere. The time history of aerosol emissions is also somewhat different
from that of greenhouse gases, with aerosol production having increased
sharply during the early and mid-twentieth century, but tailing off thereafter due to antipollution measures, in particular the various Clean Air
Acts passed in recent decades by countries such as the United States,
Canada, and the United Kingdom. The regional cooling impact of anthropogenic aerosols consequently appears to have been at least partially
responsible for the cessation of Northern Hemisphere warming from the
1940s through the 1970s, and the accelerated warming of recent decades
now that aerosol production has decreased.
The observed changes in climate can be compared with the predictions
of theoretical climate models to assess whether or not human impacts on
the climate can indeed be detected in the observational record. So-called
detection and attribution studies comparing the predicted and observed
spatiotemporal patterns of climate change over the past century have shown
that the observed patterns of warming of the Earth’s surface and the upper
oceans, and the changes in prevailing winds and rainfall patterns, are consistent with the model-predicted patterns of human-caused climate change.
Moreover, the observed patterns, including the anomalous recent warming, cannot be explained by the models in terms of natural factors. For this
reason, the scientific community largely accepts the main predictions of
future climate change expected in response to various possible future emissions scenarios. These scenarios are explored below.
III. Projected Future Climate Changes
Projections of future climate change suffer from at least two basic uncertainties. One of these, and arguably the more fundamental, is that we
cannot predict the future course of human behavior. At one extreme is a
scenario wherein society chooses to take immediate action to curb fossil
fuel burning (turning to alternative carbon-free or carbon-neutral sources
of energy to meet its energy demands), dramatically increases its energy
efficiency, and stabilizes the growing global population within one or two
decades. In such a scenario, it is likely that greenhouse gas concentrations
can be kept below twice their pre-industrial level. This is the level which
many scientists believe constitutes the threshold for “dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system,” 5 that is, the limit beyond
which human-caused climate change likely poses a serious threat to society and the environment. At the other extreme is the scenario wherein we
continue to accelerate further the rate of our burning of fossil fuels, and
greenhouse gas concentrations rise at an ever-accelerating rate. In this
5
The stated objective of the Kyoto Protocol, which was agreed upon at a summit in Kyoto
as a followup to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC),
was to achieve “stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level
that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system.”

GLOBAL WARMING AND CLIMATE CHANGE

201

scenario, we will likely breach the aforementioned threshold by mid
century.
Climate modelers have investigated both of these extreme scenarios,
and a variety of other scenarios that fall in between, including a so-called
business-as-usual scenario, which is somewhat of a middle ground between
the two extremes. The climate impacts of these various emissions scenarios are explored by taking state-of-the-art theoretical climate models and
driving them with the various possible future human-caused greenhouse
gas concentration increases. Even for a given emissions scenario, however, not all climate models predict the same future climate changes.
Different models, instead, project a spread of possible future climate
changes for a given scenario because of the differences in the way that
different physical processes are represented among the different models.
For example, as discussed earlier, different models differ in how they
represent the properties of clouds and how clouds response to changes in
various other climate variables. This leads to differences in the magnitude
of climate feedbacks related to clouds, and, thus, differences in the net
amount of warming that results from a given increase in greenhouse gas
concentrations. Such differences are often summarized in terms of “climate sensitivity,” which is the amount of surface warming that is expected
in response to a doubling of greenhouse gas concentrations from their
pre-industrial levels (which will occur roughly midway through this century if we follow the current trajectory). State-of-the-art climate models
typically vary in their climate sensitivity over a range of roughly 2 to 5°C
for such a greenhouse gas concentration doubling. Of course, surface
warming is just one of many projected responses of the climate to future
emissions. Other responses include changes in patterns of precipitation
and soil moisture, regional climate changes, ice melt and rising sea levels,
and changes in the intensity of tropical cyclones. I discuss each of these
below.
A. Surface warming
The projected increase in global surface temperature from 2000 to 2100
ranges from roughly 1 to 6°C, depending on which of the emissions
scenarios (discussed above) is assumed, and on the climate sensitivity of
the particular model used.6 The scenario that most closely corresponds to
“business as usual” (i.e., in which there are no significant departures over
the next century from the historical pattern of increasing fossil fuel burning) is the so-called A1B scenario,7 a mid-range scenario that would result
6
S. Solomon et al., “Summary for Policymakers,” in Climate Change 2007: The Physical
Science Basis.
7
N. Nakicenovic and R. Swart, Special Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change on Emissions Scenarios (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000).

202

MICHAEL E. MANN

in more than a doubling of carbon dioxide levels, raising these levels from
their pre-industrial level of roughly 280 parts per million in the atmosphere by mass (ppm) to about 700 ppm. Such an increase in greenhouse
gas concentrations would, in turn, lead to a warming of between 2 and
4°C, depending on the model.
The lower-end emissions scenarios (such as the B1 scenario) 8 on average hold additional global surface warming by 2100 to below 2°C, which
is considered by many scientists to be the threshold that defines “dangerous anthropogenic interference” with the climate. However, it is noteworthy that even in this most conservative of scenarios, some models do
predict a breaching of the 2°C warming threshold by 2100. This observation underscores how uncertainty impacts decision-making in the context
of future climate change. While contrarians in the climate change debate
often argue that scientific uncertainty constitutes a reason not to act on
the problem, it is likely that precisely the opposite is true. If we are to
reduce the risk of dangerous changes in climate to an acceptable level, we
must consider not just those changes which are very likely given a particular course of action, but also those even more dramatic changes that,
even if not likely, are nonetheless plausible, and, if they occur, would have
truly calamitous consequences.9 In this particular example, we see that
even adopting a very stringent emissions policy in the decades ahead
does not insure that we will avoid dangerous interference with the climate system.
It is also important to note that the projected warming will not be
globally uniform. Greater warming is predicted over land than over ocean,
implying that, on average, human civilization will experience more warming than would be inferred from the simple global average surface temperature change typically depicted (which combines the more rapidly
warming land regions with the more slowly warming oceans). Among
land regions, the greatest warming is projected over the polar region of
the Northern Hemisphere, due primarily to the melting of sea ice. This
means that civilizations and ecosystems in these regions, some of which
are quite fragile, could be subject to especially large amounts of warming.
Other regional variations in predicted warming arise from changes in
wind patterns and ocean currents that themselves are a result of climate
change. Such changes include alterations in the pattern of the jet stream,
and changes in the paths of warm ocean currents, both of which are
discussed later in this essay in more detail. Another key issue is so-called
committed warming. Because of the long response timescales intrinsic to
the climate —in particular, the slow nature of the warming of the deep
oceans —we are committed to many decades of additional surface warm8

Ibid.
An example of fallacious support for near-term inaction based on a neglect of lowprobability, high-cost outcomes can be found in popular contrarian writings such as Bjørn
Lomborg, Cool It (New York: Knopf, 2007).
9

GLOBAL WARMING AND CLIMATE CHANGE

203

ing even if we hold greenhouse gas concentrations fixed at current levels
(which would require us to suddenly cease all burning of fossil fuels
today). The committed warming predicted by the models is, on average,
estimated at about 0.6°C by 2100. The issue of committed warming highlights how our decision-making today holds future implications for decades
to come, and illustrates the so-called procrastination penalty of failing to
act on climate change.10
B. Patterns of precipitation and soil moisture
As patterns of winds and atmospheric circulation change with a warming climate, changes are also predicted in the large-scale patterns of rainfall and precipitation which depend on these wind and circulation patterns.
Increased precipitation is generally predicted in the subpolar latitudes of
the world, especially during winter, due to a poleward shift in the jet
streams. By contrast, many mid-latitude regions, such as large parts of
Europe and North America, are likely to experience decreased rainfall,
particularly in summer, due to a poleward expansion of the subtropical
high-pressure centers. Counterintuitively, extreme precipitation events
and flooding may actually increase in regions where there is a decrease in
total rainfall, because the precipitation that does occur is more likely to be
concentrated in a smaller number of heavier rainfall events. This latter
effect is due to the existence of a more vigorous hydrological cycle in a
warmer world. Decreased summer precipitation in the extratropics, combined with greater rates of evaporation over large parts of the globe due
to warmer surface temperatures, leads to a tendency for decreased soil
moisture and drought over much of each of the major continents.
C. Regional climate changes
Precise projections of future regional climate change are hampered by
uncertainties in the details of how wind and ocean circulation patterns
will change in response to human impacts on the climate. Of particular
relevance in this context is the potential for changes in the ENSO phenomenon. While current-generation climate models perform reasonably
well in reproducing El Nino–like behavior, they do not reproduce certain
important features of the phenomenon, such as the detailed pattern of
trade winds in the equatorial Pacific. Because the interaction between the
trade winds and the ocean surface is an important component of El Nino,
this means that these features, and in particular how they might respond
to anthropogenic impacts on climate, are uncertain. The various state-ofthe-art climate models used in the IPCC’s Fourth Assessment Report
10
This use of the phrase ‘procrastination penalty’ appears, for example, in Bill McKibben,
“Warning on Warming,” The New York Review of Books, March 15, 2007.

204

MICHAEL E. MANN

differ significantly 11 in their predictions of the expected future changes in
the frequency and intensity of El Nino events in association with anthropogenic climate change. Indeed, there is no consensus as to whether or
not El Nino events will be more frequent and of greater magnitude in the
future. If this were to be the case, such a change would lead to increased
winter precipitation in certain regions, such as the southwestern United
States, which are currently predicted to suffer from increased drought,
and decreased precipitation (and thus worsened drought conditions) in
other regions, such as southern Africa.
Similar uncertainties exist in other climate phenomena influencing
regional temperature and precipitation patterns, such as the so-called
North Atlantic Oscillation or NAO, which is characterized by a fluctuation from year to year in the pattern of the jet stream over the North
Atlantic ocean, primarily during winter. In its positive phase, the NAO
brings relatively warm and rainy conditions to Europe, cold conditions to
the northeastern United States, and dry conditions to the Middle East.
The opposite, negative phase brings the opposite conditions in those
regions. While it is currently not known with confidence how climate
change will impact the NAO, some models indicate an increased tendency for the NAO to reside in its positive phase. If such predictions hold
true, water resources could be further diminished in the already waterstarved Middle East.
It is also possible that changes in large-scale ocean circulation patterns
such as the so-called ocean conveyor belt could impact regional climate,
though in ways that cannot yet be confidently determined. The conveyorbelt circulation drives the poleward flow of warm, subtropical North
Atlantic waters, providing a warming influence on Iceland and coastal
regions of Europe. This circulation is driven by the sinking of cold saline
waters in the subpolar regions of the North Atlantic ocean. In some simulations of the climatic response to anthropogenic greenhouse gas increases,
the freshwater runoff to the ocean produced by melting polar ice leads to
a significant weakening or even a shutdown of this ocean current system,
since fresh water is less dense than saline water and inhibits the sinking
motion that drives the conveyor-belt circulation. It has been speculated
that such changes could, counterintuitively, trigger cooling in regions
surrounding the North Atlantic (such as Europe) in response to global
warming. Indeed, such speculation has fostered fictional popular accounts
of the threat of another ice age as a result of anthropogenic influence on
climate.12 However, experiments with current-generation climate models
11
See section 10.3.5.3 of chapter 10 of the Working Group I report: G. A. Meehl et al.,
“Global Climate Projections,” in Solomon et al., eds., Climate Change 2007: The Physical
Science Basis.
12
It is this (flawed) scientific premise that provides the basis for the plot of the disaster
movie The Day After Tomorrow, released by Twentieth Century Fox in 2004, written and
directed by Roland Emmerich.

GLOBAL WARMING AND CLIMATE CHANGE

205

do not support such a scenario. Such experiments indicate, at most, only
a moderate weakening of the ocean conveyor belt, damping but not erasing the warming predicted for Europe or other regions neighboring the
North Atlantic as a result of increased greenhouse gas concentrations. It
is nonetheless possible that a weakening of the conveyor-belt ocean circulation could have negative environmental or economic implications,
threatening, for example, marine ecosystems and commercial fishing. Moreover, this is one of several examples where the changes could take place
abruptly in response to gradual warming, because of “tipping points” in
the way ocean circulation may respond to larger-scale climate changes.
Such tipping points are of particular concern in evaluating the potential
societal and environmental threat posed by future climate change. (See,
for example, Section V below.)
D. Ice melt and rising sea levels
Among the most significant potential impacts of a warming climate are
prospects for significant melting of the polar ice caps, and the related
phenomenon of rising global sea levels. Even if we ceased fossil fuel
burning today, the Earth’s surface would continue to warm for decades,
and the deep ocean would continue to warm for centuries due to the
“committed warming” phenomenon referred to in Section III.A above. It
is predicted that a combination of the thermal expansion of seawater and
the melting of mountain glaciers associated with this warming will lead
to between a third and a full meter of global sea-level rise by 2100 under
the “business as usual” emissions scenario.13 It is possible, however, that
the sea-level rise could be considerably greater.
The Greenland and Antarctic ice sheets, for example, may melt more
rapidly than is currently projected by global climate models. Even stateof-the-art climate models typically employ a fairly primitive representation of ice sheet behavior. Recent observations reveal that there are a
number of processes that appear to be active in actual ice sheet behavior but are not included in current models —processes which could lead
to a more rapid collapse of ice sheets than those models predict. These
processes include the formation of deep fractures called “moulins” that
allow meltwater to penetrate to the base of the ice sheet, where they
13
This estimate is taken from a recent peer-reviewed study published in Science (S.
Rahmstorf, “A Semi-Empirical Approach to Projecting Future Sea-Level Rise,” Science 315
[2007]: 368–70), which was published too late for inclusion in the IPCC Fourth Assessment
Report. This recent work suggests sea-level-rise estimates that are moderately higher than
suggested in the IPCC report. While the IPCC report is widely recognized as the most
comprehensive assessment of the peer-reviewed climate change research, one shortcoming
of the report was that the contribution to sea level from melting continental ice sheets was
ignored, simply because its contribution is uncertain. This decision insured that the magnitude of sea-level rise would be systematically underestimated in the IPCC report, and
more recent work supports modestly higher estimates, as cited above.

206

MICHAEL E. MANN

encourage rapid sliding of the ice in the form of ice streams, and can
lead to accelerated collapse of the continental ice sheet. Another such
process is the buttressing effect of ice shelves. When ice shelves —thick
sea ice flowing from inland glaciers out onto the ocean surface —
collapse, as did a large part of the famous Larsen Ice Shelf in February
2002, they can destabilize the inland glaciers, allowing them to break
up and flow out to sea, also potentially accelerating the collapse of the
continental ice sheet. If recent observations of such phenomena are
indicative of a larger-scale pattern of changes in ice sheet behavior, it is
possible that the ice sheets could collapse far more rapidly than predicted by current models (which project their collapse over a period of
multiple centuries).
Paleoclimatic evidence suggests than most of the Greenland ice sheet,
and some fraction of the Antarctic ice sheet, were absent roughly 120,000
years ago, when the Earth was perhaps only slightly warmer than at
present. The destruction of the Greenland ice sheet would lead to roughly
five meters of sea-level rise, enough to submerge substantial lowland and
island regions of the world, including major parts of the U.S. Gulf and
East coasts, roughly the lower third of Florida, large parts of the Netherlands and Belgium, and populated tropical low-lying regions such as
Bangladesh. If, in addition, the west Antarctic ice sheet were to collapse
(which recent observations indicate might indeed now be underway),14
the eventual sea-level rise could be closer to ten meters, submerging
major U.S. coastal cities such as New York. While state-of-the-art coupled
climate/ice sheet models currently predict that such sea-level rises might
take several centuries to occur, it is possible that the rate could be considerably faster than those models predict due to processes such as those
discussed above, which are currently not incorporated in the models.
Moreover, because of the complex nature of these processes, it is possible
that ice sheet collapse (and associated sea-level rise) could occur suddenly and irreversibly in response to smooth, steady warming —another
possible climate-change tipping point.
E. Tropical cyclones
Climate change is likely to impact the characteristics of tropical cyclones
(the strongest of which are known as “hurricanes” in the Atlantic ocean).
Warming tropical ocean temperatures associated with global warming
increase the maximum possible intensity, and thus the destructive potential, of tropical cyclones. In the Atlantic, where long-term data are available, a close relationship is observed between warming ocean temperatures
14
E. Rignot, “Recent Antarctic Ice Mass Loss from Radar Interferometry and Regional
Climate Modelling,” Nature Geoscience 1 (2008): 106–10.

GLOBAL WARMING AND CLIMATE CHANGE

207

in recent decades and the increased powerfulness of hurricanes.15 Though
there appears to be a consensus that warmer ocean surface temperatures
will favor increased tropical cyclone intensities, there is less agreement
with regard to whether tropical cyclones will become less or more frequent in response to future climate change. Additional factors such as
alterations in the large-scale atmospheric circulation can also influence
the environmental favorability for tropical cyclone development. Increased
wind shear (that is, winds of opposing directions or different strengths at
different levels in the atmosphere), for example, can serve to create an
unfavorable environment for the development of tropical cyclones because
they interfere with the highly organized vertical circulation pattern required
to maintain a tropical cyclone. Thus, even if warmer oceans tend to favor
tropical cyclone development, if climate change also leads to an increase
in the amount of wind shear in the atmosphere in a given region, fewer
tropical cyclones may form. However, future changes in wind patterns
are uncertain, due (for example) to the uncertainties in how climate change
will impact ENSO, as discussed earlier.
IV. Impacts on Our Environment and Society
The projected climate changes due to anthropogenic impact on the
Earth’s climate, as I have noted, include warmer surface temperatures,
shifting patterns of rainfall, more widespread drought, rising sea levels,
and more extreme meteorological conditions including flooding and intense
tropical cyclones. These changes in climate are likely to have profound
impacts on ecosystems, human health, water resources, agriculture, and
the basic infrastructure that supports modern civilization. On balance,
impacts are likely to be harmful, rather than beneficial, and include a
greater tendency for drought and loss of water resources in some regions,
widespread extinction of animal species, decreases in global food production, loss of coastline and coastal wetlands, increased severity of storm
damage and flooding in many regions, and increased spread of infectious
disease. These additional stresses on society could, in turn, lead to greater
conflict. The extent of any such impacts will depend on the rate and
amount of future warming, and on the nature of adaptations that are
undertaken. In what follows, I will consider each of the various impacts
in more detail.
A. Ecosystems
Climate change is likely to influence the functioning of ecosystems and
to impact biodiversity. Plants and animals have established their current
15
K. Emanuel, “Increasing Destructiveness of Tropical Cyclones over the Past 30 Years,”
Nature 436 (2005): 686–88.

208

MICHAEL E. MANN

geographic ranges through long-term adaptation to seasonal climate patterns. Anthropogenic climate change is likely to alter those seasonal patterns on a timescale far more rapid than has occurred naturally over past
millennia. It is this rapid rate of climate change which is likely to challenge the natural adaptive capacity of living things.
It has been estimated that anywhere from a fifth to a third of all plant
and animal species are likely to be at an increased risk of extinction for an
additional warming between 1.5 and 2.5°C,16 the range of warming predicted by 2100 in even the lower-range emissions scenarios. For warming
in excess of 4.5°C, which is projected by some models for the higher-end
emissions scenarios (e.g., in the aforementioned A1B scenario), as much
as 40 percent of species would be at risk of extinction. Such widespread
extinctions would, in turn, likely threaten the delicate balance and trophic
structures of ecosystems, posing a wider threat to ecosystem function and
services and biodiversity.
There are a number of mechanisms by which climate change is predicted to lead to species loss. In temperate regions, warming and shifts in
seasonal patterns of precipitation are likely to confuse the seasonal cues
controlling the timing of leaf-out of trees, egg-laying and hatching by
birds and insects, and the seasonal migration patterns of birds, fish, and
other migratory species. For high-latitude ecosystems, continued warming may threaten many of the so-called charismatic megafauna at the top
of the food chain which rely on broken sea ice for hunting, such as polar
bears and walruses. A number of climate-change impacts, such as warming oceans, decreased sea ice, and changes in ocean current systems and
salinity patterns, are likely to impact algae and plankton populations, and
therefore may threaten fish and other organisms which forage upon them.
The second largest of all penguin species, the Antarctic King penguins, for
example, may be threatened by continued warming of the ocean, which
appears to be decreasing the populations of the small fish they feed on in
their region of winter foraging at the northern edge of the Antarctic
continent.17
Climate change is likely to cause the destruction of rare and fragile
habitats that are home to “specialist species” unable to thrive in other
environments. For example, the coastal wetlands, salt marshes, and mangrove swamps that are home to many rare species are threatened by
rising sea levels. Certain amphibian species such as the golden toad,18
whose habitats are limited to certain isolated tropical cloud forests, have
16
M. L. Parry et al., “Summary for Policymakers,” in Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fourth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University
Press, 2007).
17
C. Le Bohec et al., “King Penguin Population Threatened by Southern Ocean Warming,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (2008): 10.1073/pnas.0712031105.
18
See J. Alan Pounds et al., “Widespread Amphibian Extinctions from Epidemic Disease
Driven by Global Warming,” Nature 439 (2006): 161–67.

GLOBAL WARMING AND CLIMATE CHANGE

209

either met or are meeting their demise as these environments literally
disappear in response to warming atmospheric temperatures.
In many cases, the combined stresses of climate-change impacts and
other anthropogenic disturbances to the environment, such as changing
land-use patterns and pollution of the atmosphere and oceans, pose a
significantly greater threat to ecosystems than does any one of these
stresses alone. Nowhere else is this phenomenon better illustrated than
with coral reef systems, which contain much of the ocean’s biodiversity.19
Threats to the viability of coral reefs include increased incidence of “bleaching” (a loss of symbiotic algae at high water temperatures) due to warming oceans, and damage to reefs by increasingly destructive tropical
cyclones. These effects are likely to add to stresses from increased ocean
acidification (also a result of anthropogenic increases in atmospheric carbon dioxide concentrations) and marine pollution. Another example of
the confluence of multiple stresses is the threat to migratory animals that
are likely to encounter physical impediments from human constructions,
such as highways and fences, as they attempt to migrate away from
increasingly inhospitable climatic conditions. Destruction of coastal wetlands and other habitats due to human development also compound the
stresses on ecosystems.
B. Human health
Human health will likely be detrimentally impacted by climate change
in a number of different ways, including through greater spread of infectious disease, increased incidence of environment-related health afflictions (including heat stress), and more widespread malnutrition.
Infectious disease is likely to become more widespread as the geographical ranges and seasonal windows of activity of disease vectors such as
insects and rodents widen with warmer temperatures. For example, the
unusually warm winter of 1999 in New York State led to an outbreak of
the West Nile virus.20 In the southwestern United States, alternations
between drought and floods related to ENSO have created conditions
favorable for the rodent-spread hantavirus,21 while the spread of mosquitoborne Rift Valley fever in equatorial east Africa was related to wet conditions associated with ENSO.22 To the extent that climate change leads to
19
O. Hoegh-Guldberg et al., “Coral Reefs Under Rapid Climate Change and Ocean
Acidification,” Science 318 (2007): 1737–42.
20
D. S. Asnis et al., “The West Nile Virus Encephalitis Outbreak in the United States
(1999–2000),” Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 951 (2001): 161–71.
21
B. Hjelle, and G. E. Glass, “Outbreak of Hantavirus Infection in the Four Corners
Region of the United States in the Wake of the 1997–1998 El Niño–Southern Oscillation,”
Journal of Infectious Diseases 181 (2000): 1569–73.
22
K. J. Linthicum et al., “Climate and Satellite Indicators to Forecast Rift Valley Fever
Epidemics in Kenya,” Science 285 (1999): 397–400.

210

MICHAEL E. MANN

a greater number of large ENSO events, climate change could increase the
spread of infectious disease indirectly through its impacts on ENSO.
Among other afflictions which may be worsened by climate change are
diarrhea, cardio-respiratory illness, and allergic reactions to increased levels of pollen in extratropical regions experiencing longer growing seasons.23 Moreover, global warming may also worsen air pollution by
increasing concentrations of ozone, which in the lower atmosphere is a pollutant that irritates the human lung. Warming air temperatures both increase
ozone production and promote stagnant atmospheric conditions, which
favors the accumulation of high levels of ozone in the lower atmosphere.
Urban areas, already suffering under increased pollution, are likely to experience especially large increases in pollution. One recent study, for example, estimated the potential for an increase of 1,000 pollution-related deaths
in the United States and 20,000 worldwide (and an increase in nonfatal respiratory illnesses) for each degree Celsius of additional warming.24
Heat stress represents an additional climate-change health threat. Heat
waves represent a significant threat, particularly in regions where air
conditioning is not widely available, and for the very young or elderly,
who are least physiologically able to tolerate extreme warmth. During the
European heat wave of 2003, for example, European fatalities neared
35,000.25 Most of those who perished were elderly people who were
unable to escape the persistent and oppressive heat. It is highly likely that
heat waves will become more common and more intense with global
warming.26 For example, heat waves that previously might have been
considered one-in-one-hundred-year events could in many regions become
one-in-two-year events, because of the dramatic impact that surface warming of even one or two degrees Celsius has on the probability of shortterm periods of extreme warmth.
Finally, worsened malnutrition is a likely consequence of climate change,
due to reduced agricultural and livestock yields in many underdeveloped
countries already afflicted by food shortages. The impacts of climate change
on agriculture and farming are discussed in more detail below.
C. Agriculture and farming
Agricultural productivity may increase modestly overall in extratropical regions in response to a local warming of 1 to 3°C.27 Similar increases
23
U. Confalonieri et al., “Human Health,” in M. L. Parry, et al., eds., Climate Change 2007:
Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability, 391–431.
24
M. Z. Jacobson, “On the Causal Link between Carbon Dioxide and Air Pollution Mortality,” Geophysical Research Letters 35 (2008): L03809, doi:10.1029/2007GL031101.
25
See, e.g., S. Bhattacharya, “European Heatwave Caused 35,000 Deaths,” New Scientist,
October 10, 2003.
26
Ibid., 11.
27
W. E. Easterling et al., “Food, Fibre and Forest Products,” in Parry et al., eds., Climate
Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability, 273–313.

GLOBAL WARMING AND CLIMATE CHANGE

211

are expected for livestock productivity, since this relies on feed stocks
which are themselves agricultural products. These increases are primarily
a result of the lengthening of growing seasons in temperate regions associated with large-scale warming. However, for even greater amounts of
warming, agricultural productivity begins to fall off, since such warming
begins to rise above the optimal temperature levels for photosynthetic
activity that plants have evolved through long-term evolution. In tropical
and subtropical regions, crop productivity is projected to decrease for
even weak local warming because essentially any warming exceeds these
optimal temperature levels. Increased incidence of droughts and flood
events may lead to further declines in agricultural and farming productivity, with the impacts influencing subsistence farmers most severely. In
regions such as the African Sahel, decreases in agricultural productivity
have already been observed due to a reduced growing season resulting
from warmer and drier conditions. One problematic aspect of the projected trends in agricultural productivity is that they differentially threaten
the tropical regions and, thus, the developing world, while (at least in the
near term) benefiting the extratropics and, hence, the developed world. In
this sense, climate change represents a redistribution of resources from
the poor to the well off, a troubling ethical implication that I will discuss
in more detail later (in Section V.C).
D. Water resources
Water resources are also likely to be substantially impacted by climate
change. At current rates of warming, by the middle of this century a 10 to
40 percent increase in average river runoff and water availability has been
projected in higher latitudes and in certain wet regions in the tropics,
while decreases of similar magnitude are expected in other parts of the
tropics, and in the dry regions of the subtropics, particularly in summer.28
In many cases, water availability is decreasing or expected to decrease in
regions that are already stressed for water resources, such as the African
Sahel, western North America, southern Africa, and western Australia. In
those regions, drought is likely to increase in magnitude and extent, with
negative impacts (see above) on agriculture and the raising of livestock.
Increased and earlier spring runoff is already being observed in extratropical regions with glacial or snow-fed streams and rivers, such as
western North America. Fresh water currently stored by mountain glaciers and snow in both the tropics and the extratropics is projected to
decline, reducing fresh water availability for more than 15 percent of the
world’s population which relies upon these freshwater sources. It is also
likely that warming temperatures, through their impact on biological
28
Z. W. Kundzewicz et al., “Freshwater Resources and Their Management,” in Parry
et al., eds., Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability, 173–210.

212

MICHAEL E. MANN

activity in lakes and rivers, may have an adverse impact on water quality,
further diminishing access to safe water sources for drinking or farming.
Risk-management procedures are already being taken by some countries
in response to expected changes in water availability.
E. Energy
Energy availability and use will both be impacted by climate change.
Warmer conditions will almost certainly fuel increased energy demand
for air conditioning. This will be partially offset by decreased energy
demand for winter heating in extratropical regions. Any such changes in
energy demand will be superimposed on a continually increasing percapita demand for energy as the underdeveloped world industrializes,
and a global population likely to increase for at least the next few decades.
Climate change will not only influence energy resources through its
impact on energy demand. There are also ways in which climate change
could impact energy supply. Shifting water resources as a result of the
changing patterns of rainfall discussed earlier could impair energy production. Most current methods of energy generation require water either
directly, such as hydroelectric and hydrothermal energy generation, or
indirectly by steam turbines in coal-fired power plants, or as a coolant in
nuclear power plants. Such energy sources are therefore likely to be diminished in regions with reduced water supplies. Increasing use of certain
other methods of energy generation could both ameliorate this threat and
contribute toward the mitigation of the greenhouse gas emissions responsible for projected climate changes. I discuss such issues below in Section VI.
F. Societal infrastructure
Projected climate changes pose numerous threats to societal infrastructure. As is true with many other climate-change impacts, poor communities and nations, with their limited adaptive capacities, are likely to be
disproportionately impacted.29 Among the more damaging impacts are
possible increases in certain types of severe weather (e.g., hailstorms,
tornadoes, and tropical cyclones), the predicted tendency in some highly
populated regions for increased frequency of heavy flooding, and the
likely increase in wildfire threats over regions such as western North
America, as a result of dryer conditions, decreased snow-pack, and thus
decreased summer ground moisture, all favoring a longer fire season.30
Such increases will threaten homes, dams, and other human infrastructure. In high-latitude and mountain regions, melting permafrost is likely
29
T. J. Wilbanks et al., “Industry, Settlement, and Society,” in Parry et al., eds., Climate
Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability, 357–90.
30
A. L. Westerling et al., “Warming and Earlier Spring Increase Western U.S. Forest
Wildfire Activity,” Science 313 (2006): 940–43.

GLOBAL WARMING AND CLIMATE CHANGE

213

to lead to ground instability or rock avalanches, further threatening structures in those regions. Increased coastal vulnerability due to sea-level rise
and the potential for increased severity of tropical cyclones and hurricanes represents a heightened threat to coastal infrastructure throughout
the world. An additional warming of 1 to 3°C, it has been estimated, will
threaten millions more people with the risk of annual flooding. Densely
populated poor low-lying regions in Africa, Asia, and island nations will
be most vulnerable due to their limited adaptive capacity, but regions of
developed nations such as the low countries of Europe and the East and
Gulf coasts of the United States will also be vulnerable in higher-end
sea-level rise scenarios. Adaptive steps are already being taken by some
governments through the building of dams and drainage works in response
to the increased coastal vulnerability expected from projected future climate changes.
V. Evaluation of the Threat
One of the challenges faced by society involves how to weigh the
potential costs and benefits of dealing with the climate-change threat. It is
useful in this context to focus on three key kinds of considerations. The
first of these —and perhaps the more straightforward —are the economic
considerations, which weigh the potential financial costs of adaptation
and mitigation against the benefits of thwarting the various threats to our
environment and societal infrastructure associated with climate change.
The second of these, the potential threat to our security, is somewhat more
speculative but no less significant. The third of these are ethical considerations, which are more fundamentally philosophical, yet equally if not
more important than the other two kinds of considerations. Ethical considerations focus on issues such as justice and equity that are central to
human civilization as it struggles to deal with the challenges of climate
change. I discuss each of these considerations in more detail below.
A. Economic considerations
Obviously, any analysis of the economic implications of climate change
and climate-change mitigation must weigh the costs of combating climate
change against the benefits of doing so (alternatively viewed as the costs
of inaction). For example, the immediate costs of dramatic reductions in
fossil fuel burning are known to potentially be quite large. However, only
recently have there been systematic analyses of the benefits of taking
action. Such costs and benefits are typically evaluated through a type of
cost-benefit analysis known as “integrated assessment.” In this context,
integrated assessments are performed by coupling climate model projec-

214

MICHAEL E. MANN

tions to economic models.31 The impacts are typically quantified in terms
of the fractional change of gross domestic product (GDP) that can be
expected given a particular climate-change scenario. By driving the climate models with a range of possible emissions scenarios, both the costs
and the benefits for a given scenario can be estimated in terms of a
projected change in GDP. (This is typically expressed in current dollars,
i.e., adjusting for future assumed inflation.) There are a number of implicit
assumptions in these estimates, some of which are potentially limiting
and arguably quite problematic.
One of the primary limitations of these analyses is the use of very crude
“energy balance” climate models (see Section II.E above) to generate
climate-change projections. When such simple climate models are used,
impacts must be based solely on estimated changes in global average
temperature, the single variable predicted by the models. Yet, as we have
seen (see Sections III.C and III.D), many of the most significant potential
climate-change impacts, such as the potential for rapid sea-level rise or
possible abrupt changes in ocean circulation, represent possible tipping
points that cannot simply be linked to the smoothly evolving long-term
changes in global temperature, and for which both the probability and
timing of occurrence is unknown. Perhaps even more problematic, the
economic estimates do not take into account so-called externalities —that
is, the intrinsic value of natural ecosystems and our environment, which
are under threat from climate change as detailed in Section IV of this
essay. This oversight is, of course, a special case of the well-known “tragedy of the commons.” 32 Finally, there are deep ethical considerations,
which are not incorporated at all in traditional economic cost-benefit
analyses (see subsection C below for a more detailed discussion).
The cost-benefit calculations typically involve an estimate of the so-called
social cost of carbon (SCC), which is defined as the marginal benefit at
some point in time of reducing carbon emissions, often evaluated in U.S.
dollars per ton of atmospheric carbon produced. The SCC depends on
several factors, including the projected costs of climate-change damages
caused by rising carbon dioxide concentrations. A complicating factor is
the so-called social discount rate, which measures the degree to which
consumption now is preferred to consumption at some time in the future
(with prices held fixed, but assuming that incomes rise at the same rate as
per-capita GDP).
There is no common agreement upon what the social discount rate
should be in the context of climate-change mitigation. Unlike standard
31
See, e.g., W. D. Nordhaus, “To Slow or Not to Slow: The Economics of the Greenhouse
Effect,” The Economic Journal 101 (1991): 920–37; and W. D. Nordhaus, “Economic Approaches
to Greenhouse Warming,” in Global Warming: Economic Policy Responses, ed. R. Dornbusch
and J. M. Poterba (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1991).
32
This concept was first described by W. F. Lloyd, Two Lectures on the Checks to Population
(Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1833).

GLOBAL WARMING AND CLIMATE CHANGE

215

financial discounting, there are substantial uncertainties in climatechange impacts that make it difficult and, perhaps, impossible to predict
the precise impacts that will result from a given pattern of greenhouse gas
emissions. Such uncertainties render standard economic discounting
approaches (e.g., setting the rate equal to the return on treasury bills) 33
invalid, because the choice of discount rate reflects the level of confidence
that society will be able to solve environmental problems as they arise. Yet
these levels of confidence may have no underlying scientific foundation
where there are tipping points such as those discussed above that could
lead to unpredictable, dramatic, and irreversible changes in climate with
potentially catastrophic damage costs. For example, if we cross a threshold wherein we set in motion the irreversible melting of the major ice
sheets, we could be faced with an inevitable sea-level rise of ten meters or
more, which would insure the destruction of a large number of major
cities throughout the world, including New York. While perhaps unlikely
given our best current scientific assessments, it is conceivable that this rise
could take place over the course of a century. If so, the damages would be
essentially incalculable and, for all intents and purposes, the costs can be
considered infinite. There is a disaggregation between those primarily
causing climate change (i.e., emitters from industrialized nations) and
those most likely to suffer the damages of climate change (in large part,
the poorest people in the developing world). Climate-change mitigation
also involves an intergenerational transfer of wealth and utility, since
current generations gain (e.g., from access to cheap energy) at the expense
(e.g., from a degraded environment) of future generations. Aside from
introducing some troubling ethical implications (which I will discuss later),
such issues pose a major challenge to conventional cost-benefit approaches,
which are ill-equipped to deal with the complications introduced by such
disaggregation or intergenerational transfer issues.
The net result of these complications is that economic models are relatively unconstrained with regard to the social discount rates they employ.
Coupled with the fact that the choice of which strategies are more optimal
(e.g., little versus major near-term investment in mitigation of greenhouse
gas emissions) is highly sensitive to the discount rate used, this lack of
constraint means that conclusions as to whether or not to mitigate climate
change from economic models are not especially robust. Some of the
earlier economic studies by leading researcher William Nordhaus assumed
a fairly high discount rate of 6 percent.34 At such high levels of discounting, the economic models tend to favor a delay in the mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions in favor of near-term gains of higher GDP. More
33
Most serious economists would not advocate such a choice for the social discount rate.
Nonetheless, libertarian activists sometimes do. See, e.g., J. Taylor, “Nordhaus vs. Stern,”
http://www.cato-at-liberty.org/2006/11/28/nordhaus-vs-stern/.
34
See, e.g., W. D. Nordhaus, ed., Economics and Policy Issues in Climate Change (Washington, DC: Resources for the Future, 1998).

216

MICHAEL E. MANN

recent studies by Nordhaus have assumed a considerably more stringent
3 percent discount rate.35 (Notably, some advocates against greenhouse
gas mitigation continue to misrepresent Nordhaus’s work by citing the
higher rates from his older work and ignoring the considerably lower
rates he has favored in his more recent work).36 Other researchers have
argued for even lower rates. Most notably, Sir Nicholas Stern, head of the
Government Economic Service in Great Britain, argues for a 1.4 percent
social discount rate based on ethical principles (in particular, that it is
wrong to discount the utility of future generations who will suffer the
consequences of our actions today).37
Whether one adopts the very low (1.4 percent) rate advocated by Stern
(which amounts to an SCC in the range of $160/ton of atmospheric carbon, according to one estimate), or the modestly higher (3 percent) rate
advocated by Nordhaus (which amounts to an SCC of roughly $60/ton),
the economic model calculations generally indicate that we should invest
significantly in the mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions to forestall the
damages posed by the higher-end emissions scenarios. In the low-range
(B1 and B2) through “business as usual” (A1B) emissions scenarios, which
collectively are likely to lead to a 1 to 4°C overall warming of the globe
(see Section III.A above), losses are likely in certain, but not all, economic
sectors. Losses are predicted to be especially great in tropical and highlatitude regions, while other regions could potentially benefit.38 For warming in excess of 4°C, costs are estimated to clearly exceed benefits overall,
with aggregate global economic losses estimated to be between 1 and 5
percent of the global gross domestic product (GDP).
Though scientific uncertainty is sometimes argued as a reason to delay
taking action to mitigate climate change, incorporation of uncertainty into
the economic models actually leads to the conclusion that an even greater
near-term investment should be made.39 This feature arises from the
“heavy-tailed” nature of the statistical distribution of climate-change damages, that is, from the fact that uncertainty leads to the existence of lowprobability, but extremely high-cost scenarios (e.g., the tipping-point
example of abrupt and irreversible sea-level rise discussed above). Indeed,
such considerations can be argued to motivate —even within the context
of standard cost-benefit analysis —the so-called precautionary principle,40
35
W. D. Nordhaus, “Critical Assumptions in the Stern Review on Climate Change,”
Science 317 (2007): 201–2.
36
See, e.g., Lomborg, Cool It.
37
N. Stern, The Economics of Climate Change: The Stern Review (Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press, 2007).
38
S. H. Schneider et al., “Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability,” in Parry et al., eds.,
Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability, 779–810.
39
See, e.g., David Biello’s interview of economist Gary Yohe of Wesleyan University, in D.
Biello, “Clash: Gary Yohe,” Scientific American, November 26, 2007.
40
C. Raffensberger and J. Tickner, eds., Protecting Public Health and the Environment: Implementing the Precautionary Principle (Washington, DC: Island Press, 1999).

GLOBAL WARMING AND CLIMATE CHANGE

217

that is, the principle that the burden of proof in policymaking, in the presence of significant scientific uncertainty, falls upon those advocating inaction, where such inaction has the potential to cause extreme and/or
irreversible societal or environmental harm. In essence, the finite probability of catastrophic damages imposes an essentially infinite expected cost
on inaction. In the presence of such infinite expected costs, cost-benefit analysis will indicate taking whatever mitigation measures are available, short
of those which might incur essentially infinite costs themselves.
Standard economic considerations dictate that society will act to reduce
carbon emissions as long as the SCC exceeds the costs associated with
emissions reduction. This means that the SCC can be regulated by governments (e.g., through taxes on carbon, or through tradable carbonemission credits) in such a way as to insure that net carbon emissions are
kept below some level, e.g., the level perceived to constitute “dangerous
anthropogenic interference” with the climate (see the discussion at the
beginning of Section III). Indeed, a carbon trading scheme has already
been initiated in Europe.41
B. Security considerations
There is a popular misconception that concern over climate-change
impacts is confined to political progressives. Yet, quite to the contrary, a
constituency typically more thought of as being aligned with the conservative end of the political spectrum —the national defense community —
has increasingly become concerned with the threats that climate change
may increasingly pose to national security in the future.42
Irrespective of climate change itself, reliance on fossil fuels naturally
threatens the national security of nations such as the United States by
placing them at the mercy of volatile foreign regimes in satisfying their
energy needs. There are also direct threats of climate change itself to
national security. Paramount among these threats is the defense of national
borders. A case in point relates to the dramatic melt-back of Arctic sea ice
41
The European Union Carbon Emission Trading scheme covers slightly less than half of
the EU’s energy- and industry-related greenhouse gas emissions. Emission allowances or
“permits” are apportioned to major emitters for a period of several years at a time. The
scheme requires emitters to monitor and report their emissions, and to return to the government a number of permits that is equivalent to their emissions on an annual basis.
Permits can be bought from other emitters or the government as needed, or sold when they
are available in excess of what is required by the emitter, thus creating a tradable emissions
market. Upon instituting this scheme in 2005, the price of carbon credits began near the low
end of the range of SCC estimates cited in the text, but then rose to around US$100/ton,
close to the mid-range of estimates, before falling in 2006 (because the credits were believed
to have been too generous). These fluctuations all fall within the range of SCC estimates
cited in the text.
42
K. K. Campbell et al., The Age of Consequences: The Foreign Policy and National Security
Implications of Global Climate Change (Washington, DC: Center for Strategic and International
Studies, 2007).

218

MICHAEL E. MANN

witnessed during the summer of 2007. Sea ice retreated to a record minimum of under 3.5 million square kilometers (for comparison, the longterm average annual minimum is roughly 6 million square kilometers).
With this dramatic retreat came the opening of the Northwest Passage, an
ice-free path through the Arctic ocean connecting the Atlantic and Pacific
ocean basins that had remained elusive in modern history, though its
fleeting existence in the past had been anecdotally reported. While the
record 2007 melt-back might have represented an isolated anomaly, the
summer of 2008 has also witnessed anomalous Arctic sea ice melt. Indeed,
in the “business as usual” climate-change projections, an open Arctic
ocean is forecast to be commonplace in a matter of decades. Such an open
Arctic ocean would pose obvious national defense challenges. Nations in
North America and Eurasia would have to defend new Arctic coastlines
against the threat of potential military attack and/or illegal immigration.
Climate change also represents a security threat through the increased
competition it may create among nations for diminished basic resources
such as food, water, and energy. Historically, increased stress for resources
has favored sociopolitical instability: for example, the election of populist
demagogic leaders. Climate change, of course, threatens to introduce precisely such threats. Decreased or unreliable precipitation and runoff patterns are likely to create increased competition for available freshwater
resources. In regions such as the Middle East, where there is a history of
sociopolitical conflict over religious differences and valuable oil rights,
the tentative climate model projections of decreased freshwater resources
can only add to the volatile mix of factors underlying sociopolitical conflict.
Sea-level rise and other factors that make currently inhabited regions
inhospitable to human societies (e.g., expanded patterns of drought, and
conditions unfavorable for agriculture and farming) are likely to create
increased competition for the remaining habitable land. Indeed, the term
‘environmental refugee’ has been coined to describe individuals fleeing
their homelands because of drought, desertification, and other environmental factors placing stress on essential resources. An estimated 25 million people were classified in 1995 as environmental refugees,43 more
than the number of refugees due to civil war or religious persecution.
Among these 25 million were roughly 5 million who have fled the recent
droughts in the African Sahel (the 10 million who left minus the 5 million
who returned), and at least another 7 million who have fled other parts of
Sub-Saharan Africa in order to obtain relief food.44
When added to the pressures of a considerably expanded global population by the mid twenty-first century (projected at roughly 9 billion, a 33
percent increase above the 2008 level of just under 7 billion), the stresses
43
N. Myers and J. Kent, Environmental Exodus: An Emergent Crisis in the Global Arena
(Washington, DC: The Climate Institute, 1995).
44
N. Myers, “Environmental Refugees: Our Latest Understanding,” Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B 356 (2001): 16.1–16.5.

GLOBAL WARMING AND CLIMATE CHANGE

219

on available water, land, and food resources created by climate change could
foster an environment that is rife for heightened global conflict. As nations
around the world exceed their capacity to adapt to the changing climate,
competition for dwindling resources could lead to increased violence and
potentially even societal destabilization. A combination of worsened
drought, oppressive temperatures, and rising sea levels could, by the mid
twenty-first century in some scenarios, displace a large enough number of
environmental refugees to challenge the ability of surrounding nations to
accept them. A possible scenario threatening the United States is one in
which drought and decreased river runoff in the desert Southwest place
further stress on water- and resource-starved northern Mexico, leading to
increased migration to the U.S. and placing further stress on already delicate diplomatic relations between the governments of the U.S. and Mexico. Security experts have described worst-case scenarios that are not so
unlike those depicted in post-apocalyptic theatrical productions.
C. Ethical considerations
While much attention in the popular discourse on climate change has
been given to the economic considerations discussed in Section V.A, disappointingly little attention has been given by comparison to the equally
important ethical considerations. Such considerations are intrinsic even to
interpreting the objective of the Kyoto Protocol, which is to insure the
“stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a
level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the
climate system.” This objective begs a number of ethical questions. How
do we define what constitutes “dangerous”? And “dangerous” to whom?
To answer such questions, we must consider political, cultural, and philosophical principles that are fundamentally ethical in nature.
In some cases, the relevant ethical principles are rooted in religious
precepts and the words of the Bible. A widely accepted religious principle
is that mankind should serve as “stewards of the Earth,” and “protectors
of creation.” As such, this principle holds that we are bound by a moral
covenant to protect the Earth, its environment, and all its creatures. In
support of these principles, evangelical leaders in the United States have
recently engaged in a campaign to raise awareness of major environmental threats, including climate change, among their followers.45
Another key ethical principle that comes into play in the context of
climate change is equity. Issues of equity include distribution of the risks,
45
Press Release (National Association of Evangelicals): “Evangelical, Scientific Leaders
Launch Effort to Protect Creation” ( January 17, 2007). The coalition released an “Urgent Call
to Action” statement signed by twenty-eight evangelical and scientific leaders, describing a
joint effort to protect the environment against human-caused threats to Creation —including
climate change, habitat destruction, pollution, species extinction, the spread of human infectious diseases, and other dangers to the well-being of societies.

220

MICHAEL E. MANN

benefits, responsibilities, and costs of climate change in a way that is fair
to both developed and developing nations. Climate change is likely to
lead to substantial regional redistributions of wealth and resources, due
to impacts on food production, freshwater availability, and health. In this
redistribution, there will be winners and losers. Unfortunately, in most
cases, negative climate-change impacts, including decreased freshwater
supply, decreased food production, and disease and loss of land, appear
likely to disproportionately impact the tropical, largely developing world.
By contrast, at least in the short run, extratropical regions dominated by
the developed nations may actually benefit from climate change, through
longer growing seasons and associated benefits for agricultural productivity. Further exaggerating this inequity is the fact that the developing
world, by virtue of its relative poverty and lack of technological infrastructure, is more vulnerable to the threats posed by climate change. For
these reasons, it is often argued on ethical principles that the developed
world has a responsibility to assist developing nations both in adapting to
inevitable climate changes and in minimizing future detrimental climate
change and its impacts.
There are other implications of justice considerations that come into
play involving fossil fuel burning itself. The developed world has already
had an opportunity to benefit from more than a century of inexpensive
energy in the form of fossil fuels. It might therefore seem somewhat of an
injustice to mandate that developing nations, who are just now beginning
to build their energy infrastructures, should not also get such an opportunity. This challenging ethical dilemma complicates any determination
of the appropriate burden of mitigation efforts, and the appropriate distribution of emissions rights among nations.
There are additional problematic ethical issues that arise from the generational transfer of the benefits and costs of fossil fuel burning. These
issues are often hidden in seemingly objective economic cost-benefit analyses such those discussed above in Section V.A, which implicitly make key
ethical judgments in the determination of an appropriate social discount
rate. Discounting places a greater value on benefits today at the expense
of costs to subsequent generations, under the assumption that those generations will have access to technology that enables them to deal with any
of the resulting environmental threats and dangers. If this assumption
leads us to posit high social discount rates, we essentially insure that a
policy of inaction will be chosen. Yet such high discount rates neglect the
impact of uncertainty and, in particular, the potential looming threats
associated with abrupt and irreversible changes in climate. A valid argument holds that it is simply unfair —and indeed unethical —to take the
gamble that we will be able to solve the future environmental problems
caused by our patterns of behavior today. If we lose out in that gamble,
it is subsequent generations, rather than us, who will bear the brunt of the
ensuing damages.

GLOBAL WARMING AND CLIMATE CHANGE

221

Further ethical complications, as discussed earlier, arise from the disaggregation of the costs and benefits of fossil fuel burning. Simply put,
the individuals who gain from current fossil fuel burning in the form of
cheap energy are not the same as the individuals who stand to lose due
to the negative impacts of the resulting climate changes. It is questionable
whether or not we can assign meaningful costs to human mortality due
to starvation and other ill health impacts of climate change. Such impacts
will be disproportionately felt by the poor and disadvantaged citizens of
developing countries. It is unclear that the value of their lives can be
meaningfully incorporated in standard economic cost-benefit calculations.
Finally, there are ethical dilemmas which arise when considering options
for mitigation of climate change (the subject of Section VI below). For
example, how do we go about incentivizing compliance with international emissions agreements and penalizing noncompliance? Is there a
role for punitive actions in the latter case? Addressing such issues in a
satisfactory manner will require delicate international negotiations.
VI. Adaptation and Mitigation of Climate-Change Impacts
As I discussed in the previous section, economic, security, and ethical
considerations all seem to point toward taking precautions to protect
society and the environment against the threats posed by major climate
changes. Yet there is still fierce debate over precisely how we go about
achieving such protection. In fact, there are a number of different approaches that have been articulated for how society should go about
confronting climate change. In one approach —“adaptation” —we accept
at least some amount of climate change as inevitable, and find ways to
deal with the challenges and solve the problems created by climate change.
In the other approaches, each of which constitute some form of “mitigation,” we seek to either prevent or offset the climate changes which constitute a threat. Each of the approaches possesses potential weaknesses or
obstacles for implementation. The approaches in general are not mutually
exclusive, and it is thus likely that we will need to consider a combination
of approaches if we are to protect ourselves and our environment from
the threats posed by climate change.
A. Adaptation
As we have seen above (see Section III.A), even the most optimistic scenarios for the future path of fossil fuel burning might still lead to dangerous climate change. It is thus arguable that society will be faced with
required adaptation in any plausible scenario. The problem with adaptation as a sole strategy is that, in most if not all realistic future emissions
scenarios, many of the predicted climate-change impacts are also likely to
exceed the capacity for humans (or ecosystems, for that matter) to adapt.

222

MICHAEL E. MANN

These considerations lead us to the inevitable conclusion that we will have
to combine elements of both adaptation and mitigation (see below), perhaps combined with technological innovations (see Section VI.D below),
to cope with the challenges posed by climate change.
Vulnerability to climate change is related to adaptive capacity, namely,
the ability to respond (either through behavior changes or the development and use of appropriate technology) to climate variability and change
in a way that mitigates the negative impacts of that change or variability.
Yet, as I discussed in Section V.C, there is great variability in this capacity
among different societies, with wealthier developed nations such as the
United States possessing significantly greater adaptive capacity (and thus,
less vulnerability) than the developing world (e.g., Africa). While there are
many examples, particularly salient examples can be found in the potential adaptive responses to sea-level rise and agriculture. In the case of sealevel rise, wealthy nations (e.g., the low countries of Europe) have the
technology and financial resources to build coastal defenses, while poor
tropical regions that find themselves similarly threatened, such as Bangladesh, do not. With regard to agriculture, wealthy extratropical nations
such as the United States have the resources (e.g., access to a large force of
inexpensive farm workers) to take advantage of longer growing seasons
while limiting the downside of more widespread drought through sophisticated irrigation and water-management schemes. By contrast, nations in
tropical west Africa which are almost certain to see less favorable growing
seasons do not have access to sophisticated irrigation systems or other technology that might help to mitigate deleterious climate-change impacts.
“Business as usual” climate-change projections for 2100 indicate that
the adaptive capacities of even the developed world are likely to be
exceeded.46 Analyses indicate that strategies for increasing adaptive capacities over time (that is, “learning”) can reduce, but not eliminate, vulnerability for most regions and nations. Coupled with substantial mitigation
efforts, however, it may be possible for most nations to avoid breaching
the limits of their adaptive capacity (though the developing world and, in
particular, Africa, China, and much of South America, are likely to remain
vulnerable to climate-change impacts). While mitigation strategies may
largely benefit the developing world in the short run, the developed
world too will benefit significantly in the long run (e.g., by the end of the
current century) based on comparisons of climate-change projections
between the lower-end and mid-range emissions scenarios.
B. Mitigation: Reducing energy demand
The simplest approach to decreasing global greenhouse emissions is to
decrease the demand for energy which drives these emissions. This task
46
W. N. Adger et al., “Adaptation Practices, Options, Constraints, and Capacity,” in Parry
et al., eds., Climate Change 2007: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability, 717–43.

GLOBAL WARMING AND CLIMATE CHANGE

223

is, alas, not a simple one, as energy demand underlies nearly all aspects
of modern life and major sectors of the world economy such as transportation, agriculture, forestry, and waste management.
First and foremost, there are changes we can make in our personal
lifestyles that can greatly reduce our personal energy demand, and thus
our “carbon footprints.” In many cases, these are “no regrets” changes
that have side benefits that make them worth doing irrespective of the
reduction in energy use, benefits including improved health and quality
of life, conservation of natural resources, and smaller energy expenses.
Examples of “no regrets” domestic strategies include home improvements that decrease required winter heating and summer cooling. These
improvements include better insulation, use of passive solar heating in cold
months, and substituting window fans and opening windows in place of
using air conditioning in warm months. Another measure that can be taken
involves replacing older and inefficient incandescent lightbulbs with far
less power-consuming compact fluorescent bulbs. Since a significant
amount of energy is used in the manufacturing sector to process new raw
materials, there is substantial opportunity for saving energy by recycling
disposable items such as newspaper and waste paper, cans, bottles, plastic
containers, and cardboard boxes. Appliances that are not used frequently
can be unplugged, reducing “leakage” of unused, dissipated power.
Altering our personal transportation patterns can provide tremendous
potential energy savings while yielding other benefits. Commuting to
work by bicycle or by foot combines personal fitness and commuting
activities. Such measures, or other transportation choices such as public
transport and carpooling, have the desirable added benefit of reducing
traffic congestion and improving air quality. Reduced gasoline consumption has the added national security benefit of reducing our collective
reliance upon volatile foreign regimes for energy. Reduced personal use
of gasoline also leads to lower gasoline bills.
While individuals can accomplish many of the energy reductions outlined above, there is also an important role for companies, governments,
and nongovernmental organizations. Companies can establish training and
reward systems that encourage employees to reduce energy consumption.
Governments and nongovernmental organizations can provide educational programs aimed at teaching energy-conservation principles, and
campaigns aimed at encouraging individuals to make environmentally conscious decisions in their daily lives.
C. Mitigation: Moving away from a carbon-based energy infrastructure
Mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions can go only so far based solely
on attempts at increased energy efficiency such as those described above.
To prevent greenhouse gas concentrations from reaching levels that may
threaten to cause dangerous interference with the climate, it will be nec-

224

MICHAEL E. MANN

essary to move toward practices that do not pollute the atmosphere with
increased greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and methane (as well
as other secondary greenhouse gases such as nitrous oxide).
Given the global scope of anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions, it is
generally agreed that widespread observance of international negotiated
treaties such as the Kyoto Accord is necessary to achieve the required
reductions in carbon emissions. However, while many nations have indeed
signed on to the Kyoto Accord, and are prepared to sign on to even more
stringent fossil fuel emissions treaties, the two largest emitters of greenhouse gases —the United States and China 47 —have not. In the absence of
these major emitters agreeing to reduce their emissions, it is unlikely that
any significant progress can be made in the mitigation of global greenhouse gas emissions. This is because there are few economic incentives
for reducing emissions, especially in the two largest emitting nations, the
United States and China, whose very large economies are currently essentially fossil fuel dependent. It is arguable that these nations will only sign
on to global greenhouse gas reductions if forced to do so based on economic considerations and, specifically (see Section V.A), when the social
cost of carbon (SCC) becomes prohibitively expensive. Consequently, it is
necessary to internalize the SCC into economic decision-making by industries across the various sectors responsible for fossil fuel emissions.
Two methods that have been widely considered are the “carbon tax,”
which places a surcharge on carbon at the point of origin (e.g., on the
greenhouse gases emitted by the tailpipes of automobiles or the smokestacks of factories), and tradable carbon emission permits (“cap and trade”),
which are instead aimed at “end use” (e.g., the automobile industry).
Under a cap-and-trade system, a limit is placed on the level of emissions
(the “cap”) for a particular industry, and emissions rights are determined
through a system of permits which are initially assigned based on some
set of criteria, but which can subsequently be traded. Vigorous arguments
have been made for and against the two alternatives. Those favoring
carbon taxes typically point to the fact 48 that they are a more natural
market-based mechanism for leveraging behavior, that they avoid the
bureaucracy, volatility, and potential arbitrariness of the cap-and-trade
system, and that they can be used to raise revenue, or, alternatively, can
be made revenue-neutral though the use of offsetting reductions in other
taxes. Advocates of tradable emissions rights, in contrast, typically note 49
that, unlike a carbon tax, the cap-and-trade approach allows for emissions
to be kept below some predetermined desired level, which is important if
47
China recently overtook the United States as the world’s single largest emitter of
greenhouse gases. See, e.g., “China Overtakes U.S. in Greenhouse Gas Emissions,” International Herald Tribute, June 20, 2007.
48
See, e.g., “Doffing the Cap,” The Economist, June 14, 2007.
49
Eileen Claussen and Judith Greenwald, “Handling Climate Change” (op-ed), Miami
Herald, July 12, 2007.

GLOBAL WARMING AND CLIMATE CHANGE

225

there are dangerous climate “tipping points” (as discussed earlier). Moreover, proponents argue that the cap-and-trade approach has historical
precedents that have demonstrated its viability in dealing with large-scale
environmental threats (e.g., acid rain in the United States), as well as more
recent demonstrated success for carbon emissions specifically in restricted
markets (e.g., in the European Union, which has developed a system
along the lines of what was originally suggested by the Kyoto Accord).
The only barrier to implementation of mitigation strategies is establishing an acceptable system of incentives, whether it be in the form of a carbon tax or a cap-and-trade system. The technology to achieve mitigation is
already in place. Anthropogenic greenhouse emissions can be reduced by
eliminating fossil fuel burning and other human emissions of greenhouse
gases such as methane and nitrous oxide produced by certain types of agricultural practices. In addition, carbon dioxide emissions produced by power
plants or industrial activity can be scrubbed from smokestacks before they
have the opportunity to enter the atmosphere (see subsection D below).
The largest contributor to current global greenhouse emissions is the global energy supply sector, which is responsible for nearly 6.4 Gigatons of
CO2 equivalent annually.50 Increases in the use of alternative carbon-free
energy sources such as wind, solar, geothermal, and nuclear, or in the use
of carbon-neutral energy sources such as biofuels, provide substantial
opportunities for the mitigation of greenhouse gas emissions in the energy
supply sector. Emissions from other sectors, such as forestry and agriculture, have been increasing as rapidly or more so than emissions from the
energy sector in recent decades. Cleary, mitigation efforts must target these
sectors as well. In the agricultural sector, for example, alternative methods
of rice cultivation that minimize methane production, feeds that minimize
methane production by ruminants, and alternative fertilizers that minimize nitrous oxide production can contribute significantly to mitigation
efforts. There is also substantial room for mitigation in the transportation
sector, either through the widespread use of more fuel efficient vehicles such
as hybrid cars, or through the increased use of biofuels, especially those
currently under development (including cellulosic ethanol, which is considered to be a more efficient alternative to the currently available cornbased ethanol). Increased efficiency could also be achieved in aviation
transport through the use of more efficient fuels. It is likely that further technological innovation in areas such as hydrogen fuel cell technology and
electric vehicles will yield even greater opportunities for future greenhouse gas mitigation.
50
To make comparisons across sectors, it is necessary to define a consistent unit of
measurement that takes into account the impact of emissions of different types of greenhouse gases with different warming impacts. The preferred unit is the “CO2 equivalent,”
which expresses the combined impact of multiple greenhouse gases (i.e., carbon dioxide,
methane, nitrous oxide, etc.) in terms of the impact of an equivalent amount of carbon
dioxide (CO2 ). The CO2 equivalent is typically measured in Gigatons (billions of metric
tons) CO2 , abbreviated as “Gt CO2 eq.”

226

MICHAEL E. MANN

The developed world is currently responsible for the bulk of worldwide greenhouse gas emissions. However emission rates are increasing
most rapidly in the developing world, underscoring the fact that measures aimed at mitigating greenhouse emissions must take into account
current trends as well as historical patterns of emissions.
D. Mitigation: Geoengineering
One alternative to conventional mitigation approaches involves
“geoengineering,” 51 that is, efforts to offset human impacts on climate
either at the source level (i.e., preventing greenhouse gas emissions from
building up in the atmosphere) or at the impact level (i.e., offsetting the
climate changes caused by greenhouse gas emissions through some measure). In either case, the approaches in question involve planetary-scale
engineering of our global environment unlike anything yet witnessed.
One source-level geoengineering scheme that has been proposed involves
“iron fertilization,” the deliberate addition of iron to the upper ocean. The
principle behind this scheme is fairly straightforward. Iron is a key nutrient that is often of limited abundance in the upper ocean. The limited
availability of this nutrient consequently places limits on the productivity
of marine plants that live near the surface of the ocean. Since these marine
plants take carbon dioxide from the surface waters which, in turn, take
their carbon dioxide from the atmosphere, an increase in marine plant
productivity could, in principle, increase the rate at which carbon dioxide
is taken from the atmosphere, thus depleting the levels of carbon dioxide
in the atmosphere. However, the limited experiments that have been
performed indicate that the main effect of iron fertilization appears to be
simply a faster cycling of oceanic carbon between the atmosphere and the
upper ocean, with little or no burial in the deep ocean.52 Without such
deep ocean burial, the processes in question are unlikely to slow the
long-term carbon dioxide increase in the atmosphere. Moreover, there
could be negative side-effects of interfering with the complex and potentially delicate ecology of the marine biosphere in this way.
Other source-level geoengineering approaches include attempts to
increase the efficiency of natural terrestrial processes that take carbon
dioxide out of the air. A simple example is the reforestation of areas,
particularly in the tropics, that have been deforested in recent centuries.
While this approach is in certain respects more environmentally friendly
than many other proposed geoengineering approaches, it is not clear that
it could be implemented on the massive, planetary scale that would be
necessary to significantly counteract the effect of human carbon emis51
An excellent summary of the topic is provided by D. W. Keith, “Geoengineering,”
Nature 409 (2001): 420.
52
K. O. Buesseler et al., “The Effects of Iron Fertilization on Carbon Sequestration in the
Southern Ocean,” Science 304 (2004): 414–17.

GLOBAL WARMING AND CLIMATE CHANGE

227

sions. Related to this approach are so-called carbon capture and sequestration (CCS) approaches. With CCS, carbon is extracted from fossil fuels
as they are burned, preventing their escape to the atmosphere. The captured carbon is buried well beneath the Earth’s surface, or injected into
the deep ocean where it is likely to reside for centuries. One scheme that
has been proposed involves using scrubbers to remove carbon dioxide
from smokestacks, and reacting the captured carbon dioxide with particular types of rocks to yield limestone. Such a sequence of processes mimics the natural processes that remove carbon dioxide from the atmosphere
on geological timescales, but more efficiently and more quickly.53 Klaus
Lackner, a scientist at Columbia University, has argued for a related alternative in which massive arrays of artificial “trees” would be built from
synthetic materials. They would consist of a pillar resembling a goal post,
with slats covered in a solution of carbon-absorbing limewater. Like trees,
these structures would take carbon directly out of the air. The captured
carbon would then be sequestered.54
One of the most commonly proposed impact-level geoengineering
approaches involves deliberately decreasing the amount of sunlight that
reaches the Earth’s surface. In principle, incoming sunlight can be reduced
to a level where the decreased warming impact of solar radiation at the surface offsets the surface greenhouse warming. One scheme that has been proposed involves deploying “solar shields” in space that reflect sunlight away
from the Earth.55 It is unclear that such a scheme could be implemented in
an economically viable manner. An alternative, potentially far less expensive approach involves injecting sulfate aerosols into the stratosphere. This
approach mimics the cooling impact of volcanic eruptions.56 In principle,
such a procedure could be implemented as often as necessary, to offset surface warming by greenhouse gas emissions. However, there are a number
of potential pitfalls of such an approach. First, the chemistry of sulfate aerosols is such that a massive sudden injection of them on a sustained basis
is likely to worsen the problem of stratospheric ozone depletion. In addition, simply offsetting the surface warming effect of greenhouse gas emissions does nothing to solve the problem of ocean acidification, which is also
caused by accumulating carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Moreover, modeling studies indicate that reducing incoming solar radiation, though it
might offset the average surface warming of the globe, would not coun53
F. Goff and K. S. Lackner, “Carbon Dioxide Sequestering Using Ultramafic Rocks,”
Environmental Geoscience 5 (1998): 89–101.
54
M. Bentley, BBC (online), “Synthetic Trees Could Purify Air,” http://news.bbc.co.uk/
2/hi/science/nature/2784227.stm (February 21, 2003).
55
R. Angel, “Feasibility of Cooling the Earth with a Cloud of Small Spacecraft Near the
Inner Lagrange Point (L1),” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 103 (2006): 17184–189.
56
See, e.g., P. J. Crutzen, “Albedo Enhancement by Stratospheric Sulfur Injections: A
Contribution to Resolve a Policy Dilemma,” Climatic Change 77 (2006): 211–20; and T. M. L.
Wigley, “A Combined Mitigation/Geoengineering Approach to Climate Stabilization,” Science 314 (2006): 452–54.

228

MICHAEL E. MANN

teract the regional climate impacts of increased greenhouse gas concentrations. Some regions (including Greenland) might warm at even greater
rates. Regional patterns of rainfall and drought might be significantly
altered, perhaps to the further detriment of regions already suffering
increased drought due to climate change.
All of the proposed geoengineering schemes suffer from possible shortcomings and pose potential dangers. While some advocates maintain that
we may need to resort to these schemes at least as a partial solution if
faced with the prospect of irreversible and dangerous climate change,
many feel it imprudent to tamper with a system as complex and potentially fragile as our global climate in this manner. Finally, geoengineering
is saddled with problematic ethical considerations. One of the more troubling problems is that certain nations could stand to benefit from interfering with the climate system in a particular manner, at the expense of
nations elsewhere who stand to suffer from the resulting climate changes.
It is unclear how such potential conflicts could be resolved.
VII. Conclusions
The Kyoto Protocol compelled the nations of the world to take whatever actions are required to avoid breaching the threshold of “dangerous
anthropogenic interference” with the Earth’s climate. Few would argue
with the logic of this imperative. As we have seen, however, it is a challenge to define just what is meant by “dangerous anthropogenic interference,” let alone how close we might be to it, and what is necessary to
avoid it. Such uncertainty complicates the objective prescription of policy
solutions for combating the problem of global climate change. Indeed,
uncertainty abounds for those looking to it as an excuse for inaction. Yet
if anything, as we have seen, uncertainty will likely work against us
rather than for us, given the potential “tipping points” that may accelerate future climate changes and their impacts. Uncertainty is not an excuse
for inaction. Quite the contrary, as I noted earlier, uncertainty places an
even greater burden of proof upon those advocating inaction, given the
possibility it introduces for even more severe and irreversible harm to
society and the environment than is currently envisioned.
If the remaining uncertainties in the science are not a valid argument
against taking immediate action to slow climate change, then it is worth
asking: What is? As discussed earlier, some have argued that taking actions
to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions, such as the imposition of carbon
taxes or a cap-and-trade system, could threaten to harm the economy. Yet
this argument does not appear to withstand scrutiny, as economic analyses tend to point to the opposite conclusion: that the economic harm of
inaction would be far greater than the cost of mitigation. Some contrarians argue that climate change might be beneficial to humankind. Yet, as
we have already seen, an objective assessment of the science underlying

GLOBAL WARMING AND CLIMATE CHANGE

229

projected climate-change impacts strongly suggests otherwise. Others argue
that we can engineer our way out of the problem with emerging and
future technology (i.e., geoengineering). However, I have explored the
numerous pitfalls associated with that approach in Section VI.D.
Others who are opposed to taking action to mitigate climate change
concede that climate change represents a potential threat to society, but
that it is only one of many problems facing society, and that focusing on
the climate-change problem might take away attention and resources that
would be better focused on more pressing problems.57 Such reasoning,
however, is premised upon a false dichotomy. The assumption that society must choose between competing environmental, health, or socioeconomic problems is based on the flawed premises that (i) society can only
solve one problem at any given time (this is plainly false), or that (ii) the
problems facing society are independent of each other. The latter premise
clearly does not hold for climate change. As I have already discussed in
this essay, climate change is likely to aggravate other major societal and
environmental threats, such as the loss of biodiversity, the scarcity of fresh
water, and the spread of disease.
There are some promising new technologies in the pipeline that could
assist efforts either to move away from a carbon-based energy economy,
or to sequester carbon or otherwise prevent greenhouse gas emissions
from entering the atmosphere. It is unlikely, however, that any foreseeable
technological innovations will allow us to meet our growing energy
demands in a carbon-free or carbon-neutral manner within the next few
decades. The conundrum is that with each passing year of “business as
usual” emissions, the likelihood of stabilizing the Earth’s climate below
the level of “dangerous anthropogenic interference” becomes increasingly small, evoking once again the notion of a “procrastination penalty”
in dealing with climate-change mitigation. Indeed, some climate scientists have articulated the view that we are committed to dangerous climatechange impacts unless we both stabilize and begin to reduce greenhouse
gas emissions in absolute terms within less than a decade.58
In the absence of substantial action to mitigate future climate change,
one can imagine various scenarios. In the most favorable of scenarios, a
number of factors might conspire to set society on the path of one of the
more moderate emissions scenarios even in the absence of directed mitigation efforts. Moreover, climate sensitivity might turn out to be at the
lower end of the current range of estimates. In such a scenario, it is likely
that human society and ecosystems will be able to adapt to some, but not
all, changes. There will likely be a loss of species, many of which are
currently already threatened by the changes taking place, and there will
be some detrimental impacts on society. These impacts include moderate
57
58

See Lomborg, Cool It.
Hansen et al., “Global Temperature Change.”

230

MICHAEL E. MANN

loss of coastal settlement and island nations associated with sea-level rise
in the range of one meter, and moderately expanded patterns of drought
threatening agriculture and freshwater supplies in many regions. Projected climate-change impacts, even in this best-case scenario, would likely
lead to a world lacking some of its current natural beauty and wonder: for
example, a world without a Great Barrier Reef, polar bears, or the “Snows
of Kilimanjaro.” Some of the great coastal cities of the modern world,
such as Amsterdam, Venice, and New Orleans, could well be lost even
with the most moderate projected future sea-level-rise estimates.
In the worst-case scenarios, the outlook is far more bleak. Adaptations
of the sort explored in this essay would be difficult or impossible if
climate sensitivity turns out to be at the upper end of the current estimated range, and if emissions continue along the “business as usual”
course. In such a scenario, one can envision detrimental impacts on human
civilization and our natural environment that are not entirely unlike the
dystopian world depicted in the 1970s science fiction movie Soylent Green.
Unfortunately, no single approach to climate mitigation in isolation is
sufficient to solve the problem of global climate change, that is, to avert
breaching the level of “dangerous anthropogenic interference” with the
Earth’s climate. A viable solution will have to involve strategies for adaptation to changes that are inevitable, and mitigation of changes that can
still be averted. It will require a concerted effort across nations, governments, and all strata of society, and hard work and perhaps difficult
choices among individuals, governments, and industries. It will require
the development and use of alternative energy sources, significant changes
in lifestyle, and dramatically altered incentive structures that reward environmentally responsible behavior by people, industries, and governments.
Anthropogenic climate change has been argued by some to constitute
the greatest threat human society has ever faced. At their worst, human
civilizations under threat have succumbed to some of the worst of human
instincts, such as greed and short-sightedness. The collapse of Easter
Island —wherein systematic deforestation of the island by its human inhabitants undermined its sustainability for human occupation —provides a
compelling example.59 Yet at their best, civilizations have displayed a
remarkable fortitude that has allowed them to triumph in the face of
seemingly insurmountable adversity. We must hope that modern human
civilization will follow the latter of these two very different possible paths
as it confronts the daunting challenge of global climate change in the
decades ahead.
Meteorology and Geosciences, Pennsylvania State University

59
This example is highlighted by Jared Diamond in Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fail
or Succeed (New York: Viking, 2004).

