SCIENCE Vol 174  Num 4012 26 November 1971 

  

A Cartography of the Ecstatic and Meditative States 

Roland Fischer 

In this age so concerned with travel in outer as well as inner-space, it is strange 
that, while we have detailed charts of the moon, we have no cartography of the 
varieties of human experience. In order to draft a map of inner space, I am ready 
to be your travel guide and take you on two voyages: one along the perception-
hallucination continuum of increasing ergotropic (1) arousal, which includes 
creative, psychotic, and ecstatic experiences; and another along the perception-
meditation continuum of increasing trophotropic (1) arousal, which encompasses 
the hypoaroused states of Zazen and Yoga samadhi. 

Along the perception-hallucination continuum of increasing arousal of the 
sympathetic nervous system (ergotropic arousal), man--the self-referential 
system--perceptually-behaviorally (cortically) interprets the change (drug-induced 
or "natural") in his subcortical activity as creative, psychotic, and ecstatic 
experiences (2). These states are marked by a gradual turning inward toward a 
mental dimension at the expense of the physical. The normal state of daily 
routine, our point of departure, is followed by an aroused, creative state, which 
can be characterized by an increase in both data content (a description of space) 
and rate of data processing ["flood of inner sensation' (3), or most intense time 
(4)]. However, in the next aroused state on the continuum, acute schizophrenic 
[or rather "hyperphrenic" (5)] state, further increase in data content may not be 
matched by a corresponding increase in the rate of data processing. While the 
creative state is conducive to the evolution of novel relations and new meaning, 
the psychotic "jammed computer" state interferes with the individual's creative 
interpretation of the activity of his central nervous system (CNS). At the peak of 
ecstatic rapture, the outside (physical) world "retreats to the fringe of 

consciousness" (6), and the individual reflects himself in his own "program." One 
can conceptualize the normal, creative, "hyperphrenic" and ecstatic states along 
the perception-hallucination continuum as the ledges of a homeostatic step 
function (7). While the creative person may travel freely between "normal" and 
creative states, the chronic schizophrenic patient is stranded in the "jammed 
computer" state. And the talented mystic, of course, does not need to go through 
every intermediate step to attain ecstasy.  

The mutually exclusive relationship between the ergotropic and trophotropic 
systems (8) justifies a separate perception-meditation continuum of increasing 
trophotropic arousal (hypoarousal) that is continuous with, and to the right of, 
perception-hallucination continuum (Fig. 1).  

 

Fig 1. Varieties of conscious states mapped on a perception-
hallucination continuum of increasing ergotropic arousal (left) 
and a perception-mediation continuum of increasing trophotropic 
arousal (right).  The loop connecting ecstasy and samadhi 
represents the rebound from ecstasy to samadhi, which is 
observed in response to intense ergotropic excitation.  The 
numbers 35 to 7 on the perception-hallucination continuum are 
Goldstein's coefficient of variation (46), specifying the decrease 

in variability of the EEG amplitude with increasing ergotropic 
arousal.  The numbers 26 to 4 on the perception- mediation 
continuum, on the other hand, refer to those beta, alpha, and 
theta EEG waves (measured in hertz) that predominate during, 
but are not specific to, these states (17). 

The course of our second trip, therefore, will take us in the opposite direction, 
along the tranquil perception-meditation continuum, where man may symbolically 
interpret his gradually increasing trophotropic arousal as Zazen, and, ultimately, 
samadhi. 

That the two continua in Fig. 1 represent two mutually exclusive states of arousal 
has been well documented by Hess (1) and Gellhom (8, 9). The mutual 
exclusiveness of the ergotropic, and trophotropic systems can also be illustrated 
by characteristic changes in the frequency of the small, involuntary, 
micronystagmoid movements of the eye. These rapid scanning movements (with 
a mean frequency of one per second and an amplitude of 5 to 10 minutes of arc) 
are regarded as a prerequisite for the fixation of an object in physical space-time 
(10). The frequency of saccadic movement is increased five to eight fold in 
response to the ergotropic arousal induced by moderate doses of mescaline, 
psilocybin, or LSD (D-lysergic acid diethylamide) (10). This increase is also 
present without drugs in acute schizophrenic (11) [that is, patients in a state of 
ergotropic arousal, the "alarm reaction" (12) stage of Selye's general adaptation 
syndrome (13)]. 

On the other hand, 0.9 gram of alcohol per kilogram of body weight and even 
sleepiness and fatigue, decreases saccadic frequency (14); more precisely, 0.01 
milligram of Valium (diazepam) per kilogram of body weight reduces the saccadic 
frequency by 9 degrees per second (15). Such a progressive decrease seems to 
be a characteristic feature of trophotropic arousal along the perception-mediation 
continuum. That the alpha rhythm appearing on the electroencephalogram (EEG) 
appears to be phase-locked to the onset of saccades (16) may also be of 

significance, since states of progressively greater trophotropic arousal along the 
perception-meditation continuum are characterized by EEG waves of 
progressively lower frequencies (measured in hertz) (17) (see Fig. 1, right). 
Moreover, since a complete arrest of saccadic frequency, [for example, by optical 
immobilization of the retinal image (18)] results in periodic fading, disintegration, 
and fragmented reconstruction of the image, we may postulate that reduced 
saccadic frequency may be linked with the Yogi's comment that, at the peak of a 
meditative experience, he can still see "objects," but they have no predicative 
properties (19). 

What An Hallucinations and How Can They Be Measured? 

The hallucinatory or waking-dream states along the perception-hallucination 
continuum can best be described as experiences of intense sensations that 
cannot be verified through voluntary motor activity. Note that such a definition 
does not differentiate between dreams and hallucinations; for example, see the 
"Three Wise Men" (Fig. 2 unavailable). Two of the three wise men dream with 
eyes closed, while the third, with eyes open, hallucinates the angel who carries 
all three away from the "real" world into a mental dimension. We can describe 
verifiable perceptions, therefore, by assigning to them low sensory-to-motor 
(S/M) ratios (20), while non-verifiable hallucinations and dreams can be 
characterized by increasing S/M ratios as one moves along the perception-
hallucination or perception-hallucination continuum toward ecstasy or samadhi, 
the two most hallucinatory states (21) (Fig. 1, left and right, respectively). 
Moderate doses of the hallucinogenic drugs LSD, psilocybin, and mescaline (22) 
can get one "moving" along the perception-hallucination continuum, whereas 
minor tranquilizers and some muscle relaxants may initiate travel along the 
perception-meditation continuum. If high S/M ratios do, indeed, reflect 
hallucinatory experiences, as my definition of hallucinations would imply, it would 
be important to quantify S/M ratio as a measure of hallucinatory intensity. In fact, 
a quantitative meaning has been given to the S/M ratio by measuring the 

components of a psychomotor performance, specifically, handwriting area and 
handwriting pressure (20), in volunteers during a psilocybin induced waking-
dream state. The techniques for measuring handwriting area (S) (in square 
centimeters), as well as for obtaining handwriting pressure (M) (in 104dynes 
averaged over time), with an indicator that operates on a pressure-voltage- to-
frequency basis, have been described elsewhere (20). Using these two 
parameters prior to (T1) and at the peak,(T2) of a psilocybin-induced experience 
[160 to 250 micrograms of psilocybin per kilogram of body weight], we found in a 
sample of 47 college-age volunteers a 31 percent (T1 -T2) increase in mean S/M 
ratio. I should note that the standard deviation on handwriting area at T1 is 
significantly related to the S/M at T1 (r = 0.4888, P < .01, N =47) and that the 
standard deviation is a simple and useful indicator of the ensuing drug induced 
increase in S/M ratio (r= 0.372, P<.01, N=47). Moreover, subjects with a large 
standard deviation on handwriting area at T1 (that is, "variable" subjects), tend to 
be "perceivers," whereas volunteers with a small standard deviation at T1 
("stable" subjects) tend to be "judgers," in terms of the Myers-Briggs Type 
Indicator. This self-reporting, Jungian-type personality indicator yields simple, 
continuous scores on four dichotomous scales: extroversion-introversion, 
sensation-intuition, thinking-feeling, and judging-perceiving (23). The perceivers 
also overestimate or contract time more than judgers do at the peak of a 
psilocybin-induced experience (4): this implies that perceivers move faster and 
farther along the perception-hallucination continuum than do judgers, who 
apparently require a larger dose for a comparable experience.  

Space and Increasing Hyper and Hypoarousal 

We call man's symbolic interpretation of his CNS activity "perception-behavior" 
and regard creative, "hyperphrenic," and ecstatic states, as well as Zazen and 
samadhi, as perceptual-behavioral interpretations of ergotropic and trophotropic 
arousal, respectively. We may now consider some of the perceptual-behavioral 
changes, or transformations, that gradually develop as the level of arousal 

increases and decreases along each continuum. One of the most conspicuous 
transformations is that of "constancies" (24), which in the normal state of daily 
routine form a learned structure of primary ordering of space and time "out 
there." Although the newborn infant's only reality, in the beginning, is his CNS 
activity, he soon learns, by bumping into things, to erect a corresponding model 
"out there." Ultimately, his forgetting that his CNS activity had been the only 
reality will be taken by society as proof of his maturity, and he will be ready to 
conduct his life "out there" in (container) space and (chronological) time (4). This 
gradually learned and projected model, then, is the representation of a world 
ordered and stabilized by self-programmed invariances. The adult interprets his 
CNS activity within this structure of similarity criteria, or "constancies," and thus 
experience can be said to consist of two processes: the programmed 
(subcortical) CNS activity; and the symbolic or perceptual-behavioral (cortical) 
interpretation, or metaprograms, of the CNS activity. I have studied the 
transformation of certain constancies along the perception-hallucination 
continuum and find, for example, that the ability to readapt to optically induced 
spatial distortions, or to maintain the constancy of the visual world, gradually 
diminishes as a subject turns inward under the influence of psilocybin (25). 
Another finding revealed that the preferred level of (the constancy of) brightness 
increases under the influence of hallucinogenic drugs (26), but only in "variable" 
subjects (20, 27)--that is, those subjects whose large standard deviations on a 
variety of perceptual and behavioral tasks indicate a large and varied interpretive 
repertoire. However, in "stable" subjects, who are characterized by small 
standard deviations and, thus, by smaller and more predictable interpretive 
repertoires, the level of preferred brightness decreases when they are under the 
influence of hallucinogenic drugs. In addition, nearby visual space was found to 
gradually close in as subjects moved along the perception-hallucination 
continuum under the influence of moderate doses of psilocybin. This contraction 
of nearby visual space was observed with two different techniques: monitoring 
the apparent fronto-parallel plane (28), and handwriting measurements (29).  

The transformation of constancies under ergotropic arousal--specifically as 
manifested in the psilocybin-induced contraction of nearby visual space--can also 
be observed in acute schizophrenics under "natural" ergotropic arousal (that is, 
without hallucinogenic drugs). The transformation of constancies during acute 
psychotic episodes apparently gives rise to a "vertical displacement of the visual 
angle," which is implicit in a contraction of visual space and which results in an 
elevation of the horizon (30). Rennert (30), who for years has studied the angle 
of perspective in the drawings of schizophrenic patients, finds the acuteness of a 
schizophrenic episode to be significantly related to the height of the horizon in 
the patient's drawings. In fact, using a ruler, Rennert can predict remission or 
relapse from the position of the horizon in a drawing: the more severe the 
schizophrenic episode, the higher the position of the horizon--ultimately, it may 
even disappear. At the same time (see cover - unavailable), a map-like 
perspective, or bird's-eye view, of the landscape results, with houses and other 
significant figures appearing in the foreground. The cover etching, made during 
an acute (hyperaroused) schizophrenic episode, demonstrates the contraction of 
nearby visual space, resulting in a raised horizon. Note that the elevation of the 
horizon forces the animals to walk at a steep angle. Compare with the low 
horizon in another etching by the same patient after remission (31).  

I have also observed that the just noticeable difference (JND) in taste, expressed 
as Weber fraction, becomes smaller with increasing ergotropic arousal: subjects 
need fewer molecules of a sapid substance (such as sucrose, quinine, and so 
on) to taste a JND in sweetness or bitterness. On the other hand, under the 
influence of tranquilizers of the phenothiazine type, the Weber fraction becomes 
larger: more molecules are needed to taste a JND (32). Since the Weber fraction 
is constant at levels of arousal associated with daily routine (within the 
customary middle range of taste sensitivity) (33), I interpret the above as 
examples of arousal-induced transformations of constancies. Because the 
number of molecules necessary to elicit the sensation of a JND gradually 
decreases during a voyage from the physical to the mental dimension along the 

perception-hallucination continuum, it might be extrapolated that no sapid 
molecules at all are needed for the experience of taste during ecstasy, the most 
hyperaroused hallucinatory state.  

It should be emphasized that the projection of our CNS activity as location in the 
physical dimension of space and time "out there" was learned at, and is hence 
bound to, the lower levels of arousal characteristic of our daily survival routines. 
That this projection is gradually learned can be supported by Bender's 
observation that schizophrenic children "do not experience hallucinations of the 
projected type like adults, but only of the introjected type. They hear voices inside 
their head or other parts of the body, feel that they originate inside themselves 
and do not feel persecuted by them" (34).  

The constancy of corporeal awareness also undergoes transformations as one 
moves along the perception-hallucination continuum. For instance, phantom 
sensations [that is, readaptation phenomena compensating for and correcting 
distortions of corporeal awareness in physical space-time (35)] gradually diminish 
and disappear as one moves into the mental dimension under the influence of 
hallucinogenic drugs (36). Depersonalization phenomena, on the other hand, 
manifest themselves as changes in body image, and usually accompany the 
dissolution of ego boundaries during creative, psychotic, ecstatic, or meditative 
states--whether "natural" or drug-induced--as well as while falling asleep. All of 
this is to say that the constancy of the "I" is interfered with as one moves along 
the perception-hallucination continuum from the "I" of the physical world to the 
"Self" of the mental dimension; Analogously, the perception-meditation 
continuum (Fig. 1, right) also involves a departure from the "I" to the "Self." These 
two continua can thus be called "I-Self" continua. As will become clear later, the 
"Self" of ecstasy and the "Self' of samadhi are one and the same "Self."  

The further we progress on the perception-hallucination continuum from the 
normal through the creative, psychotic, and, ultimately to the ecstatic state (Fig. 

1), the more complete is the transformation, or "unlearning," of the constancies of 
the physical dimension. Input, or outside information in general, is gradually 
reduced along this continuum. Thus, Saint Teresa of Avila tells us in her 
autobiography that, at the peak of a mystical experience, "... the soul neither 
hears nor sees nor feels. While it lasts, none of the senses perceives or knows 
what is taking place" (6). Space, then, which was gradually established in ever-
widening circles during childhood, gradually contracts with increasing arousal 
and ultimately disappears.  

Time and Increasing Hyper- and Hypoarousal  

A gradual contraction and ultimate disappearance is also the rate of 
chronological time in the physical dimension (of the "I" state) as one progresses 
along the perception-hallucination or the perception-mediation continuum. In 
particular, we find that LSD (37) and psilocybin (4) cause, an overestimation of 
time, the magnitude of which is related to a subject's variability on a perceptual or 
behavioral test before ingesting the given drug. The greater a subject's variability 
before ingesting a drug--for example, the retest-variance on his quinine taste-
threshold or the standard deviation on his handwriting area--the greater will be 
his contraction or overestimation of time at drug peak [that is, 150 minutes after 
the oral administration of 160 to 200 micrograms of psilocybin per kilogram of 
body weight, when 63 minutes of chronological time (in geometrically increasing 
intervals) are estimated and recorded (4)]. Moreover, the greater the subject's 
variability, and thus his contraction of time, the greater will be his "rebound effect" 
24 hours after: that is, his underestimation or expansion of time (4). Dividing 
people, according to the magnitude of their perceptual variability, into 
"maximizers" ("stable" subjects) and "minimizers" ("variable" subjects) assists 
one in resolving the hotly debated question of whether time "flies" or "drags" 
during a hallucinogenic drug-induced experience. Actually, as we have found, it 
does both: it is overestimated (it "flies" or contracts) by the minimizers, the 
subjects with a large standard deviation, who prefer to decrease (visual) sensory 

data content and its rate of processing at drug peak; and it is underestimated (it 
"drags" or expands) by the maximizers, the subjects with a small standard 
deviation, who prefer to increase data content and its rate of processing at drug 
peak.  

Such contraction of time parallels the already described contraction of nearby 
visual space. By "time-contraction," I mean an increase in data content within a 
chronological time span, or, in experiential terms, "the flood of inner sensation" 
(3); and I imply that, during such an experience, the subject, if without a watch, 
would arrive early for an appointment. Under the impact of an acute, 
hallucinogenic drug-induced experience, the subject usually compares the time 
contraction or increased data content of the mental dimension with his past and 
present routine performance in physical space-time and has, therefore, to 
conclude that "time" passes slowly. Note, for instance, Hofmann's classical 
description of riding home on his bicycle under the influence of LSD: "The trip is 
about fourmiles and I had the feeling of not getting ahead, whereas my escort 
stated that we were rolling along at a good speed" (38). By comparing the usual 
rate of revolution of the spokes, as well as the usual rate at which the roadside 
"passed him by," with his experience of an increased data content or "flood of 
inner sensation," he had to conclude that he was not getting ahead and that time 
was dragging. Thus, there is only an apparent contradiction in terms: while 
experience is shifting from the physical toward the mental dimension, physical or 
chronological time becomes less and less important. Still, this transitional state 
can only be described in Aristotelian [dualistic, or two-valued (true-false)] terms 
of chronological time (39) and by comparing experimental with experiential data. 
This contradiction resolves itself at the peak of ergotropic or trophotropic arousal, 
since these purely mental states are timeless and spaceless and in no need of 
comparative verification.  

Increasing Cortical-Subcortical Integration with Increasing Arousal  

If we assume that man, the self-referential system, creates experience through 
the cortical (that is, perceptual-behavioral) interpretation of his subcortical 
activity, we may ask about the extent of freedom, or relative independence, of the 
mind (cortex) from the subcortical substratum. Indeed, man is to a large extent 
free to interpret his subcortical activity in a variety of ways at levels of arousal 
associated with daily routine. That this freedom is implicit in the functional 
independence of the limbic and neocortical systems is dramatically demonstrated 
by the fact that the electrical discharges resulting from hippocampal seizures are 
confined to the limbic system (40)  

We can find no relation between the extent of psilocybin-induced perceptual and 
behavioral (or cortical) change and a drug-induced increase in pupillary diameter 
(41), which is a drug dose-dependent parameter of autonomic activity (20, 42). 
This lack of a relation points to a large degree of freedom of cortical interpretive 
activity, even under moderate hyperarousal.  

The cortical-subcortical independence at the level of daily routine and even 
moderate levels of arousal is also implicit in the results of Maranon's (43) and 
Schachter and Singer's (44) experiments, in which the set and setting determined 
the particular cortical interpretation (from "good trip" to "bad trip") of each subject 
after his subcortical activity had been altered by an injection of 0.5 cubic 
centimeter of a 1:1000 solution of epinephrine.  

It is now common knowledge that the set and setting, as well as the personality, 
decisively influence the cortical interpretation of hallucinogenic drug-induced 
changes in subcortical activity (45). What is not fully realized is that set, setting, 
personality, expectations, and past experiences determine the cortical "effects" of 
most of the psychoactive drugs when they are used in medically endorsed 
dosages. In fact, except for the anesthetics and hypnotics, there are no drugs 
that selectively direct human cognitive (psychological, or, in our terms, cortical) 
functions.  

With rising levels of ergotropic and trophotropic arousal, however, perception-
behavior becomes increasingly dependent upon (or less free of) the subcortical 
substratum that generates it. A cat responds to ergotropic hyperarousal with 
rage, while at the peak of trophotropic arousal the animal always yawns, curls up, 
and falls asleep. But man may be compelled to interpret these two extreme 
states of hyper and hypoarousal as ecstasy and samadhi. This increasing 
stereotypy (loss of freedom) with increasing ergotropic arousal can be observed, 
for example, as a decrease in the variability of the EEG amplitude, which 
Goldstein and others have measured with a Drohocki integrator (46). A decrease 
in variability is expressed as the coefficient of variation (see the coefficient of 
variation values for states ranging from relaxation to catatonia in Fig. 1) (46, 47). 
Increasing stereotypy also manifests itself as an increase in the S/M ratio (20), 
thus indicating an intensification of inner sensations, accompanied by a loss in 
the ability to verify them through voluntary motor activity. Such high S/M ratios 
are implicit in the statements uttered during both drug-induced hallucinations and 
the hallucinations of schizophrenics: "of being hypnotized," "of being not free." "of 
being overpowered," "of being paralyzed," and so on, and in the mystic's inability 
to experience the subject-object dichotomy of daily routine in the physical 
dimension.  

Apparently, then, an increase in ergotrophic arousal is paralleled by a restriction 
in the individual's repertoire of available perceptual-behaviora1 interpretations. 
This restriction implies that certain levels can only be interpreted as creative 
(artistic, scientific, religious) or psychotic experiences (48). Although a religious 
interpretation is a common feature of catatonia (49), ecstasy, which is the 
mystical experience of the Oneness of everything, results from a creative 
breakthrough out of catatonic hyperarousal. During the ecstatic state, there is 
neither capacity nor necessity for motor verification of the intense sensations. In 
the mental dimension, in contrast to the physical, the all-pervasive experience of 
absolute certainty does not require further verification (50) and will be structured 
according to current mythology or the belief system of a St. Francis, Pascal, or 

Ramakrishna. What is one man's loss of freedom, therefore, may be another's 
gain in creativity.  

An increasing stereotypy can also be observed along the perception-meditation 
continuum of increasing trophotropic arousal (see Fig. 1, right); this enables one 
to gradually exclude stimulation from without and turn attention inward. 
Continuous trains of alpha waves accompany these changes, and the dominant 
frequency of the alpha pattern decreases toward the alpha-theta border region, 
until some subjects, in a state of reverie, produce long trains of theta waves (51) 
[see the beta, alpha; and theta waves (52), measured in hertz, in Fig. 1, right]. 
According to Green et al. (17), the "alert inner-focused state is associated with 
the production of alpha rhythm;" in this state Zen masters show an alpha-
blocking response to auditory clicks, but, in contrast to normal controls, do not 
habituate to these stimuli (51). Since the alpha rhythm is not altered or blocked 
by flashing lights, sounding gongs, or the touch of a hot test tube during the deep 
meditation of Indian Yoga masters (53), the Yoga samadhi apparently represents 
a more intense state of trophotropic arousal than Zazen does and must also 
express a greater inability to function in physical space-time than Zazen does. In 
fact, a Yoga master denies noticing-any outside stimuli during deep meditation, 
whereas control subjects show alpha-blocking with as little stimulus as a flashing 
light (as do the Yoga masters themselves when not meditating). 

"Self": The Knower and Image-Maker; and "I": The Known and Imagined  

We have seen that the departure from the physical dimension during a voyage 
on the perception-meditation continuum is accompanied by a gradual loss of 
freedom, which is manifested in the increasing inability to verify the experience 
through voluntary motor activity (53). At the peak of trophotropic arousal, in 
samadhi, the meditating subject experiences nothing but his own self-referential 
nature, void of compelling contents. It is not difficult to see a similarity between 
the meditative experience of pure self-reference and St. Teresa's description of 

her ecstasy: in both timeless and spaceless experiences the mundane world is 
virtually excluded. Of course, the converge is true of the mundane state of daily 
routine, in which the oceanic unity with the universe, in ecstasy and samadhi, is 
virtually absent. Thus, the mutual exclusiveness of the "normal" and the exalted 
states, both ecstasy and samadhi, allows us to postulate that man, the self-
referential system, exists on two levels: as "Self" in the mental dimension of 
exalted states; and as "I" in the objective world, where he is able and willing to 
change the physical dimension "out there." In fact, the "I" and the "Self" can be 
postulated on purely logical grounds. See, for instance, Brown's reasoning (54) 
that the universe is apparently ... constructed in order (and thus in such a way as to be 
able) to see itself. But in order to do so, evidently it must first cut itself up into at least one state 
which sees, and at least one other state which is seen. In this severed and mutilated condition, 
whatever it sees is only partially itself... but, in any attempt to see itself as an object, it must, 
equally undoubtedly, act so as to make itself distinct from, and therefore, false to, itself. In this 
condition it will always partially elude itself.  

In our terminology, the "Self" of exalted states is that which sees and, knows, 
while the "I" is the interpretation, that which is seen and known in the physical 
space-time of the world "out there." The mutually exclusive relation between the 
"seer" and the "seen," or the elusiveness of the "Self" and the "I" may have its 
physiological basis in the mutual exclusiveness of the ergotropic and trophotropic 
systems (8).  

A discernible communication between the "Self" and the "I" is only possible 
during the dreaming and hallucinatory states, whether drug-induced or "natural." 
These states can be located approximately between coefficients of variation 10 
and 13 on the perception-hallucination continuum (Fig. 1, left) and in the 9 to 12 
hertz EEG range on the perception-meditation continuum (Fig. 1, right). Such "I"-
"Self" communication is the creative source of art, science, literature, and 
religion.  

In spite of the mutually exclusive relation between the ergotropic and trophotropic 
systems, however, there is a phenomenon called "rebound to superactivity," or 
trophotropic rebound, which occurs in response to intense sympathetic excitation 
(55), that is, at ecstasy, the peak of ergotropic arousal (56). A rebound into 
samadhi at this point can be conceived of is a physiological protective 
mechanism; Gellhorn (8, 9) was among the first to notice that the rebound of the 
trophotropic system is not confined to the autonomic branches, but also causes 
significant changes in behavior. Thus, repetitive stimulation of the reticular 
formation in the midbrain increases the arousal level in awake cats, but this 
phase is followed by one in which the animal yawns, lies down, and finally falls 
asleep. This rebound phase is associated with the appearance of theta potentials 
in the hippocampus (57), just as the corresponding human trophotropic rebound-
samadhi-is characterized by theta potentials (17) (see Fig. 1, right). These 
rebound or reversal phenomena between ecstasy and samadhi (8, 9) are 
illustrated by the loop (58) connecting the two extreme exalted states in Fig. 1.  

The "Self" of ecstasy and samadhi are one and the same, as if the reflecting 
surface of a lake in Fig. 1 embraced both exalted states. If the level of water in 
such a lake were gradually raised, it would intersect successive and 
corresponding hyper and hypoaroused states. The intersected states represent 
levels of gradually diminishing subjectivity (less "Self') and increasing objectivity 
(more "I"), until eventually the objective "I"-state of the world is reached. Thus, 
each level of water would connect a hyper and hypoaroused state with a specific 
subjectivity/objectivity (or "Self"-to"I") ratio, implying a similarity between those 
pairs of hyper and hypoaroused states that are connected by gradually raised 
levels of water. This similarity might, for example, be used to account for the 
success of the widely practiced narcoanalytic technique of abreacting a 
traumatic, hyperaroused experience in a hypoaroused state of similar "Self"-to-"I" 
ratio. The similarity between corresponding hyper and hypoaroused states could 
also account for the hyperamnesic phenomena of the hypoaroused elderly, who 

clearly recall the hyperaroused experiences of their youth, but do not recall more 
recent experiences (59).  

During the ''I"-state of daily routine, the outside world is experienced as separate 
from oneself, and this may be a reflection of the greater freedom (that is, 
separateness or independence) of cortical interpretation from subcortical activity. 
With increasing ergotropic and trophotropic arousal, however, this separateness 
gradually disappears, apparently because in the "Self"-state of ecstasy and 
samadhi, cortical and subcortical activity are indistinguishably integrated. This 
unity is reflected in the experience of Oneness with everything, a Oneness with 
the universe that is oneself. 

Sign-Symbol-Meaning Transformations 

The separateness of subject and object during the daily routine levels of arousal 
(in the "I"-state) has been elaborated in our customary, rational, Aristotelian logic 
and language--a two valued (either-or, true-false) logic that discounts the 
interaction between observer (subject) and observed (object) (60). This 
separateness of object and subject, as we have seen, is a reflection of the 
relative independence of cortical interpretation from subcortical activity and is of 
survival value in the "I"-state, where the subject must make decisions of life and 
death by manipulating objects (through voluntary motor activity).  

But when we depart along either continuum from the "I" toward the "Self," the 
separateness of object and subject gradually disappears and their interaction 
becomes the principal content of the experience. This interaction, again, is a 
reflection of the gradually increasing integration of cortical and subcortical 
activity. In this state of Unity, the separateness of subject and object that is 
implicit in dualistic, Aristotelian logic and language becomes meaningless; only a 
symbolic logic and language can convey the experience of intense meaning. 
Apparently, then, meaning is "meaningful" only at that level of arousal at which it 
is experienced, and every experience has its state-bound meaning. During' the 

"Self"-state of highest levels of hyper or hypoarousal, this meaning can no longer 
be expressed in dualistic terms, since the experience of unity is born from the 
integration of interpretive (cortical) and interpreted (subcortical) structures. Since 
this intense meaning is devoid of specificities, the only way to communicate its 
intensity is the metaphor; hence, only through the transformation of objective sign 
into subjective symbol in art, literature, and religion can the increasing integration 
of cortical and subcortical activity be communicated.  

The transformation of sign to symbol is also apparent in the visual realm, where 
the constancies of space and time are replaced by geometric-ornamental 
rhythmic structures, the "hallucinatory form constants" of Kluver (61). In the light 
of my own experience, I would extend Kluver's observations to include hyper and 
hypoaroused hallucinatory experiences in general, whether electrically (62), 
"naturally" or drug-induced (63). The hallucinatory constancies are "magical 
symbols" visible or audible metaphors within a structure of symbolic logic and 
language, the language of hyper and hypoaroused hallucinatory states, and are 
at the base of the general tendency toward geometric-rhythmic 
ornamentalization. For example, both the rose windows of Gothic cathedrals and 
the mandalas of Tantric religious art (64) are ritualized hallucinatory form 
constants. The tendency toward ornamentalization, however, is not reserved to 
visual imagery, but also governs the order of poetic and musical rhythm, 
imposing an all-pervasive metrum and harmony on the hallucinatory creative-
religious states (65); the rhythm of music, poetry, and language corresponds to 
the geometric ornamental rhythm of the visual realm. Therefore, the manneristic 
(66) hallucinatory-creative style of art and literature is regarded as a projection 
and elaboration of the geometric-rhythmic ornamental fabric of hyper and 
hypoaroused states. 

State-Boundaries  

Inasmuch as experience arises from the binding or coupling of a particular, state 
or level of arousal with a particular symbolic interpretation of that arousal, 
experience is state-bound; thus, it can be evoked either by inducing ("naturally," 
hypnotically, or with the aid of drugs) the particular level of arousal, or by 
presenting some symbol of its interpretation, such as an image, melody, or taste. 
"Acquired aversions to tastes following illness are commonplace in humans. The 
knowledge that the illness was caused by the stomach flu and not the Sauce 
Bernaise does not prevent the sauce from tasting bad in the future" (67).  Alcohol 
induces the state of arousal necessary for the recall of a state-bound experience 
in the film City Lights. Here, Charlie Chaplin saves a drunken millionaire from 
attempted suicide, and so becomes his good friend. When sober, however, the 
millionaire does not remember Charlie. However (68):  

...the millionaire does not stay sober long. When he is drunk again, he spots Charlie and treats 
him like a long-lost friend. He takes Charlie home with him, but in the morning, when he is again 
sober, he forgets that Charlie is his invited guest and has the butler throw him out. 

Evidently, consciousness extends either between states of drunkenness; or 
between states of sobriety; but there is complete amnesia between the two 
discontinuous states of sobriety and drunkenness, states with characteristic and 
different "Self"-to-"I" ratios.  

Charlie's story has been recently modeled and scientifically validated by Goodwin 
et al. (69), who had 48 subjects memorize-nonsense syllables while drunk. When 
sober, these volunteers had difficulty recalling what they had learned, but they 
could recall significantly better when they were drunk again. Bustamante et al. 
(70) also observed amphetamine-induced (20 milligrams) excitatory, and 
amobarbital-induced (200 milligrams), "inhibitory," state-dependent recall of 
geometric configurations. His volunteers both memorized and later recalled the 
configurations under one of the two drugs. I submit, however, that while 
remembering from one state to another is usually called "state-dependent 
learning" (71) (implying that the individual was confronted with a learning task), 

extended practice, learning, or conditioning is not necessary for producing "state 
boundness." On the contrary, a single experience may be sufficient to establish 
state-boundness. 
 
Deja vu experiences and the so-called LSD flashbacks are, I believe, special 
cases of the general phenomenon of state-boundness, Note that neither focal 
lesions nor molecules of a hallucinogenic drug are necessary for the induction of 
a flashback--a symbol evoking a past drug experience may be sufficient to 
produce an LSD flashback (72). 
 
An 18-year old boy had a "bum trip" on "acid" and could not "come down" for two 
weeks. After he drank wine with a group of friends and was told by one of them 
that the wine contained a high dose of LSD (which it did not), he experienced 
hallucinations continuously for 14 days. 
 
And here is the story of a'"flashback" involving no drugs whatsoever (73). 
 
I was in love with a college classmate, but he married someone else. I also 
married, and even after four years and a beautiful baby I still dreamed about this 
fellow. Whenever I saw a car like his, my heart would pound even though he had 
left town years before and I knew it couldn't possibly be his. 
 
It follows from the state-bound nature of experience, and from the fact that 
amnesia exists between the state-of normal daily experience and all other states 
of hyper- and hypoarousal, that what is called the "subconscious" is but another 
name for this amnesia. Therefore, instead of postulating one subconscious, I 
recognize as many layers of self-awareness as there are levels of arousal and 
corresponding symbolic interpretations in the individual's interpretive repertoire. 
The many layers of self-awareness, each with its characteristic "Self"-to-"I" ratio, 
remind one of the captain with girl friends in many ports, each girl unaware of the 

existence of the others, and each existing only from visit to visit (that is, from 
state to state). This is how multiple existences become possible: by living from 
one waking state to another waking state; from one dream to the next; one 
amobarbital narcoanalysis session to the next (74); from LSD to LSD (75); from 
epileptic aura to aura (76); from one creative, artistic, religious, or psychotic 
inspiration or possession to another creative artistic, religious, or psychotic 
experience; from trance to trance; and from reverie to reverie. 
 
References and Notes 

1. W. Hess, Das Zwischenhirn und die Regullerung von Kreislauf und Atmung 
(Thieme, Leipzig, 1938); Das Zwischenhirn (Schwabe, Basel, 1949).  Ergotropic 
arousal denotes behavioral patterns prepatory to positive action and is 
characterized by increased activity of the sympathetic nervous system and an 
activated psychic state.  These states may be induced either naturally or, for 
example, through hallucinogenic drugs.  Trophotropic arousal results from an 
integration of parasympathetic with somatomotor activities to produce behavioral 
patterns that conserve and restore energy, a decrease in sensitivity to external 
stimuli, and sedation.  During ergotropic and trophotropic arousal, "alterations in 
autonomic activity are not confined to the visceral organs, but induce changes in 
cortical activity" [W. Hess cited by Gellhorn(9)]. 

2. R. Fisher, in Psychiatry and Art, vol. 2,  Art Interpretation and Art Therapy, I. 
Jakab, Ed. (Karger, Basel, 1969), p. 33. 

3. R. Gelpke, quoted by A. Hofmann. In Sonderabdruk aus dem Basler 
Stadtbuch (Basel 1964).  

4. R. Fischer, in Proceedings of the 4th International Congress of Pharmacology 
(Schwabe, Basel, 1970), vol. 33, p. 28;  Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 138, 440 (1967). 

5. The word "hyperphrenic" was suggested to me by Dr. A. Bader, Lausanne, 
Switzerland. 
 
6. Saint  Teresa, The Life of Saint Teresa, J. M. Cohen, Transl. (Penquin, 
Baltimore, 1957), p. 142. 
 
7.  W. Ashby, Design for a Brain (Wiley, NY 1960), p. 88. 

8.  E. Gellhorn, Psychol. Forsch. 34, 48 (1970). 

9. _____, J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 147, 148 (1968). 

10. E. Hebbard and R. Fischer, Psychopharmacologia 9, 146 (1966). 

11. J. Silverman and K. Gaarder, Percept. Mot. Skills 25, 661 (1967). 

12. R. Fischer, J. Nerv. Ment. Dis. 119, 492 (1954). 

13. H. Selye, J. Clin. Endocrinol. Metab. 6, 117 (1946). 

14. M. C. Franck and W. Kuhlo, Arch. Psychiat. Nervenkr. 213, 238 (1970). 

15. J. Aschoff, ibid., 211, 325 (1968). 

16. K. Gaarder, R. Koresko, W. Kropff, Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 
21, 564 (1966). 

17. E. Green, A. Green, E. Walters, J. Transpersonal Psychol. 1, 1 (1970). 

18. R. D. Ditchburn and D. Fender, Opt. Acta 2, 128 (1955). Immobilization is 
accomplished by attaching a tiny mirror to a contact lens in such a way that the 
image will follow micronystagmoid movements of the eye.  Also see R. Prichard, 
W. Heron, D. Hebb [Can. J. Psychol. 14, 67 (1960)]. 

19. K. Behanan, Yoga, A Scientific Evaluation (Dover, NY 1937), p. 223.  The 
cobra has fixed eyes to begin with; therefore, to compensate for the lack of 
scanning eye movements, it must sway its head rhythmically to fixate the image 
of its victim. (If nothing else, one practical application of this paper may be the 
following: whenever you meet a cobra, swing along with him and he won't be 
able to locate you.) 
 
20. R. Fischer, T. Kappeler, P. Wisecup, K. Thatcher, Dis. Nerv. Syst. 31,91 
(1970); K. Thatcher, T. Kappeler, P. Wisecup, R. Fischer, ibid., p. 181. 

21. R. Fischer, ibid, 30, 161 (1969). J. Strauss's evidence also suppors this 
concept of the continuous, nondiscrete nature of perceptual and hallucinatory 
experience [Arch. Gen. Psychiat. 21, 581 (1969)]. Our definition of hallucinations 
or dreams as experiences characterized by a high S/M ratio is free of value 
judgment, thus implying that hallucinatory experience can be labeled 
pathological, artistic, religious, and so on, according to one's taste [and taste 
threshold; see  R. Fischer, in Gustation and Olfaction, G. Ohloff and A. E. 
Thomas, Eds. (Academic Press, NY 1971), pp. 187-237]. 

22. The cross-tolerance between LSD, psilocybin or mescaline [H. Isbell, A. 
Wolbach, A. Wikler, E. Miner, Psychopharmacologia 2, 147 (1961); A. Wolbach, 
H. Isbell, E. Minor, ibid, 3, 1 (1962)] as well as the characteristic square-wave 
pattern of saccadic movement they elicit [E. Hebbard and   R. Fischer, ibid., 9, 
146 (1966)] mark these drugs as the hallucinogenic, psychotomimetic, 
psychedelic, or psychodysleptic drugs.  It is implied, therefore, that any state 
which can be induced by one of these drugs can be duplicated by the others as 
well. 

23. R. Corlis, G. Splaver, P. Wisecup, R. Fischer, Nature 216, 91 (1967).  

24. "Constancies" assure the recognition of identity; they refer to what Piaget 
meant by the "conservation" of area, distance, length, volume, and so on [J. 

Plaget, B. Inhelder, A. Szeminska, The Child's Conception of Geometry, E. A. 
Luzer, Transl. (Routledpge, London, 1960), p. 390]. For example, wearing prism 
spectacles results in a variety of visual distortions which, due to the cortical 
transformation of subcortical (retinal) information, gradually disappear with time. 
Perceptual-behavioral constancies can be formalized as information (or signal to 
noise) ratios; that is, as dimensionless quantities [R. Fischer, F. Griffin, R. C. 
Archer, S. C. Zinsmeister, P. S. Jastram, Nature 207; 1049 (1965)].  

25. R. Hill, R. Fischer, D. Warshay, Experientia 25, 171 (1969).  

26. R. Fischer, R. Hill, D. Warshay; ibid., p. 166. (1969).  

27. R. Fischer, P. Marks, R. Hill, M. Rockey, Nature 218, 296 (1968); R. Fischer, 
In Origin and Mechanisms of Hallucinations, W. Keup, Ed. (Plenum, New York, 
1970) pp. 303-332.  

28. R.. Fischer, R. Hill, K. Thatcher, J. Schelb, Agents Actions 1, 190 (1970).  

29. R. Hill and R. Fischer, Pharmokopsychiat. Neuro-Psychopharmakol. 3, 256 
(1970).  

30. H. Rennert, Confin. Psychiat. 12, 23 (1969).  

31. L. Navratil, ibid., p. 30. 

32.R. Fischer and R. Kaelbling. in Recent Advances In Biological Psychiatry, J. 
Wortis, .Ed. (Plenum, New York, 1967), vol. 9, p. 183; R. Fischer, L. Ristine, P. 
Wisecup, Biol. Psychiat. 1, 209 (1970).  

33. R. Fischer, H. Dunbar, A. Sollberger, Arnzneimittel-forschungs 21, 135 
(1971).  

34. L. Bender, in Psychotomemtic Drugs, D. Elron, Ed. (Raven, New York, 1969), 
p. 267.  

35. R. Fischer, Perspect. Biol. Med. 12, 259 (1969). The loss of a limb or an 
organ, for instance, can be regarded as a distortion of corporeal awareness; the 
phenomenon that corrects for this distortion results in a very real feeling that the 
lost limb or organ is still there, but this is only a phantom sensation.  

36. S. Kuromaru, S. Okada, M. Hanada, Y. Kasahara. K. Sakamoto, Psychiat 
Neurol. Jap. 64, 604 (1962).  

37. R. Fischer, Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 96, 44 (1962).  

38. A. Hofmann, in Discoveries In Biological Psychiatry, F. Ayd and Blackwell, 
Eds. (Lippincott, Philadelphia, 1970), chap. 7.  

39. R. Fischer, in The Voices Of Time, J. Fraser, Ed. (Braziller, New York, 1966), 
p. 357. 

40. P. MacLean, J. Neurosurg. 11, 29 (1954); Amer. J. Med. 25, 611 (1958).  

41.The mean increase in pupillary diameter induced by 160 micrograms of 
psilocybin per kilogram of body weight in 34 college-age male volunteers was 
0.93 millimeter, standard deviation = + 0.52; whereas in 13 females, the mean 
increase was 0.56 millimeter, standard deviation = + 0.27.  

42. R. Fischer and D. Warshay. Pharmakopsychiat. Neuro-Psychopharmakol. 1, 
291 (1968); R. Fischer,  Perspect. Biol. Med. 12; 259 (1969).  

43. G. Maranon, Rev. Fr. Endochrol. 2, 301 (1924).  

44. S. Schachter and J. Singer, Psychol. Rev. 69, 379 (1962).  

45. H. Lennard, L. Epstein. A. Bernstein, D. Ransom, Science 169, 438 (1970).  

46. L. Goldstein, I. Murphree, A. Sugerman. C. Pfeiffer, E. Jenney, Clin. 
Pharmacol Ther. 4, 10 (1963). 

 
47. K. Thatcher, W. Wiederholt, R. Fischer, Agents Actions 2, 21 (1971); G. 
Marjerrison, A. Krause, R. Keogh, Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 24, 35 
(1967). 

48. R. Fischer, in Genetic Factors in "Schizophrenia," A. Kapan, Ed. (Thomas, 
Springfield, IL, in press). 

49. B. Pauleikhoff, Fortschr. Neurol. Psychiat. 37, 476 (1969).  The distinction 
between a conversion experience is pointed out by H. Weibrecht [Beitrage zur 
Religionspsychopathologie, insbesondere zur Psychopathologie der Bekehrun 
(Scherrer, Heidelberg, 1948)] His four schizoprhenics experienced a religious 
conversion during their psychoses. Although after remission they had insight into 
the diseased nature of their psychoses, they continued to regard their conversion 
experiences as valid turning points.  We conceptualize conversion experiences 
as confrontations and dialogue between a man's worldly "I" and his ecstatic (or 
meditative) "Self," resulting in the creation of a more consistent personality--one 
that has "found its style." [R. Fischer, Confin. Psychiat. 13, 1 (1970); ibid., in 
press]. 

50. Pascal recorded at the peak of his decisive religious illumination: "Fire. God 
of Abraham, God of Issac, God of Jacob, not of the philosophers and the 
scientists. Certainty. Certainty." [M. Arland, Pascal (l'Enfant Poete, Paris, 1946) 
pp. 120-121]. 

51. A. Kasamatus and T. Hirai, Psychologia 6, 89 (1963); Folia Psychiat. Neuro. 
Jap. 20, 315 (1966). 

52. It is likely that these parietal, low-frequency EEC wave are related to dendritic 
field-potential charges. 

53. B. Anand, G. Chhina, B. Singh, Electroencephalogr. Clin. Neurophysiol. 13, 
452 (1961). 

54. G. Brown, Laws of Form (Allen, London, 1969), p. 105.  Saint Teresa 
elegantly expressed this partial elusiveness: "There remains the power of seeing 
and hearing: but is as if the things heard and seen were all a great distance far 
away" [in E. Underhill, Mysticism (Methuen, London, 1912), p. 450]. 

55. E. Gellhorn, Acta Neuroveg. 20, 181 (1959). 

56. Such rebound would be called "inhibition" in pavlovian terminology [I. Pavlov, 
in C. Murchison, Psychologies of 1930 (Clark Univ. Press, Wocester, MA, 1930), 
p. 213], and "phase of resistance" by Selye [Stress Acta, Montreal, 1950), pp. 15-
43]. It can also be accounted for within the frame of Wilder's Law of Initial Value, 
which states that "the higher the initial value of a measured function, the lower is 
the tendency of the system to respond to furthering stimuli, while the highest as 
well as the lowest values tend to result in a reversal of action (italics mine)" [J. 
Wilder, J. Psychother. 12, 199 (1958)]. 

57. P. Parmeggiani, Brain Res. 7, 350 (1968). 

58. The "loop" in Fig. 1 has also been independently suggested to me (on 
experiential grounds alone) by both Dr. J. H. M. Whiteman, University of Cape 
Town, South Africa, and Marilyn Delphinium Rutgers, Glen-Ellen, CA. I am 
gratefully indebted to them, as well as to Primarius Dr. Leo Navratil, Gugging, 
Austria, for sharing with me their intuition and scholarship. 

59. This example was suggested to me by Primarius Dr. Leo Navratil, Gugging, 
Austria. 

60. For example, neither quinine molecules nor a subject's taste receptors are 
bitter per se--bitterness results only during interaction of   the two. Therefore, no 

taster, no bitterness (just as there can be no image or sound of a falling tree 
without a viewer or listener). [See R. Fischer, Dis. Nerv. Syst. 30, 161 (1969)]. 

61. H. Kluver, Mescal and Mechanism of Hallucinations (Phoenix, Univ. of 
Chicago Press, Chicago, 1966). p. 66. 

62. M. Knoll, J. Kugler, D. Hofer, S. Lawder, Confi. Neurol. 23, 201 (1963). 

63. W. Keup, Ed., Origin and Mechanisms of Hallucinations  (Plenum, New York, 
1970), 
pp. 95-210. 

64. A. Mookerjee, in Tantra-Kunst, R. Kumar, Ed. (Basillius, Basel, 1967-1968), 
p. 11. 

65. R. Fischer, Confi. Psychiat. 13, 1 (1970). 

66. See L. Navratil, Schizophrenie und Kunst (Deutsches Taschenbuch Verlag, 
Munchen, 1965), p. 35; Schizophrenie und Sprache (Deutsches Taschenbuch, 
Munchen, 1966), p. 162. 

67. M. Seligman, Psychol. Rev. 77, 416 (1970). 

68. G. McDonald, M. Conway, M. Ricci, Eds. The Films of Charlie Chaplin 
(Citadel, NY, 1965), p. 191. 

69. D. Goodwin, B. Powell, D. Bremer, H. Holne, J. Stern, Science 163, 1358 
(1969). 

70. J. Bustamante, A. Jordan, M. vila, A. Gonzalez, A. Insus, Physiol. Behav. 5, 
793 (1970). 

71. R. Fischer, Dis. Nerv. Syst. 32, 373 (1971); ____ and G. M. Landon, Brit. J. 
Psychiat., in press.  The later paper also includes an extensive discussion of 

state-dependent learning in human beings and animals.  Note that this term 
could just as well be "state-dependent adaptation," since learning and adaptation 
are as indistinguishable from each other as hallucinations and dreams. 

72. L. Tec, J. Amer. Med. Ass. 215, 980 (1971). 

73. From "Dear Abby," in Citizen Journal, Columbus, Ohio, 13 Jan 1971, p. 21. 

74. Primarius Dr. Raoul Schindler, Vienna, informed me at Linz in 1969 that a 
patient's thread of thought in narcoanalyis resumes, after an injection of 
amobarbital, exactly where it left off at the end of the previous session. 

75.  Dr. Hanscarl Leuner, Gottingen, Germany, also confirms (1970) that his 
patients in LSD-supplemented or psycholytic therapy regard each LSD 
experience as a continuation of the last. 

76. M. Horowitz, J. Adams and B. Rutkin [Arch. Gen Psychiat. 19, 469 (1968)] 
report from the case history of an epileptic girl that the imagery of every aura 
consisted of "pigs walking upright like people." In early grade school the girl 
would rip open her blouse during a seizure, but, of course, she would not 
remember this after the seizure.  Nevertheless, her classmates called her a pig, 
and it was this pig which she saw "walking upright" in each aura. 

77. The author is professor of experimental psychiatry and associate professor of 
pharmacology at the Ohio State University College of Medicine, Columbus 
43210. This article is adapted from a paper presented at the AAAS symposium 
on "Mood, Behavior, and Drugs" in Chicago, IL, 28 December 1970, and from a 
seminar given on 20 January 1971 at the department of psychiatry, Johns 
Hopkins University, Baltimore, MA. 

Supported in part by National Institute of Mental Health grant 1 RO3 MH17633-
01 and general research support grants.  I am indebted to Sandoz 
Pharmaceuticals, Basel, Switzerland, and to Dr. John A. Scigliano, former 

executive secretary, FDA-PHS Psychotomimetic Agents Advisory Committee, 
Bethesda, Maryland, for generously providing me with psilocybin (under IND-
3350). I am also grateful to Dr. Peter Gwyane, James Scheib, and Pamela 
Furney for their devoted competence and to my creative artist wife, Trudy, for 
vital perceptual as well as cognitive illumination. 

 

  

 

