Publishing Consultant : Tam Lye Suan, Millennia Comms

Cover Design : Rainbow River Design

Text Illustrations : YH Cheng

Typesetting : Papyrus Communications Sdn. Bhd.

Text  2003 Ng Kwan Hoong

This  edition  September  2003,  published  for  Malaysian
Communications and Multimedia Commission

All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system or transmitted in any form or by any
means,  electronic,  mechanical,  photocopying,  recording  or
otherwise, without the prior permission of the text copyright
owner and publisher.

Perpustakaan Negara Malaysia Cataloguing-in-Publication Data

Ng, Kwan-Hoong
Radiation,  mobile  phones,  base  stations  and  your  health/Ng
Kwan-Hoong
ISBN 983-40889-0-9
1. Cellular telephones  Health aspects   2. Health Care I. Title.
384.535

ISBN  983-40889-0-9
Printed by Gains Print Sdn. Bhd.

ii

Contents

v
Acknowledgements
vii
Foreword
Introduction
ix
Eight Myths About Mobile Phones and Base Stations xi

Frequently Asked Questions
 Why is there a great concern on the health

effects of a mobile phone system?

 What is radiation?

How does radiation behave?
Is natural radiation dangerous?

 What is electromagnetic field (EMF)?
 What is radiofrequency (RF)?
 What is a mobile phone? Does it emit

large quantities of RF radiation?
Besides the RF radiation from a mobile
phone system, are there any other
RF sources that I am exposed to?

 What are mobile phone base stations and

how do they work?
Are there health risks associated with
living or working near a base station?
How safe are the base stations?
Is there a scientific basis for these RF
radiation safety standards?
Does Malaysia have safety standards and
guidelines for mobile phone base stations?

1
1
3
3
4
5

6

6

7

8
8

9

9

iii








Do mobile phone base station antennas
meet the safety standards?

 What can the consumers do to influence

the siting of base stations?

 What are the international organizations

doing regarding the health effects of
RF radiation?

 What are the findings of recent reviews

from some of these international
organizations?

 What is the present position of the

Malaysian government agencies?

 What are the effects of RF radiation?
How safe is the mobile phone system?
Can it cause cancer and other illnesses?
 What is Specific Absorption Rate (SAR)?

How can I use it?

 Where can I obtain SAR value for my

mobile phone?

 What steps can I take to reduce my

exposure to RF radiation from my
mobile phone?

 What is the advice for children using

mobile phones?
So why is anyone still worried?

 Where can I get more information?
Additional Information / Links

9

10

10

11

13
13

14

14

15

15

16
16
18
19

iv




Ac knowledgements

The  author  wishes  to  acknowledge  the  indispensable
assistance of the project team and a host of many others
for their invaluable comments, advice and support without
whom,  this  work  would  not  have  been  possible.  In
particular, he is grateful to:

Y.  Bhg.  Tan  Sri  Dr  Mohamad  Taha  bin  Arif,  Director-
General, Malaysian Ministry of Health.

Mr Mohd. Yusof  Ali, Senior Research Officer and Manager,
Non-ionizing  Radiation  Unit,  Malaysian  Institute  for
Nuclear Technology Research (MINT).

Dr David J. Dowsett, Consultant Medical Physicist, Dublin,
Ireland.

Dr  Andrew  W.  Wood,  Temporary  WHO  Consultant,
Associate  Professor  in  Biophysics,  School  of  Biophysical
Sciences  &  Electrical  Engineering,  Swinburne  University
of Technology, Australia.

Dr T. E. Van Deventer, Scientist, Radiation & Environmental
Health,  Protection  of  the  Human  Environment,  World
Health Organization, Geneva, Switzerland.

v

vi

Foreword by

Y. Bhg. Tan Sri Dr. Mohamad Taha bin Arif

Director-General, Ministry of Health

First  and  foremost,  I  wish  to  extend  my  heartiest
congratulations  to  Professor  Ng  Kwan  Hoong  for  his
commendable efforts in producing this highly informative
publication  entitled  Radiation,  Mobile  Phones,  Base
Stations  and Your Health. This timely publication does
not only provide general background information on the
health effects from mobile phones and base stations but
also helps to alleviate anxiety of the general public.

With  the  technology  rapidly  advancing,  mobile  phone
users and people living within close range of the mobile
phone base stations have become increasingly concerned
over  the  potential  harmful  effects  of  radiofrequency
radiation produced by these devices to their health.

The Ministry of Health has always been striving to play an
effective role as the guardian of public health. In 1996,
the  Ministry  appointed  an  interagency  scientific
committee to study and produce a report on the health
effects of electromagnetic fields (EMF). This committee
concluded that there is no conclusive evidence to indicate
that EMF exposures at levels normally encountered will
cause harmful health effects. The above is also the findings
of  the  world  scientific  and  medical  community.  This
committee still monitors the current research worldwide
and reports to the Ministry of Health periodically.

vii

Nevertheless,  there  continues  to  be  a  great  deal  of
misunderstanding  and  misinformation  on  the  issue  of
safety and radiation. I am therefore very pleased that this
book endeavours to promote a better understanding of
what  is  known  and  not  known  about  radiofrequency
radiation, as well as to separate the myths from the facts.

Once  again,  I  applaud  Prof.  Ng  on  his  efforts  and  his
continuing  contribution  towards  promoting  better
understanding  of  radiation,  in  particular,  its  use  in  the
medical field.

Thank you.

TAN SRI DR. MOHAMAD TAHA BIN ARIF

viii

Introduction

The telecommunications industry is experiencing a robust
growth on a global scale. By the year 2005, the industry
predicts that there will be as many as 1.6 billion mobile
phone subscribers worldwide. Since the introduction of
mobile  phones  in  the  mid-1980s,  there  has  been  a
significant increase in the number of mobile phone users
and installations of base stations. As of 2003, statistics from
the  Malaysian  Communications  and  Multimedia
Commission (MCMC), show that the mobile penetration
rate  is  39  persons  per  100  population  or  9.7  million
subscribers.

Mobile phones, sometimes known as cellular phones or
handsets,  form  an  integral  part  of  modern  tele-
communications and are fast becoming a social lifestyle.
In some parts of the world, they are the most reliable or
the only phones available. In others, mobile phones are
very  popular  because  they  allow  people  to  maintain
constant  and  continuous  communication  without
hampering their freedom of movement.

How does a mobile phone system work? The individual
mobile phone operates by communicating with a fixed
installation  known  as  a  base  station  or  a  tele-
communications structure. Since the mobile phone and
its  base  station  is  a  two-way  radio,  they  produce
radiofrequency  (RF)  radiation  as  a  means  of
communicating and expose the people near them to RF
radiation.

ix

The wide use of mobile phones has inevitably raised the
question of whether there are any implications for human
health. There have been some reports relating to possible
adverse health effects and these have understandably led
to some concern from the members of the public.

In  Radiation,  Mobile  Phones,  Base  Stations  and  Your
Health, issues regarding human health effects from mobile
phones and their base station antennas are addressed and
discussed in the Frequently Ask Questions (FAQ) manner.
While  some  of  the  issues  discussed  are  international,
however, general issues of technical and regulatory aspects
of this FAQ, are specific to Malaysia.

Our  perception  about  radiation  and  health  shapes  our
actions concerning it and our actions influence the future
of important services and functions. It is with this in mind
that this book attempts to make radiation from mobile
phone system more understandable to the members of
public and to try to separate the myths from facts.

For now, we can conclude that there is no consistent and
convincing  scientific  evidence  of  adverse  health  effects
caused  by  RF  radiation.  Meanwhile,  further  ongoing
research  based  on  established  scientific  methods  will
continue  to  shed  light  on  our  understanding  of  this
important health issue.

x

Eight Myths About Mobile Phones

and Base Stations

 MYTH

 FACT

 Mobile phones cause
brain cancers - look at
all those people who
used mobile phones
and are ill.

 Mobile phones are so

powerful that they
literally cook your
brain.

 You are safer using a
mobile phone in a car
because it shields you
from the radiation.

 Using them in a car
does not affect your
driving skills.

 It is the base stations

that are really
dangerous.

 Despite individual cases, there is

no scientific evidence that it is
anything but chance.

 Mobile phones typically have an
output of less than 1 watt that may
cause heating in the brain of
fractions of a degree, less than
normal exercise.

 Phones automatically increase

their input in a car to overcome
the shielding. A car kit often
uses an external antenna that
will reduce the power levels.
 You are 4 times more likely to

crash because of divided attention,
and it is similar to drunk-driving.
 At the ground level, the intensity
of radiofrequency radiation from
base stations are less than one
thousandth of those from mobile
phones and are generally much
less than those from the local radio
and television stations.

 The cases of brain

cancer are increasing
as more people use
mobile phones.

 Using a mobile phone
gives you headaches.

 Nobody is really
investigating the
dangers.

 There is no evidence of a rise

among young people  any
increase will be among people in
their 70s.

 People get headaches without

using mobile phones, too  there
is no evidence of a direct link.

 The World Health Organization
and many government agencies
are coordinating  scientific studies
to investigate these health effects.

xi

Frequently Asked Questions

Why is there a great concern on the health
effects of a mobile phone system?

Millions of people around the world use mobile phones
as  a  communication  tool  everyday.  Base  stations  or
telecommunication  towers  are  continuously  being
erected.  Because  of  this,  scientists  worldwide  are
concerned  about  the  potential  health  risks  associated
with the use of this device. Even small adverse effects on
health  could  have  major  public  health  implications.
Moreover, radiofrequency is an abstract subject and is not
easily understood by people. The term radiation often
conjures fear and scare. A tremendous amount of publicity
generated in the mass media has also caused great concern
among members of the public.

What is radiation?

Radiation is a form of energy on the move. Radiation is
electromagnetic  in  nature,  i.e.,  it  consists  of  waves  of
electric and magnetic energy moving together through
space at the speed of light. We live in a radiation world
and are exposed to both natural and man-made radiation.
Every second of our life, we are exposed to all forms of
radiation such as ultraviolet light from the sun and radio
waves from radio and television broadcasts. When we go
for a chest x-ray examination, we are exposed to x-rays.

There are two types of radiation:
N Ionizing radiation

It  contains  enough  energy  to  cause  ionization.
Ionization is a process by which electrons are stripped
from atoms and molecules. Its interaction with matter
can change chemical reactions in the body that leads
to damage in biological tissues including effects on

1

DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid)  the genetic material.
Gamma  rays  and  x-rays  are  two  forms  of  ionizing
radiation.

N Non-ionizing radiation (NIR)

It does not have sufficient energy to cause ionization
in  living  matter.  It  causes  some  heating  effect,  but
usually not enough to cause any kind of long-term
damage to tissues. Radiofrequency energy, visible light
and microwave radiation are considered non-ionizing.

ELECTROMAGNETIC SPECTRUM

Source

     Frequency in hertz (Hz)

Gamma rays

X-rays

Ultraviolet
radiation

Visible
light

Infrared
radiation

Microwaves

Radiowaves

Very low

frequency (VLF)
3000-30.000 Hz

Extremely low
frequency (ELF)

3-3000 Hz

Direct Current

800 MHz - 1 GHz

100 MHz

15-30 kHz
and 50-90 Hz

50 Hz

Fig. 1     The Electromagnetic Spectrum

2

n
tio
dia
a
R
 
g

nizin

o
I

n
tio
dia
a
R
 
g

nizin
-io
n
o
N

22
10

20
10

18
10

16
10

14
10

12
10

10
10

8

6

4

10

10

10

2

10
50Hz

0

For  the  same  strength,  ionizing  radiation  is  more
capable of causing health effects than non-ionizing
radiation due to the ionization process.

How does radiation behave?

Radiation behaves in the same manner as light. It travels
in a straight line and when it collides with an object, it
can  do  three  things    it  can  pass  right  through
(transmission), it can bounce off (reflection), and it can
be absorbed. It readily reduces its energy as it moves away
from its source where radiation is produced.  This means
that  a  person  will  receive  less  exposure  if  he/she  stays
indoors compared to staying outside or keep a distance
compared to standing close to the source.

Is natural radiation dangerous?

We are being continuously exposed to many sources of
natural radiation. Of these sources, the sun is the most
familiar to us as it produces infrared radiation, visible light,
and  ultraviolet  light.  The  other  sources  are  cosmic
radiation that consists of high energy particles and rays
that originate from outside our earth, terrestrial radiation
that comes from naturally occurring radioactive materials
in  the  earths  crust,  and  internal  radiation  from
radioactivity that is naturally present in our bodies.

Of these, only the ultraviolet light from the sun can be
considered  dangerous.  Over-exposure  to  the  suns
ultraviolet light can cause premature aging of the skin
and cause sunburn, which has been linked to skin cancer.
Although the nature of cosmic, terrestrial, and internal
radiation is inherently hazardous and can cause cancer,
these  sources  are  not  normally  dangerous  to  us  as  the

3

levels present naturally are sufficiently low that the risk is
negligible.

What is electromagnetic field (EMF)?

Electromagnetic radiation consists of waves of electric and
magnetic energy moving together through space at the
speed of light. Often the term electromagnetic field or
EMF is used to indicate the presence of electromagnetic
radiation.

Different forms of electromagnetic radiation are classified
by their frequencies. The term EMF is generally used to
cover fields in the frequency range below 300 gigahertz
(GHz),  where  giga  refers  to  a  thousand  million.  EMF
includes electric and magnetic fields from the electricity
supply at power frequencies (50 Hz in Malaysia), and radio
waves  from  TV,  radio  and  mobile  phones,  radar  and
satellite  communications.  Many  home  devices  also
transmit EMF such as cordless phones and radio-controlled
toys.

Frequency

Frequency is measured in Hertz (Hz)
1 Hz = 1 cycle per second

1 cycle

kHz
MHz
GHz

=
=
=

kilohertz
megahertz
gigahertz

=
=
=

1000 Hz
1000 000 Hz
1000 000 000 Hz

Example:
Source:
Power line
Mobile phone

Frequency:
50 Hz
900 MHz

4

What is radiofrequency (RF)?

A radio signal can be thought of as a wave that spreads
out from its source (the antenna). It is often referred to
as  an  electromagnetic  wave  that  is  made  up  of  linked
electric and magnetic components. The radiofrequency
(RF)  part  of  the  electromagnetic  spectrum  includes
electromagnetic waves produced by television and radio
transmitters  (including  base  stations)  and  microwaves.
The  electric  and  magnetic  components  that  form
the  electromagnetic  wave  can  be  referred  to  as
radiofrequency fields.

When  the  announcer  of  a  radio  station  says,  You  are
listening to 95.8 FM what the announcer means is that
you are listening to a radio station broadcasting a FM radio
signal at a frequency of 95.8 megahertz.

Fig. 2     Exposure to radiofrequency radiation in everyday life.

5

What is a mobile phone? Does it emit large
quantities of RF radiation?

Antenna

Transmitter

A  mobile  or  cellular  phone  is  a
low-power, single-channel, two-
way  radio.  It  contains  both  a
transmitter  and  a  receiver.  It
emits  RF  radiation  to  transmit
information to the base station.
It  also  acts  like  a  receiver  of
information, in a similar manner
as a transistor radio. The handset
battery limits the power of trans-
mitted radiation, which is similar,
if  not  smaller  than,  that  of  a
torchlight. The radiation emitted
by the antenna is insufficient to
cause any significant heating of
tissues  in  the  ear  or  head,
although  a  rise  in  skin  tem-
perature may occur as a result of
placing the mobile phone too close against the ear or head
thus restricting the airflow.

Fig. 3 Radiation in
a mobile phone is
generated in the
transmitter and
emitted through
the antenna.

Besides  the  RF  radiation  from  a  mobile  phone
system, are there any other RF sources that I am
exposed to?

Yes.  You  are  exposed  to  RF  radiation  originating  from
paging and other communications antennas such as those
used  by  the  fire,  police  and  emergency  services,  that
operate at similar power levels as base stations, and often
at a similar frequency. In many urban areas, television and
radio broadcast antennas commonly transmit higher RF
radiation levels than the mobile phone base stations.

6

What  are  mobile  phone  base  stations  and
how do they work?

Mobile  phone  base  stations  are  also  known  as  base
transceiver  stations  or  telecommunications  structures.
They  are  low-power,  multi-channel  two-way  radios.
Antennas, which produce RF radiation, are mounted on
either  transmission  towers  or  roof-mounted  structures.
These structures need to be of a certain height in order
to have a wider coverage. When you communicate on a
mobile phone, you are connected to a nearby base station.
From  that  base  station  your  phone  call  goes  into  the
regular fixed-line phone system.

As  the  mobile  phones  and  their  base  stations  are  two-
way radios, they produce RF radiation to communicate
and  therefore  expose  the  people  near  them  to  RF
radiation.  However,  as  both  the  phones  and  the  base
stations have low-power (short range) transmitters in them,
the RF radiation exposure levels are generally very low.

(a) A Transmission Tower

(b) A Roof top Structure

Fig. 4(a) & (b)  Mobile phone base stations

7

Are there health risks associated with living
or working near a base station?

The consensus of the international scientific community
is that the power from these mobile phone base station
antennas is far too low to produce health risks as long as
people  are  kept  away  from  direct  contact  with  the
antennas.

You have to know the difference between antennas and
towers.  It  is  the  antennas  that  you  need  to  keep  your
distance from and not the towers that hold the antennas.

You also need to be aware of the many different designs
of mobile phone base stations that vary widely in their
power and characteristics, as well as their potential for
exposing people to RF radiation.

How safe are the base stations?

In Malaysia, base stations are installed in compliance with
the  stringent  guidelines  set  by  the  Malaysian
Communications  and  Multimedia  Commission  and  the
Ministry  of  Housing  and  Local  Governement,  which
conform to international standards and best practices of
safety.

In addition to local standards the following international
agencies  are  the  International  Commission  on  Non-
Ionizing  Radiation  Protection  (ICNIRP),  the  Institute  of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) and the World
Health Organization (WHO).

8

Is  there  a  scientific  basis  for  these  RF
radiation safety standards?

Yes.  Over  the  past  few  decades,  scientists  have  been
researching  the  biological  effects  of  RF  radiation  on
animals  and  humans.  The  results  were  published  in
scientific journals and have been extensively reviewed by
international organizations.

Does  Malaysia  have  safety  standards  and
guidelines for mobile phone base stations?
Yes.  The  Malaysian  Communications  and  Multimedia
Commission (MCMC) Guidelines on permissible radiation
levels, released in August 1998, are based on international
standards developed to minimize the possible impact of
radiation on health. The MCMC continues to monitor the
latest  safety  standards  recommended  by  world
organizations  such  as  the  International  Commission  on
Non-ionizing Radiation Protection (ICNIRP) and the World
Health Organization (WHO) to ensure that the guidelines
adopted for Malaysia remain current.

Do mobile phone base station antennas meet
the safety standards?

Yes.  With  proper  engineering  design,  installation  and
regulatory control, mobile phone base station antennas
can  meet  all  the  national  and  international  safety
standards.

The Malaysian Institute for Nuclear Technology Research
(MINT) has measured exposures around many base stations
and found that the maximum exposures around the great
majority of base stations are less than 1 per cent of the
public exposure limit set by the safety standards. Exposures
seldom exceed a few percent of the limit and none have
been above 10 per cent.

9

What can the consumers do to influence the
siting of base stations?

Mobile operators should comply with the guidelines and
standards  set  by  the  relevant  regulatory  bodies.  Base
station  sites  must  offer  good  signal  coverage  and  be
accessible  for  maintenance.  While  RF  radiation  levels
around  base  stations  are  not  considered  a  health  risk;
siting decisions should take into account aesthetics and
public sensibilities.

However, as consumers, you too have a role to play. You
can influence the decision to locate or site the base stations
in  your  area.  Siting  base  stations  near  kindergartens,
schools and playgrounds may need special consideration.
Open communication and discussion between the mobile
phone operators, local councils and the public during the
initial planning stages for a new base station, can help
create public understanding and greater acceptance of a
new facility.

What  are  the  international  organizations
doing  regarding  the  health  effects  of  RF
radiation?

Public concern in many countries regarding mobile phones
and base stations has resulted in a number of international
and  national  organizations  and  independent  expert
groups  being  requested  by  governments  to  carry  out
detailed reviews of the research literature.

The  World  Health  Organization 
International
Electromagnetic Fields (EMF) Project was started in 1996.
An  important  result  of  this  work  has  been  the
development of a detailed agenda of research needs, that
has driven the establishment of new research programmes
around  the  world.  It  aims  to  harmonize  the  safety
standards for all countries in the world. The Project has

10

also  helped  develop  a  series  of  public  information
documents on EMF issues.

What are the findings of recent reviews from
some of these international organizations?
The  most  recent  reviews,  and  brief  quotes  from  their
findings are presented below.

No  consistent  increases  in  health  risk  due  to
exposure to RF radiation are evident to date. It
appears that exposure of the public to RF fields
emitted from wireless telecommunications base
stations  is  of  sufficiently  low  intensity  that
biological  or  adverse  health  effects  are  not
anticipated.

The Royal Society of Canada 1999

Despite the rather limited epidemiological and
experimental data available, NRPB concludes that
the  totality  of  the  evidence  available  does  not
suggest that the use of mobile phones have any
detrimental effect on human health. Nevertheless,
there does remain a need for further research.

U.K. National Radiological
Protection Board (NRPB) 1999

None of the recent reviews have concluded that
exposure to the RF fields from mobile phones or
their  base  stations  causes  any  adverse  health
consequence.  However,  there  are  gaps  in
knowledge that have been identified for further
research to better assess health risks. It will take
about  three  to  four  years  for  the  required  RF
research  to  be  completed,  evaluated  and  to
publish the final results of any health risks.

     The World Health Organization (WHO) 2000

11

The  balance  of  evidence  to  date  suggests  that
exposures to RF radiation below ICNIRP guidelines
do not cause adverse health effects to the general
population.

We  conclude  that  the  balance  of  evidence
indicates that there is no general risk to the health
of people living near to base stations on the basis
that exposures are expected to be small fractions
of guidelines.

The United Kingdom Independent
Expert Group Report (also known
as the Stewart Report) 2000

FDA has been receiving inquiries about the safety
of mobile phones, including cellular phones and
Personal  Communication  Services  (PCS)  phones.
Mobile phones emit low levels of radiofrequency
(RF) energy (i.e., radiofrequency radiation) in the
microwave range. High levels of RF radiation can
produce biological damage, but it is not known
whether lower levels of RF radiation might cause
adverse  health  effects  as  well.  Although  some
research has been done to address these questions,
no clear picture of the biological effects of this
type of radiation has emerged to date. Thus, the
available science does not allow us to conclude
that mobile phones are absolutely safe, or that
they are unsafe. However, the available scientific
evidence does not demonstrate any adverse health
effects associated with the use of mobile phones.

       U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) 2001

12

What is the present position of the Malaysian
government agencies?

In 1996, the Ministry of Health established the Interagency
Ad-Hoc Scientific Committee to study the public health
issues  arising  from  the  mobile  phone  technology.  The
conclusion  reached  was  that  there  was  inconclusive
scientific evidence indicating that EMF exposures at levels
normally encountered will cause harmful health effects.
The above is also the findings of the world scientific and
medical community. The committee continues to monitor
the situation and advises the government periodically.

What are the effects of RF radiation?

RF radiation can cause the heating of tissues that leads to
an increase in the body temperature. This is known as the
thermal effect. Although the body has its effective ways
of  regulating  its  temperature,  nevertheless,  if  the  RF
exposures are too high, the body may no longer be able
to cope.

There is some discussion about other effects caused by RF
radiation  other  than  by  thermal  effect.  However,  no
evidence is established yet.

The  scientific  community  and  international  bodies
acknowledge that further research is needed to improve
our understanding in some of these areas. At the moment,
there is insufficient and inconclusive scientific findings to
prove any adverse health effects caused by RF radiation.

13

How safe is the mobile phone system? Can
it cause cancer and other illnesses?

Some studies have also examined the possibility of a link
between RF radiation exposure and cancer. The results to
date have been inconclusive. While some experimental
data may suggest a possible link between exposure and
cancer formation in animals exposed under certain specific
conditions,  the  results  have  not  been  independently
reproduced.  In  fact,  other  studies  have  failed  to  find
evidence  for  a  causal  link  to  cancer  or  any  related
condition.  Further  research  is  underway  in  several
laboratories to help resolve this issue.

In recent years, publicity, speculation, and concern over
claims of possible health effects due to RF radiation from
base stations and mobile phones have prompted many
research organizations to investigate the potential health
effects from the use of mobile phones.

To date, there is inconclusive scientific evidence to prove
that  the  mobile  phone  system  can  lead  to  cancer  or  a
variety  of  other  health  effects,  including  headaches,
dizziness, memory loss or birth defects.

What is Specific Absorption Rate (SAR)? How
can I use it?

SAR  is  a  measure  of  the  amount  of  RF  energy  that  is
absorbed by the tissues in the human body. It indicates
the  average  rate  at  which  energy  is  absorbed  for  each
kilogram of tissue (watts per kg). This measurement is used
to determine whether a mobile phone complies with the
safety guidelines.

The  exposure  limit  takes  into  consideration  the  bodys
ability to remove heat from the tissues that absorb energy
from the mobile phone and is set well below levels known
to show biological effects.

14

The U. S. Federal Communications Commission (FCC) limit
for RF radiation exposure from mobile phones is set at a
SAR  of  1.6  watts  per  kilogram  (1.6  W/kg).  ICNIRP
recommends that the localized SAR in the head be limited
to 2 W/kg averaged over any 10g mass of tissues in the
head (0.02 W absorbed in any 10g mass of tissue in the
head). A SAR of 4W/kg is associated with a temperature
rise in humans of a fraction of a degree Celsius.

Where can I obtain SAR value for my mobile
phone?

Mobile  phone  manufacturers  must  ensure  that  their
products comply with the SAR levels that have been set
as  safe  although  there  is  a  range  of  SAR  values  in  the
products sold. You may wish to take the SAR value into
consideration when choosing a mobile phone, hence the
move to provide this information.

What steps can I take to reduce my exposure
to RF radiation from my mobile phone?

If you are concerned about avoiding even potential risks,
here  are  a  few  simple  steps  that  you  can  take  to  help
minimize your exposure to RF radiation.

Since time is a key factor in how much exposure a person
receives,  the  shorter  the  time  you  spend  on  a  mobile
phone, the smaller the RF radiation exposure.  You could
use a hands-free kit or use a mobile phone connected to
a remote antenna to increase the distance between your
body and the source of the RF radiation, since the exposure
level drops off dramatically with distance.

Again,  the  scientific  data  does  not  demonstrate  that
mobile phones are harmful. However, if you are concerned
about the RF radiation exposure from these products, you
can  use  measures  described  above  to  reduce  your  RF
radiation exposure from mobile phone use.

15

What is the advice for children using mobile
phones?

The scientific evidence does not show a danger to mobile
phone users, including children and teenagers. If you want
to take steps to lower the exposure to RF radiation, the
measures described above could also apply to children and
teenagers. Reducing the time of mobile phone use and
increasing  the  distance  between  the  user  and  the  RF
radiation source will reduce the RF radiation exposure.

In  December  2000,  the  United  Kingdom  government
recommended  limiting  the  use  of  mobile  phones  by
children  as  a  precautionary  measure.  It  was,  however,
noted  that  no  evidence  exists  to  suggest  that  using  a
mobile phone causes brain cancers or other health effects.

The U.K. Stewart Report states:
If there are currently unrecognized adverse health effects
from  the  use  of  mobile  phones,  children  may  be  more
vulnerable because of their developing nervous system,
the greater absorption of energy in the tissues of the head,
and  a  longer  lifetime  of  exposure.  In  line  with  our
precautionary approach, we believe that the widespread
use of mobile phones by children for non-essential calls
should  be  discouraged.  We  also  recommend  that  the
mobile phone industry should refrain from promoting the
use of mobile phones by children.

So why is anyone still worried?

It is only natural for the members of the public to worry
whenever  there  is  a  health  scare  as  this  is  how  they
perceive risk. The tremendous amount of publicity on this
health  issue  has  also  caused  further  confusion  and
uncertainty. A few years back, experiments conducted on
animals  suggested  that  mobile  phone  radiation  might

16

cause cancer or damage DNA. While these findings have
been reported, further animal studies have also suggested
that RF radiation is harmless.

Secondly,  science  is  unable  to  prove  that  something  is
absolutely safe and harmless. And scientists are seldom
able to say the word never an assurance that the public
wants.

Thirdly, as health scare has always acquired a life of their
own, once it is suspected that mobile phones could be
dangerous, many people would come forward to heap
blames on them as the probable cause for the death of
their  loved  ones  or  any  illness  that  they  may  have.
Although there is inconclusive evidence, no amount of
proof of reseach will likely erase such doubts.

Presently, no recognized expert is of the opinion that the
radiation from television towers and other microwave-
emitting antennas is linked to leukaemia. Whatever little
evidence that existed before has since been squashed. Yet,
in many countries, ongoing campaigns have been carried
out to stop these towers  from being built.

In  the  1960s,  the  public  were  suspicious  and  unduly
worried  about  the  x-ray  exposure  from  their  colour
television.  In  the  1980s,  electromagnetic  fields  from
computer terminals have been erroneously linked as the
main cause of miscarriages, birth defects and other health
problems. Again, these claims have been overturned. In
the  1990s,  with  the  internet  revolution,  experts  have
begun to raise their concerns over the internet addiction
among its users.

17

Where can I get more information?

There are many informative and authoritative web sites
maintained  by  international  organizations  and
government  agencies  where  you  can  get  further
information. These include:

N The  World  Health  Organization  (WHO).  The  World
Health  Organization  established  the  International
EMF Project in 1996 to assess the scientific evidence
of  possible  health  effects  of  electric  and  magnetic
fields, including the radiofrequency fields from mobile
phone.  They  have  a  fact  sheet  on  Electromagnetic
fields and public health that deals with issues relating
to radiation around mobile phones and base stations
available at
http://www.who.int/inf-fs/en/fact193.html
Other  information  on  the  project  can  be  found  at
http://www.who.int/peh-emf/en/

N The  International  Agency  for  Research  on  Cancer
(IARC)  INTERPHONE  project  is  described  in
http://www.iarc.fr

N New  information  leaflets  published  by  the  U.K.
Department  of  Health  can  be  found  at:
http://www.doh.gov.uk/mobilephones/index.htm

N Independent Expert Group on Mobile Phones Report
(also known as the Stewart   Report)  this report was
published  in  May  2000  by  an  independent  expert
group  established  by  the  U.K.  government
http://www.iegmp.org.uk

N Royal  Society  of  Canada.  A  review  of  the  potential
health  risks  of  radiofrequency  fields  from  wireless
telecommunications  devices.  Expert  panel  report
prepared  by  the  Royal  Society  of  Canada  for
Health.  Ottawa,  Royal  Society  of  Canada  (1999).
http://www.rsc.ca/english/RFreport.pdf

18

N The  Institute  of  Electrical  and  Electronics  Engineers
(IEEE)  Online  journal  Spectrum  article  Are  mobile
phones safe?
http://www.spectrum.ieee.org/publicfeature/aug00/
prad.html

N IEEE Committee on Man and Radiation (COMAR) also
publishes reports on the safety and human exposure
to electromagnetic fields.
http://www.seas.upenn.edu/~kfoster/comar.htm

N A consumer update on mobile phones produced by

the United States FDA is  available at
http://www/fda/gov/cellphones/

N A highly respected Internet site on health and safety
issues relating to electromagnetic fields by J. Moulder,
Medical College of Wisconsin, U.S.A.
http://www.mcw.edu/gcrc/cop/cell-phone-health-FAQ/
toc.html

Additional Information/Links

INTERNATIONAL
N World Health Organization (WHO) International EMF

Project
http://www.who.int/peh-emf/en/

N International Commission on Non-Ionizing Radiation

Protection  (ICNIRP)
http://www.icnirp.de

19

If you wish to contact the Malaysia Communications and
Multimedia Commission regarding this or any other issues,
please send your enquiries to:

Malaysia Communications and

Multimedia Commission

Level 11, Menara Dato Onn
Putra World Trade Centre

45, Jalan Tun Ismail
50480 Kuala Lumpur

Tel: (603) - 4047 7000
Fax: (603) - 2694 0943

E-mail:webmaster@cmc.gov.my

Website:www.cmc.gov.my

20

