Top 10 Main Causes of Global Warming - List Dose

http://listdose.com/top-10-main-causes-of-global-warming/

listdose.com

http://listdose.com/top-10-main-causes-of-global-warming/

Top 10 Main Causes of Global Warming

Global warming is one of the major problems which is not divided by the boundaries of various
countries. Global warming is the hottest topic that anybody learned can relate to. But for those
of you who do not understand what is Global Warming, here we are, it is the rise in the average
temperature of the atmosphere of Earth (in Lehman language) and youll be able to know its
causes and effects after reading this write up.

It is important to understand that the consequences of global warming are very significant. It must have not
escaped or rather cannot escape our notice that devastations like tsunami, avalanches, landslides and some
other significant changes like increasing average temperature across the globe and many more in-direct
effects. The major cause of global warming is the developing number of industries in developing countries.
But its better not to play the blame game rather join hands together and work together as one and fight
against it so that we can save our planet from further damage. Recognizing the causes of global warming
will be the first step for the universal cause.

So here we bring to you Top Ten Causes of Global Warming

 

10.  Greenhouse Effect

Greenhouse effect is the process in which the atmosphere
of the Earth trap some of the heat coming from the sun,
making the Earth warm but due to burning fuels, cutting
trees, the concentration of heat on Earth is increased to
abnormal levels making greenhouse effect as one of the
major causes of global warming. Carbon Dioxide, methane,
nitrous oxide are the greenhouse gases which helps to keep
the Earth warm. It is a natural phenomenon that takes place
with the adequate concentrations of the greenhouse gases.
But when the concentration of these gases rises, they
disturb the climatic conditions, making the Earth more
warm. These gases are not able to escape, which is the
cause of worldwide increase in temperature. So the balance of carbon dioxide and other gases should be
maintained so that it does not become the major reason of global warming.

 

 

9.  Air Pollution

The harmful gases emitted from the vehicles and factories and the greenhouse gases cause pollution in the
air and these gases get captured in the atmosphere. The smoke, gather up in the atmosphere forming

1 of 5

1/29/14, 12:32 PM

Top 10 Main Causes of Global Warming - List Dose

http://listdose.com/top-10-main-causes-of-global-warming/

clouds full of harmful gases which later on fall as acid rain which
destroys the buildings and also lead to many dangerous diseases like
cancer, skin burns and the death of plants. Plants provide us with the
oxygen and if they die, the level of carbon dioxide will increase in the
atmosphere which is a harmful gas. These gases also emit heat which
increases the temperature of the Earth (following the same pattern as in
the above paragraph) and causes global warming.

 

 

8.  Depletion of Ozone Layer

The ozone layer is the layer outside atmosphere which protects the
surface of the Earth from the harmful Ultra-violet and infrared
radiations  causing dangerous diseases like skin cancer. Ozone
layer depletion is also one of the causes of global warming; entering
of harmful gases which helps in heating up the Earth but the other
greenhouse gases like carbon dioxide, methane, that helps in
heating up and also tears up the ozone layer making an Ozone
Hole. Mostly the CFCs (chlorofluorocarbon) damages the ozone
layer. So the ozone layer depletes due to these gases which allow
the UV radiations to enter the Earth making the Earth more warm
than normal and affects the temperature  leading to global warming.
It is interesting to note that Ozone Holes are created mainly on the
poles which is the reason of melting glaciers, increase in the water
level of the sea and of course significant rise in temperature.

 

7.  Volcanic Eruptions

Volcanic eruptions is also one of the major reason of global
warming. These eruptions contain dust particles and gases
like sulphur dioxide which stay in the atmosphere for years
and block the sunlight from reaching the surface of the
Earth making it cool. These dust particles affects the
balance of the atmosphere and becomes a contributing
factor of global warming. Though volcanic eruptions cannot
be controlled but efforts can be made to decrease the
sulphur dioxide levels.

 

 

6.  Melting of the Glaciers

2 of 5

1/29/14, 12:32 PM

Top 10 Main Causes of Global Warming - List Dose

http://listdose.com/top-10-main-causes-of-global-warming/

Melting of the glaciers is a natural phenomena. Large mountains
of ice melt due to warmer temperature of the Earth so that new ice
can accumulate. These ice mountains helps to equalize the
temperature by beating up the heat. But there is excess melting of
the ice due to the greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. These
gases contribute to the melting of the ice at faster rate which leads
to increased sea levels and eventually floods. If the temperature
kept on rising then there is a chance that glaciers might disappear
which will lead to flooding of earth and destruction of land
resources.

 

 

5.  Deforestation

Plants give us oxygen which is the most important thing for our
survival. They undergo a process of photosynthesis in which
they give out oxygen and take carbon dioxide. Plants consume
the air, sunlight and the carbon dioxide we breathe out to make
food and oxygen. So if trees are cut, plants will not produce
oxygen and the concentration of carbon dioxide will increase.
Increase of carbon dioxide in the air is harmful for human
beings and also disturbs the water cycle and hence the total
imbalance of our ecosystem. So being one of the greenhouse
gases it will lead to global warming. Its very much like not
parking your car under a tree, the car gets excessively heated
up, making it uncomfortable to sit in the vehicle.

 

4.  Industrial Advancement

More and more industries and factories are set up in this
modern world to meet the needs of human beings. These
big factories need large amount of fuels like coal, petroleum
for power and electricity required by the machines to work.
Burning of these fuels releases large amount of carbon
dioxide which absorbs the harmful radiations from the sun
making it warm, hence global warming. The smoke that is
produced from these factories is mixed with the air, making
it harmful for breathing. As written earlier developing
countries are the major contributors towards this.

 

 

3 of 5

1/29/14, 12:32 PM

Top 10 Main Causes of Global Warming - List Dose

http://listdose.com/top-10-main-causes-of-global-warming/

3. Use of Chemical Fertilizers

The use of artificial chemicals for the crops has become
one of the reason for global warming.These chemicals
are very dangerous not only for Earth but also for human
beings too. These fertilizers are rich in nitrogen oxide
which is even more dangerous than carbon
dioxide. These oxides of nitrogen destroys the ozone
layer even more faster than any other greenhouse gas
and hence let the harmful ultraviolet rays enter the
atmosphere, making the Earth warm and leading to
global warming.

 

 

2. Burning of Fossil Fuels

Fossil fuels are burnt on a day-to-day basis and they contain high
percentage of carbon, coal and petroleum and many other gases.
So burning of these fuels releases large amount of extra carbon
which has been entombed inside the Earth millions of years ago.
The carbon that is emitted by burning these fuels is the extra carbon
which is not a part of the cycle. So carbon dioxide being the
greenhouse gas is provided in excess in the atmosphere which
again leads to global warming.

 

 

1.  Human Activities

It has been said that human activities are primarily
responsible for global warming. These activities are
destroying the Earth at a faster rate. The emission of carbon
dioxide from the vehicles, the burning of the fuels, cutting
down of trees and forest to build buildings and malls, the
dumping of trash everywhere and not recycling it, excessive
use of plastics, smoke from the factories, etcetra. All these
activities performed by human beings are major factors of
the polluted gases in the air and the warming up of the Earth
which destroys the ecological balance of the nature leading
to global warming.

Related posts:

4 of 5

1/29/14, 12:32 PM

Top 10 Main Causes of Global Warming - List Dose

http://listdose.com/top-10-main-causes-of-global-warming/

Top 10 Easiest Jobs in the World
Top 10 Akbar Facts, The Great Mughal Emperor
Top 10 Reasons Why Extra Marital Affair is Extremely Bad
Top 10 Best Private Colleges in India 2013
Top 10 Psychological Effects of Internet on Humans
Top 10 Best FPS Games 2013
10 Stupid Things that we have Made Famous
Top 10 Titanic Ship Facts that you don't know

5 of 5

1/29/14, 12:32 PM

