MORE THAN 
100 WAYS TO 
SAVE ON YOUR  
ENERGY BILL

HELPING MICHIGAN  
SAVE ENERGY.
THATS OUR PROMISE.

Save Money  
by Saving Energy

Looking for ways to save money? We can help. 
If youre like most people, youre already doing some things to 
cut down on energy use, such as lowering the heat at night. To 
help you save even more, weve put together this guide of more 
than 100 things you can do to make your home more energy 
efficient, without sacrificing your comfortable lifestyle.

Its simple. When you use less, youll pay less.

Download this guide as a PDF and view these energy savings 
tips at ConsumersEnergy.com/saveenergy. 

29%

Heating

17%

Cooling

11%

Other

4%

Electronics

14%

Water
Heating

12%

Lighting

13%

Appliances

Source: EnergyStar.gov

Home Energy and You
As much as half of the energy used in your home goes to 
heating and cooling. So making smart decisions about your 
homes heating, ventilating, and air conditioning (HVAC) system 
can have a big effect on your utility bills  and your comfort.

Home Heating
Heating your home is the largest user of 
energy and offers the greatest opportunity 
for savings. About 30 percent of your total 
home energy budget goes for heating.
 Have your heating system tuned and inspected by 
a service professional before each heating season. 
Heat losses from a poorly maintained system add up 
over time, sometimes at a rate of 1 percent to 2 percent a 
year 
 Clean or replace the furnace filter often during the heating 
season. Furnaces use less energy if they breathe more easily. 
Follow instructions in the furnace manufacturers manual
 Keep furniture, carpeting and curtains from blocking heat 
registers and air return ducts
 If radiators are located near cold outside walls, place a sheet of 
aluminum foil between the radiator and the wall to reflect heat 
back into the room
 Dont overheat your home and overwork your furnace. Use 
supplemental heating equipment for hard-to-heat areas
 When replacing your furnace, look for one thats at least 
90 percent efficient
 While sleeping, add an extra blanket for warmth
 Close your attic, basement, garage and exterior doors to 
prevent cold drafts and keep in heat
 Ceiling fans set at slow speed push warm air away from the 
ceiling and move it around the room without creating a 
chilling breeze. This spreads the heat more evenly and will 
make you feel more comfortable

100 WAYS TO SAVE  CONSUMERS ENERGY  

3

Your Home Thermostat
A programable thermostat is a great 
way to dial in savings and comfort.
 A setback or programmable thermostat 
lets you automatically turn your heat up 
before you get out of bed, down when you 
leave for work, up before you return from 
work and down again when you go to bed. 
Installing one before the heating season begins 
could save as much as 20 percent on your heating costs and 
recover your investment in the first year. 
 Turn down the heat. Youll typically 
save 1 percent to 3 percent on your 
heating costs for every degree you dial 
down
 Set your thermostat at 68 degrees when 
youre home and at 65 degrees when youre away for a short 
time. If youre used to higher settings, dial down 1 degree at a 
time until you feel comfortable
 Lower your thermostat to 58 degrees if youre away from home 
five hours or more. You use much less energy to heat the house 
up when you return than to keep it heated while youre away

REMEMBER:  
Warmer temperatures 
are recommended for 
homes with ill or elderly 
persons or infants.

Cooling
Beat the summer heat and stay 
comfortable with these energy 
savers.
 Buy an air conditioner with a high 
energy efficiency rating (EER). Its printed 
on the EnergyGuide label attached to the 
unit. A unit with an EER of 10 will cost half as 
much to operate as one with an EER of 5
 If you have central air conditioning, clean leaves and debris 
from the unit. To save energy, make sure theyre not too close 
to the compressor because they can block airflow
 Install your air conditioner in the shade. When its in direct 
sunlight, it uses more energy

 Make sure your central air conditioning system is the right 
size for the area you want to cool
 Clean the filter regularly. Dusty filters make your air 
conditioner work harder. Check the manufacturers manual
More ways to stay cool
 Cool air from your window air conditioner can flow into open 
registers. Cover or close them so cool air doesnt escape
 Dont cool unused areas. Close doors and registers to cut 
energy costs
 Operate your stove, oven, dishwasher and clothes dryer in the 
morning or evening when its cooler outside. They add extra 
heat to your home and make your air conditioner work harder 
 Set the air conditioning thermostat at 78 degrees during the 
day when youre home and higher when youre away
 Install an automatic setback or programmable thermostat that 
starts your air conditioner shortly before you get home
 Reduce air conditioning needs by installing an attic fan. Hot 
air trapped in stuffy attics sinks into rooms below, adding to 
your summer cooling costs
 A ceiling fan cools fast and costs less than air conditioning

Water Heater
Water heating is a typical familys third-
largest energy expense, accounting for 
about 14 percent of utility bills.
 Take a shower instead of a bath. Youll use less 
hot water
 Install a low-flow aerator or flow restrictor on an 
existing shower head, and youll use less water when it 
seems like more! Both are inexpensive and easy to installjust 
screw them in
 Put an insulating blanket around your water heater. It holds 
heat in

4 

100 WAYS TO SAVE  CONSUMERS ENERGY

100 WAYS TO SAVE  CONSUMERS ENERGY  

5

 Set your water heater temperature at 120 degrees. A family of 
four, each showering for five minutes, uses about 700 gallons 
of water a week. By lowering the thermostat, you can cut water 
heating bills without sacrificing comfort
 Turn off hot water when you dont need it. Dont let it run 
when you wash or shave
 Save even more by setting your water 
heater to on vacation (if your unit has 
this feature) when youre away from home 
more than two days
 Fix defective plumbing or dripping 
faucets. A single dripping hot water faucet 
can waste 212 gallons of water a month. 
That can increase your water bill and your 
energy bill 
 Keep your hot water hot by making sure 
pipes in unheated areas are insulated
 Always use cold water when it will do the job as well as hot
 Once a year, drain the water heater tank completely. Then  
turn the incoming water on and off, alternately, for about 
20 seconds. These actions flush minerals and sediment from 
inside the tank and make your water heater more efficient. 
Some newer models are selfcleaning. Check the manufacturers 
manual

YOUR MONTHLY 
ENERGY USE:  
Your monthly bill from 
Consumers Energy 
includes 13 months 
of your energy use 
and cost per day.

Dishwasher
Your dishwasher uses hot water to  
do its job. Here are ways to save on 
water heating.
 Set your dishwasher at 120 degrees or 
low. Check your manufacturers manual 
to see if you can use 120 degree water
 Wash only full loads and use the shortest cycle to 
get your dishes clean
 Turn off the dishwasher after the wash and rinse cycles. When 
dishes air dry, youll save on heating costs. On newer models, 
use the heat-off setting or the energy-saver dry option

 Avoid using your dishwasher to warm plates. The extra heat 
will raise your energy bill
 A dishwasher will operate more efficiently if you unclog the 
drain of food particles and clean it weekly

Stove and Oven
You can cook delicious and nutritious meals 
and help lower energy costs by following 
these handy tips.
 Thaw foods and cut vegetables into small pieces. 
Theyll take less time to cook
 Put lids on pots and pans and make sure theyre the 
right size for the burners. Foods will cook faster and 
use less energy
 When the pot boils over or grease splatters, clean the reflector 
pans. Theyll reflect more heat when they shine
 If the flames on your gas stove or oven are yellow, energy is 
being wasted and the burners need adjusting. Call an 
appliance repair professional
When using your oven, follow these suggestions.
 Preheat the oven only when the recipe calls for it. Dont 
preheat if youre using the broiler
 Use glass and ceramic dishes. They hold heat better and you 
can lower the oven temperature 25 degrees
 Your stove or oven may not always be the best choice! Small 
appliances, such as crockpots and electric frying pans, and 
your microwave oven may be more energy efficient
 Open the oven door to peek at food inside, and youll lose 
25 degrees to 75 degrees of heat. Its best to look through the 
window or wait until the food is almost done before opening 
the door
 If you have a self-cleaning oven, clean it immediately after use. 
Because its already hot, it will take less energy to get to the 
heatcleaning stage

6 

100 WAYS TO SAVE  CONSUMERS ENERGY

100 WAYS TO SAVE  CONSUMERS ENERGY  

7

 In the market for a new gas stove? Choose a model with 
electronic igniters instead of pilot lights for the highest 
efficiency
 A microwave is best for defrosting and cooking small portions; 
an oven is more efficient for cooking large items such as 
turkeys and roasts
 When your electric burners are worn out and dont work 
properly, they use more energy. Save by replacing them
 Save energy by baking an extra dish or cooking entire meals in 
the oven at the same time

Clothes Washer
These helpful hints can save you 
money, and dont cost a penny.
 Wash and rinse your clothes in cold water 
instead of hot to save on water heating 
costs. Use a cold-water detergent
 Set the water level on your washer to match 
the size of the load and save two wayson water 
and energy 
 Youll save more by waiting to wash until you have a full load
 Add the right amount of detergent. Too many suds make your 
washer work harder and use more energy

Clothes Dryer
Here are more hot ideas to help  
you save.
 Fill your clothes dryer, but dont overload 
it. Your clothes will dry faster when they 
have room to tumble
 Overdrying wears out your clothes and wastes 
energy. Stop your dryer when the laundry is dry 
by setting the timer or using the auto dry cycle
 Your dryers lint trap helps warm air flow better and dries your 
clothes faster. Make sure to clean it after each load

 Dry your laundry in consecutive loads to take advantage of a 
heated dryer. Your laundry will dry faster and use less energy
 On sunny days, hang your clothes outdoors to dry

Refrigerator/Freezer
Your refrigerator/freezer uses more 
electricity than any other appliance in your 
kitchen. These tips can help you use less 
and save more.
 Avoid opening the refrigerator or freezer door to 
browse. Each time you do, cold air escapes and 
your energy costs increase
 Let hot foods cool before putting them in your refrigerator or 
freezer. Hot foods cause the motor to work longer and harder
 Leave room in front of your refrigerator/freezer to allow cold 
air to circulate better
 Because frozen food stays cold longer than air, its good to 
keep your freezer full, but not packed. Youll save energy by 
placing water-filled containers in empty spaces
 Running two refrigerators increases your energy bill. Plus, 
older refrigerators are less efficient than new ones. To save, get 
rid of the second refrigerator
 Condenser coils remove heat from inside the unit. Make sure 
theyre at least two inches from the wall and clean them twice 
a year
 If cold air is escaping around the door seal, adjust or replace 
the seal. To check, close the door on a dollar bill. If its easy to 
pull out, cold air is escaping
 If you have a manual-defrost freezer, it will work more 
efficiently when ice buildup is kept to 1/4 inch or less 
 Set the refrigerator thermometer at 38 degrees to 42 degrees 
and your freezer at 0 degrees to 5 degrees

8 

100 WAYS TO SAVE  CONSUMERS ENERGY

100 WAYS TO SAVE  CONSUMERS ENERGY  

9

Other Appliances
Most homes have at least 50 
household items that use natural gas 
or electricity. Look around your home 
for places you can save.
 If your water pump stays on too long after 
using water, have it serviced. If it runs 
whenever water is turned on, it will wear out 
faster and use more energy
 To save water and energy, turn off faucets, indoors and out, 
when youre done using them 
 Make sure the toilet handle doesnt stick after flushing. It 
wastes water and makes your water pump run longer
 Be sure the thermostats on appliances work properly. If the 
thermostat sticks, the appliance stays on and raises your 
energy bill
 Turn off the humidifier or 
dehumidifier when theyre not 
needed
 After your second cup of coffee, turn 
off your coffeemaker and pour the 
leftover coffee into an insulated 
container to keep it hot
 Turn off the TV, DVR, DVD player, 
VCR, stereo or radio when no one is 
watching or listening
 If your water pipes are wrapped with 
insulating electric heat tape, turn it 
off when the weather warms up
 Use small appliances that plug into electrical outlets instead of 
rechargeable devices, such as hand-held vacuum cleaners and 
lawn trimmers which use more energy
 Unplug electronics when not in use. Computers, DVD players, 
VCRs, televisions and other electronics use energy when 
theyre plugged ineven though theyre turned off

UTILIZE POWER STRIPS  
Many computers, 
televisions and other 
vampire devices use 
power when theyre off. 
Plug these devices into 
an easy-to-reach power 
strip and turn it off when 
youre not using them. 

Lighting
Follow these bright ideas to save energy.
 Choose light bulbs carefully. Compact 
fluorescent light bulbs (CFLs) use 75 percent  
less energy than standard incandescent bulbs 
and last 10 times longer. For example, a 20-watt 
fluorescent bulb is equal to a 60-watt incandescent 
bulb. They can also be used as porch lights
 Install dimmer switches and three-way bulbs. They use less 
energy and let you enjoy a choice of lighting levels for different 
tasks
 For outdoor use, consider high-pressure sodium bulbs, which 
are more efficient and last longer than their incandescent 
counterparts
 When buying bulbs, check the lumens. The higher the lumens, 
the more light youll get
More energy-saving ideas
 More light shines through when you keep 
dust off your lampshades, light fixtures and 
bulbs
 Because light bounces off walls and ceilings, 
youll get more light for the money if you 
paint your walls light colors
 Increase the power of reflection by putting 
lamps in corners where two walls reflect light 
into the room
 Take advantage of free light from the sun by 
putting furniture near windows
 Place security lights on a timer or photo-
electric control so theyll turn on and off 
automatically. Mercury vapor or high-
pressure sodium lights are the best energy 
buys for outdoors

BRIGHT IDEA:
The Lighting Facts 
label on light bulb 
packages highlights 
brightness and yearly 
energy cost.

10 

100 WAYS TO SAVE  CONSUMERS ENERGY

100 WAYS TO SAVE  CONSUMERS ENERGY  

11

Windows
You can stop heat from going out your 
windows. Take a look at these energy-
saving ideas.
 Drapes can cut heat loss in half if they 
have an insulating liner
 Let your drapes hang loose, and be sure they 
dont block heat registers and air-return ducts
 Vinyl shades and quilted curtains help cut heat loss. Shutters 
and blinds dont work as well because air travels through their 
open spaces
 Close drapes on north-facing windows to keep the chill out in 
winter
 On cool days, let the sun shine in by opening curtains, drapes, 
shades, shutters and blinds on the southern and eastern 
windows. Close them on cloudy days and at night to keep heat 
from escaping
 On hot summer days, open windows and doors in early 
morning and in the evening to let cool air in
 Cut your heating losses by installing storm windows. Double-
pane or triple-pane windows are best
 Replace old windows with new high-performance windows
 Repair open spaces in broken or cracked windows and door 
glass
 Use clear plastic or vinyl sheeting on the inside of your 
windows to make a temporary double-pane window. Use 
weatherproof tape or duct tape, trim or tacking strips to hold 
it in place

FIRE AND CARBON MONOXIDE POISONING
Please dont use gas grills, ovens or range tops 
for heating. These items can cause a fire or result 
in deadly carbon monoxide poisoning. And to be 
safe, be sure your house is equipped with a carbon 
monoxide detector.

Insulation
More than 50 percent of energy used for 
winter heating leaves homes through 
uninsulated walls, floors, ceilings and 
attics. Insulation traps small pockets of air 
between warm and cold areas inside your 
home and helps keep warm air in during 
winter. Insulation is the key to big energy 
savings. Try these tips.
 Check your homes insulation in the attic, ceiling, walls and 
floor. Insulation is judged by its R-value. The higher the 
R-value, the better the material keeps heat in during cold 
weather and cool in during hot weather. Required R-values 
vary across Michigan. Check with a store that sells insulation 
or a local contractor for the requirements in your area
 Adding batts of fiberglass insulation in your attic is one of the 
most cost-effective savings measures and one you can do 
yourself
 Add extra insulation to floors by covering them with a pad 
and rug
 Heat rises, but it also sinks into the basement and crawl space 
through uninsulated floors. Make your home more 
comfortable and cut heating losses by insulating floors
 Prevent heat loss as warm air travels through heat ducts from 
your furnace by wrapping heat ducts with insulation. Also, use 
duct foil tape where rectangular heat ducts join, and waterbase 
acrylic latex caulk where round and rectangular duct fittings 
meet
 Seal cracks where pipes, electrical wires, vents and ducts enter 
your home
 About 2 percent of air escapes your home through electrical 
outlets, especially on outside walls. Install insulation made for 
electrical outlets. You can also use safety outlet plugs to stop 
cold air from entering your home
 Insulate hot water pipes in unheated areas to keep hot water 
hot

12 

100 WAYS TO SAVE  CONSUMERS ENERGY

100 WAYS TO SAVE  CONSUMERS ENERGY  

13

Caulk & Weather Stripping
Youll live more comfortably when you 
get rid of cracks and leaks that let 
warm air escape from your home on 
cold days. Heres how.
 Seal cracks in your basement floor to keep 
heat in and cold air out
 Caulk windows, doors and anywhere air 
leaks in or out
 Weather-strip around windows and doors
 Seal cracks where pipes, electrical wires and ducts enter  
your home
 Seal openings where doors and windows close into their 
frames with weather strippingpieces of felt, rubber, metal  
or plastic that compress when you shut them
 Replace torn or worn weather stripping and caulk
 Do not caulk around your natural gas water heater  exhaust 
pipes or furnace exhaust pipes

Fireplace
Add to the warmth and enjoyment of a 
fireplace by following these tips.
 Close the damper when the fireplace isnt 
being used. About 14 percent of air 
escapes your home through the fireplace 
chimney
 Try not to run the fireplace and central heating 
system at the same time
 Seal unused fireplaces to keep heat from escaping and cold air 
from coming in

Pool and Hot Tub
Efficient ways to heat your pool and hot tub 
can yield extra  savings. Consider these 
recommendations.
 Use a solar cover to get free heat from the sun 
and prevent evaporation. If too much water 
evaporates, the water temperature drops
 Keep the filters clean. Youll save energy
 Be sure the water temperature is comfortable, about 
80 degrees. Overheating wastes energy
 Cover your hot tub when its not in use to retain heat

SHOPPING FOR NEW APPLIANCES
When shopping for new appliances, check 
EnergyGuide labels. They provide the annual 
operating cost and efficiency ratings of the 
appliance. 
Look for ENERGY STAR 
products that can save you 
money month after month. 
Buy the most energy-efficient 
model you can to keep your 
energy costs down.

SAVE ON ENERGY BILLS
With 50 rebates for residential customers 
and more than 150 for businesses, there is 
something to help you reduce your cost with 
energy effifiency.
For home rebates and savings, visit 
ConsumersEnergy.com/myhome

14 

100 WAYS TO SAVE  CONSUMERS ENERGY

100 WAYS TO SAVE  CONSUMERS ENERGY  

15

Get on the Budget Plan

Take those big seasonal surprises 
out of your energy bills with the 
Consumers Energy Budget Plan.
You pay the same amount for 
energy each month  summer, 
winter, spring and fall  which 
makes budgeting a whole lot 
easier.
 Enrollment is free and easy
 Fits any lifestyle
 Great way to manage monthly  
energy bills
Enroll Today
ConsumersEnergy.com
(800) 477-5050 

Uneven payments  
without the Budget Plan.

Equal payments  
with the Budget Plan.

IT PAYS TO HAVE A PLAN.

HELPING MICHIGAN  
SAVE ENERGY.
THATS OUR PROMISE.

2000  3/14   10103875

