 
 

  

 

Mosquito Control: Frequently Asked Questions 

 
What is mosquito control, and why is it needed? 

Mosquito control is the effort to protect public health by reducing mosquito populations. Mosquitoes 
can spread West Nile virus and other diseases. 
 
What is West Nile virus?  

West Nile virus is a virus spread by mosquitoes that can affect people and animals. Mosquitoes may 
become infected with the virus when they feed on infected birds. Infected mosquitoes can then spread 
the virus to humans and other animals.  
 
West Nile virus may cause fever, headache, fatigue or body aches. People typically recover on their own. 
In rare cases, the virus may cause inflammation of the brain and spinal cord.  
 
Is there a vaccine or treatment for West Nile virus?  

No. Currently there is no vaccine or treatment for West Nile virus, but in many cases, medications may 
be used to relieve symptoms. In severe cases, patients may need to be hospitalized to receive 
treatment. 
 
If I get bitten by a mosquito, should I be treated for West Nile virus?  

Not all mosquitoes carry West Nile virus. However, if you are bitten by a mosquito and have symptoms 
such as fever, headaches, stiff neck, confusion, muscle weakness or sensitivity to light, contact your 
doctor.  
 
Can my pet be infected by West Nile virus?  

Pets may get West Nile virus from mosquito bites, but they dont usually get sick. Contact your 
veterinarian if you are concerned about your pets health. There is no evidence that dogs and cats can 
transmit West Nile virus to humans.  
 
What does the City do to control mosquito populations? 

The Citys Health Code requires property owners to eliminate standing water, where mosquitoes easily 
breed, on their property. The City also regularly tests mosquitoes for West Nile virus and destroys 
mosquito breeding sites wherever possible. When standing water cannot be drained, the City applies 
treatments called larvicides that kill mosquitoes before they mature and can spread disease. 
(Mosquitoes that have not yet matured into adults are called larva.) 

  

 
 
Does the City spray for mosquito infestation?  

If mosquito surveillance and testing show that there is a threat to human health, the City may spray 
pesticides to kill adult mosquitoes. Spraying is conducted in high-risk areas. The City follows the New 
York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) and Federal Environmental Protection 
Agency (EPA) requirements when spraying and only sprays for mosquito control in the evenings or early 
mornings. The City does not take requests from the public for mosquito spraying. 
 
Do the pesticides used during spraying hurt people and pets?  

The City conducts spraying carefully and follows all state and federal requirements. Most people and 
their pets do not have health effects during and after pesticide spraying. Some people who are sensitive 
to spray ingredients may have short-term eye or throat irritation, or a rash. If you have stronger 
reactions after spraying, contact your doctor.  
 
How will I be notified about spraying in my neighborhood?  

The Health Department alerts the public of spraying at least 24 to 48 hours before the event. It notifies 
local media and distributes fact sheets in several languages to community-based organizations, elected 
officials, senior care facilities, libraries and many citywide organizations. See below for information 
about how to register for spraying updates.  
 
How can I avoid exposure to pesticides during spraying?  

Whenever possible, stay indoors during spraying. Remove any toys, equipment and clothes from 
outdoor areas. If any objects are exposed to pesticides, wash them with soap and water before using 
them again. Always wash your produce thoroughly with water before cooking or eating.  
 
What can I do to protect myself and my family from mosquito bites and West Nile virus?  

  Use insect repellents and wear long sleeves or pants in the evening during mosquito season 
(June through September). Mosquitoes are most active at these times. See below for more 
information about repellants. 

  Empty standing water from containers such as flowerpots, gutters, buckets, pool covers, pet 

water dishes, discarded tires and birdbaths.  

  Make sure backyard pools are properly maintained and chlorinated. 
 
  Call 311 to report groups of dead birds. They may be a sign of West Nile virus in the area.  

Install or repair screens on windows and doors.  

 
How should I choose an insect repellant? 

Always read the label carefully. Look for the repellants Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) 
registration number, active ingredients and use instructions.  
 
Active ingredients approved by the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and New York State include 
DEET and picaridin. DEET is the most common active ingredient proven to prevent mosquito bites. DEET-

  

 
 
based repellents come in a wide range of percentages, but in New York City, you do not need a repellent 
with more than 30% DEET. Repellents with greater than 10% DEET should not be used on children.  
Picaridin-based repellents ranging from 5 to 15% have shown similar protection times to DEET. 
Protection times vary for different people and depend on factors such as the species of mosquito in the 
area, how much a person sweats and how hot it is outside.  
 
Are there any non-chemical, natural or botanical products that are effective in repelling mosquitoes? 

Some products made with botanical oils provide protection from mosquito bites. However, studies 
suggest that these products work for much shorter periods of time. 
 
If my neighbors dont take care of the standing water in their yards, should I report the issue to the 
Health Department?  

Residents and business owners should take primary responsibility for emptying standing water from 
their property. If they do not, you may file a standing water complaint online or by calling 311. More 
information is below.  
 
What happens after I report standing water complaints to the City?  

The Health Department inspects properties for standing water. If an inspector notices conditions that 
attract mosquitoes, he or she will issue a violation to the property owner, which may result in fines of up 
to $2,000. 
 
Where can I get more information?  

  For more information about mosquito control and West Nile Virus, call 311 or visit 

nyc.gov/health/wnv.  

  To register for updates on mosquito spraying, sign up for NotifyNYC, follow the Health 

Department on Twitter at @nycHealthy or visit nyc.gov/health/wnv. 

  For more information about mosquito repellant, go to nyc.gov and search insect repellant. 
  To file a standing water complaint, go to nyc.gov and search standing water or call 311. 

 

