Overview of Mosquito Control Practices in California 
 
This document provides information about mosquito control practices used in 
California, and links to additional information about mosquito control related 
topics. 
 
Table of Contents   1 
 
Mosquitoes   3 
Definition of mosquitoes as a pest   3 
 
Why do mosquitoes need to be controlled?   3 
Mosquito biology   4 

 
Preventing Mosquito Related Problems   5 
Citizen responsibilities   5 
Californians are responsible for protecting themselves   5 
Mosquito breeding site source reduction   6 
Harborage reduction   7 

 
Vector Control Programs   8 
Role of public agencies in mosquito control   8 
 
Governing Laws and Regulations   8 
 
 
Surveillance   10 
Mosquito Surveillance   10 
 
Disease Surveillance   10 
 
 
Integrated Pest Management   11 
 
Habitat Modification   12 
 
Biological Mosquito Control  13 
Mosquito fish   13 
 
Biological control reality and myths   13 
 
 
Chemical Control of Mosquitoes   15 
Mosquito Control Decisions   15 
 
 
Pesticides   16 
Pesticide basics   16 
 
Pesticide resistance   17 
 
 
 
 
 

 

1

 
 
Larval Control   18 
Larval control products   18 
Table 1:  Larvicides Used in California   20 

 
Adult Mosquito Control   21 
ULV spraying   21 
 
Barrier spraying   22 
 
Adult control products   23 
 
Table 2:  Adulticides Used in California   24 

 
Basic Toxicology   25 
Definitions for toxicology   25 
 
Mosquito control products and human health   25 
 
Bottom line:  Relative risk   25 

 
Toxicity of Mosquito Control Products   27 
Chart 1:  Relative LD 50 for Mosquito Control Products   27 

 
Additional Sources of Information   28 
Information about Pesticides   28 
Information about Pesticide Poisoning   28 
Labels and MSDS   28 
Information about West Nile virus   28 
Maps of West Nile virus Activity   28 
Information about Insect Repellents   28 
Information about DEET   28 

References Cited   29 

Appendix 1   30 

 

2

Fundamentals of Organized Mosquito Control Programs in California 
 
Mosquito control programs conducted by government agencies in California are 
based on the principles of Integrated Pest Management. 
 
Mosquitoes 

 

Biting Adult Mosquito 

Definition of mosquitoes as a pest 
 
Mosquitoes are defined as a pest because their biting is a nuisance and they can 
transmit diseases to humans and domestic animals. 
 
Disease Transmission: 
 
Some mosquitoes transmit (vector) disease-causing viruses to humans and 
domestic animals when they bite. As the number of biting mosquitoes increases, 
so does the chance that humans and domestic animals may get diseases such 
as West Nile virus (WNV), Saint Louis encephalitis, and western equine 
encephalomyelitis. 
 
Annoyance: 
 
Many species of mosquitoes that bite 
humans and domestic animals do not 
transmit disease-causing organisms to 
humans; nevertheless, their bites cause 
allergic reactions in many people. When 
populations of mosquitoes are high, they 
can harm livestock productivity, drive 
tourists away from outdoors-related 
businesses, and decrease the quality of 
life.  
 
 
 
 
Why do mosquitoes need to be controlled? 
 
Mosquitoes need to be controlled because they are pests and can vector  
disease-causing organisms, particularly when mosquito populations build to 
undesirable levels. 
 
 
 
 
 

Photo Courtesy of Dr. Robert K. Washino 
And Sacramento-Yolo MVCD   
Web site:  www.fightthebite.net/vectors 

 

3

Mosquito biology 
 
Mosquitoes have a life cycle that includes egg, larva, pupa, and adult. Standing 
water is required for the completion of every life stage except the adult.  
  
Mosquito Life Cycle 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Graphic Courtesy of American Mosquito Control Association Web Site.   www.mosquito.org 
 
The speed of larval development depends on water temperature and may take 
from 4 days to more than a month for the mosquito to mature from egg to adult. 
Only adult mosquitoes can fly and bite. After they emerge as adults, mosquitoes 
can fly up to several miles.  
 
Adult male mosquitoes are not a direct health concern as they feed only on 
nectar from flowers, and usually live a few days to couple of weeks. In contrast, 
adult females can live for several months, and feed on nectar and blood. 
 
Mosquitoes live in every area of California, and can be a threat to the health of 
humans and domestic animals throughout the state.     
 
More information about mosquito biology is available by following the following 
links to the American Mosquito Control Association (AMCA) web site.  
 
Information about mosquito biology: http://www.mosquito.org/mosquito-
information/biology.aspx  
 
Information and frequently asked mosquito questions:  
http://www.mosquito.org/mosquito-information/faq.aspx  

 

4

Preventing Mosquito Problems 
 
Citizen responsibilities 
 
It is important for California residents to take action 
to prevent mosquito production and reduce the 
number of mosquitoes around their homes while 
local vector control agencies reduce mosquito 
populations over large geographic areas. 
 
Californians are responsible for protecting 
themselves 
 
California residents can take simple and 
inexpensive precautions to avoid being bitten by 
mosquitoes, and to eliminate mosquito breeding 
sites.  
 
These include: 
 
(cid:131) 

You are responsible for 
your own health!  

Photo Courtesy of CDC web site.  
http:// ww.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvbid/westnile

Repellents come in many 
brands and formulations 

Use insect repellent while outdoors  particularly at dawn and dusk when 
vector mosquitoes are most active. Repellents 
come in many brands and formulations. 
Repellents containing DEET, oil of lemon 
eucalyptus, or picaradin are most effective. 

(cid:131)  Wear loose fitting clothing with long pants and 

sleeves while outdoors. 

(cid:131)  Use screen doors and ensure that window 

screens are in good repair. 

 

 

 
 

 
 ** Use of brand names does not imply endorsement by the California Department of Health Service 
 
 
It is virtually impossible to prevent mosquitoes from biting domestic animals. 
Some mosquito-vectored disease such as WNV in horses and dog heart worm 
can be dramatically reduced through the use of vaccines or other preventive 
medicines. In some instances high value animals may be protected through 
repellents approved for use on livestock, and by housing the animal indoors and 
excluding or controlling mosquitoes inside the enclosure.  
 
Sonic devices have proven universally ineffective at repelling mosquitoes when 
subjected to rigorous scientific scrutiny. (1)  
 

 

5

Over watering turf and watering trash cans 
produces mosquitoes in municipal parks 

Mosquito breeding site - source reduction 
 
Mosquito populations in many areas 
can be reduced by eliminating larval 
development (breeding) sites. 
Larvae can develop anywhere water 
stands for at least 5 days. Vector 
species prefer stagnant water.  
 
In an urban or suburban setting, 
homeowners can prevent 
mosquitoes from developing on their 
property by eliminating containers 
holding water and making sure that 
ponds and fountains are clean and  
well maintained. Containers that 
produce mosquitoes in yards include 
buckets, wading pools, ponds, flower 
pots, trash receptacles and recycling 

Photo Courtesy of Tim Howard 
bins, irrigation control box lids, boats (covered and uncovered), aquariums on 
porches, bird baths, rain gutters and down spouts. Regular cleaning and 
maintenance can eliminate many of these mosquito breeding sites. In much of 
California, residents watering gardens, grass, and potted plants provide the water 
for backyard mosquito breeding. 
 
Filling in tire ruts, avoiding over-irrigation, 
maintaining irrigation systems and 
preventing sprinkler systems from filling 
trash barrels are management / 
maintenance practices that can reduce 
mosquito production. It is also important to 
maintain swimming pools so that they are 
free of algae and mosquitoes.   

Tire ruts can produce many mosquitoes! 

Photo Courtesy of Fairfax County, Virginia Health Department web site. 
http://www.co.fairfax.va.us/service/hd/westnile/wnveliminate.htm  

 

6

 
Catch basin mosquito 
problem 

Inside cities and developed areas, runoff from 
landscape watering, car-washing, and storms often 

collects in retention devices long enough to produce 
mosquitoes. Regular inspection and maintenance of  

Removing cattails 

             these devices reduces 

water retention and 
mosquito production. 
Problem eliminated   
Temporarily 

 
 

In agricultural areas, 
farmers who use drip 
or other low volume 
irrigation systems 
reduce runoff and 
mosquito production. 
 
Everyone can participate in eliminating mosquito 
larval development sites!  
 
** Catch basin photos courtesy of Marco Metzger, Ph.D. California Dept. of Health Services 
DCDC-VBDS Caltrans project. 
 
Harborage reduction 
 
Adult mosquitoes seek cool, shady, humid areas of lush vegetation or structures 
(e.g. under wooden decks, under eaves, in buildings, pipes and culverts) to rest 
during the daytime. These resting places are called harborage areas.  
 
Mosquito populations can be reduced by mowing grass and weeds as short as 
possible and thinning shrubs to allow air circulation through plants. Maintenance 
activities such as screening areas under porches and gazebos; and removing 
leaves, tree bark, boards, and other debris also reduce mosquito harborage 
areas.  
 

 

7

Vector Control Programs 
 
Role of public agencies in mosquito control 
 
In the past, diseases such as malaria and yellow fever caused significant human 
suffering and death in the United States. West Nile virus (WNV), Saint Louis 
encephalitis virus and western equine encephalomyelitis are found in California 
and can cause serious disease. Public agencies must also maintain vigilance for 
foreign mosquito-borne diseases such as dengue fever, Japanese encephalitis, 
and Rift Valley fever that could be introduced into California. 
 
Government agencies at the national, state, and local level have the 
responsibility to supplement the preventive activities of individual citizens toward 
protecting humans and domestic animals from mosquito- and other vector-borne 
diseases. Public health agencies track cases of mosquito-borne diseases. 
Mosquito and vector control agencies monitor mosquito populations and take 
actions to reduce mosquito population size.  
 
Governing laws and regulations 
 
In California, local vector control agencies have the authority to conduct 
surveillance for vectors, prevent the occurrence of vectors, and abate production 
of vectors. (California Codes: Health and Safety Code Section 2040).  
Vector control agencies also have authority to participate in review, comment, 
and make recommendations regarding local, state, or federal land use planning 
and environmental quality processes, documents, permits, licenses, and 
entitlements for projects and their potential effects with respect to vector 
production. (California Codes: Health and Safety Code Sections 2041)  
Web link:  http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/cacodes/hsc/2040-2055.html  
 
Additionally, agencies have broad authority to influence landowners to reduce or 
abate the source of a vector problem. Actions may include imposing civil 
penalties of up to $1000 per day plus costs associated with controlling the vector. 
Agencies have authority to abate vector sources on private and publicly owned 
properties. (California Codes: Health and Safety Code Section 2060-2065). 
Web link:  http://caselaw.lp.findlaw.com/cacodes/hsc/2060-2067.html  
 
Many Federal and State Laws govern the activities of vector control agencies, 
including the Clean Water Act (CWA), the Endangered Species Act (ESA), and 
the Federal Insecticide Fungicide and Rodenticide Act (FIFRA). Pesticide 
application by vector control agencies in California is regulated under FIFRA. 
FIFRA is administered through the Environmental Protection Agency, and 
regulates the registration, labeling, and sales of pesticides in the United States. 
In California, mosquito control agencies are also regulated by sections of the 
California Health and Safety Code, Food and Agriculture Code, California Code 
of Regulations, and others.  

 

8

 
Mosquito and vector control programs that enter into a cooperative agreement 
with the California Department of Health Services are exempted from some 
pesticide related laws under Title 3 of the California Code of Regulations section 
6620. Specifically, these agencies are exempted from Consent to Apply (Title 3 
California Code of Regulations Section 6616), Notice (Title 3 California Code of 
Regulations Section 6618), and the Protection of Persons, Animals, and 
Property (Title 3 California Code of Regulations Section 6614). Essentially, 
these provisions obviate the vector control agency from having to notify or get 
permission from landowners prior to applying a pesticide to their property in the 
interest of preserving the public health.  
Web link: http://www.dcpr.ca.gov/docs/legbills/calcode/030201.htm  
 
A vector control technician working at a vector control agency must be a certified 
technician or work under the direct supervision of a certified technician to apply 
pesticides. Vector control technicians achieve certification through an 
examination process administered by the California Department of Health 
Services.  
 
Vector control agencies cannot use any pesticide not registered for use in 
California, and are required to keep detailed records of each pesticide 
application, including date, location, and amount applied. All pesticides must be 
applied in accordance with the labeling of the product as registered with the EPA. 
 
 

 

9

Surveillance 
 
Vector control agencies determine the need for mosquito control by conducting 
routine surveillance. These regular surveillance activities enable the agency to 
monitor mosquito populations, species composition and help determine where 
and when control activities should be initiated. 
 
Mosquito Surveillance 
 
Vector control agencies regularly 
inspect areas of standing water for 
immature mosquitoes. Mosquito larvae 
will develop in nearly any standing 
water, from marshes and flooded fields 
to urban runoff catch basins and 
backyard swimming pools. 
  
Adult mosquito monitoring trap 
carbon dioxide baited 

Dipper with mosquito larvae 

Photo Courtesy of Tim Howard

 
 
 
 
Adult mosquitoes are monitored with mosquito 
traps and reports of mosquito annoyance.   
 
Virus Surveillance 
 
Vector control programs monitor mosquito-borne 
viruses through testing adult mosquitoes and 
chickens from special flocks. With the appearance 
of WNV, cataloguing and testing of dead birds 
can provide additional information about virus 
transmission in areas of California that have no 
other surveillance 
system in place.  

Dead American Crow  
(Corvus brachyrhynchos) 

 

Photo Courtesy of Tim Howard 
 
Finally, public health and agriculture 
agencies share information on cases of 
mosquito-borne virus infections in humans 
and horses with vector control agencies. All 
these sources of information are important 
in determining which actions will have the 
most effect in reducing vector populations, 
and when and where action should be 
taken to reduce mosquito populations.  
 

Photo Courtesy of Center for Disease 
Control and Prevention 

 

10

 Integrated Pest Management 
 
When surveillance efforts indicate that mosquito control is necessary, vector 
control agencies rely on a multi-pronged approach called integrated pest 
management (IPM). IPM is a strategy that incorporates a variety of methods to 
control mosquitoes. These methods include habitat modification, biological 
predators, and chemical application. When properly implemented, IPM is an 
effective, environmentally sensitive, and cost-effective approach to mosquito 
control. Regular internal and external review ensure that IPM programs in 
California meet these objectives while adhering to the highest scientific and 
safety standards available. 
 

 

11

Habitat Modification 

 

Wetlands, swamp lands, and salt marshes can be important areas for mosquito 
production. In the past, marshes and wetlands were drained to reduce mosquito 
populations. The recognized value of these limited resources as vital 
components of the ecosystem has led to their protection under state and federal 
environmental laws. Mosquito control districts in California currently work with 
many other government agencies and conservation groups to implement 
practices that decrease mosquito production without harming these 
environmentally sensitive areas. Some of these approaches include: 
 

  Ditching to maintain water circulation into and out of the marshes. This 

disperses stagnant water and provides natural biological control 
organisms like fish improved access to the marshes. 
 

  Periodically burning cattail, bull rush, and other wetland vegetation on a 

several year rotation to reduce dead vegetation in the system, and 
maintain water movement. Burning has the ancillary benefit of also 
destroys some mosquito eggs. 

 

 

Dusk at Carpinteria Salt Marsh Reserve  Santa Barbara County

 
 

 
 
 
 Link to the UC Davis web site:   
http://www.mosquitoes.org/downl
oads/8117.pdf to find additional 
information about mosquito 
control on constructed wetlands 
In California.

Photo Courtesy of University of California Natural Reserve System 
http://nrs.ucop.edu/reserves/carpinteria/Carpinfo.html 

12

Biological Mosquito Control  
 
Biological control of mosquito larvae is the 
preferred method in many permanent 
mosquito breeding sites when site 
modification or elimination is not possible or 
practical. 
 
Mosquito fish 
 
In California, many mosquito control agencies 
rear and stock small fish (Gambusia affinis) 
that eat mosquito larvae. These fish can be 
placed in ornamental ponds, stock watering 
tanks, ponds without game fish, and a variety 
of other locations as a biological control for 
mosquito larvae. Although the fish are not 
native to California, the California Department 
of Fish and Game and the US Fish and 
Wildlife Service allow their use in most areas. 
Other fish species including guppies (Poecilia 
reticulata) are also used for larval control.  
 
Biological control reality and myths 

 

Mosquito Fish (Gambusia affinis) 

Photo Courtesy of Shasta MVCD web site 
http://www.snowcrest.net/mosquito 

There are many myths about the ability of bats, birds, dragonflies, and other 
species to control mosquito populations. All of these species (and many others) 
do prey upon mosquitoes; however in most mosquito producing habitats, their 
contribution to reducing mosquito numbers is insignificant compared with the 
other methods described here. 
 
In general, permanent water bodies with stable water conditions do not produce 
large numbers of mosquitoes. Wave action in larger water bodies and a diverse 
community of predatory aquatic invertebrates reduce mosquito production in 
these habitats. Most mosquito sources that produce large populations of 
mosquitoes are either temporary in nature, highly variable in water level, or are in 
other ways not conducive to an overall diverse invertebrate community. 
 
Bats and birds 
 
Bats and birds (such as martins 
and swallows) do consume some 
mosquitoes; however the bulk of 
their diet consists of larger 
organisms and their impact on 
mosquito populations is negligible. 

Photo Courtesy of Missouri Department of Conservation 
www.conservation.state.mo.us/help/copyrite.html 

Little Brown Bat 
(Myotis lucifugus) 

 

13

Setting out martin boxes and bat roost boxes may benefit these species and is 
not harmful if the boxes are placed away from homes or other buildings; however 
this will not affect the local mosquito population. (2, 3, 4) 
 
Frogs  
 
Adult frogs in California consume adult mosquitoes; however the bulk of their diet 
is larger organisms. Adult frogs do not eat enough mosquitoes to have a 
significant impact on mosquito populations.  
 
Immature frogs (tadpoles) are commonly thought to consume mosquito larvae. 
Tadpoles actually feed on algae and other small organic debris and are not a 
significant predator on mosquito larvae. 
 
Others  
 
Many aquatic invertebrate species 
such as dragonfly naiads, damselfly 
nymphs, and aquatic beetles 
feed on mosquito larvae. Some 
of these organisms may be 
useful for biological mosquito 
control; however there are 
practical limitations and 
unanswered biological 
questions that prevent using 
them for mosquito control at the 
present time.  
 
Biological mosquito control is 
an important tool  one that 
scientists in California continue to develop as new control organisms are 
considered or alternative methods of using existing organisms are identified. 
 

California dragonfly  Skimmer 
(Libellula sp.) 

Photo courtesy of  Rod Miller   California Dragonflies 
and Damselflies   www.sonic.net/dragonfly

 

14

Larval development site inspection and treatment 

Chemical Control of Mosquitoes 
 
To prevent or control large populations of mosquitoes, vector control agencies 
implement more direct efforts to combat them. Often these measures entail the 
application of chemicals. Each local program manager uses mosquito and virus 
surveillance data to determine how and when chemical control of mosquitoes is 
required.  
 
Mosquito Control Decisions 
 
Chemical control of mosquitoes 
is implemented when mosquito 
populations reach a level that 
health officials feel represents an 
unacceptable increase in the risk 
of disease transmission to 
humans or domestic animals, or 
when biting mosquitoes become 
intolerable to the local 
population. The action level or 
threshold is determined by 
each mosquito control program 
and varies according to local 
conditions.  
The threshold for larval control is 
usually quite low, often a single 
larva in one dipper full of water. 
The threshold for adult mosquito control is variable and depends on several local 
factors including:  

Photo Courtesy of Lewis C. Keenan 

 
  The tolerance of local citizens to nuisance mosquitoes 
  Presence of mosquito-borne disease in the region 
  Percentage of mosquito population that are vector species 
  The local citizens acceptance of mosquito control activities  

 

Way above any treatment threshold! 
(460,000 mosquitoes from one trap in one night) 

Photo Courtesy of Thomas Janousek, Ph.D.

 

15

Pesticides  
 
Pesticide basics 
 
According to the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA) Web 
Site: 

 

     A pesticide is any substance or mixture of substances intended for:  
     preventing, destroying, repelling, or mitigating any pest. 
 
Though often misunderstood to refer only to insecticides, the term pesticide also 
applies to herbicides, fungicides, and various other substances used to control 
pests. (Web address:  http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/about ) 
 
Pesticide related industries are some of the most highly regulated in the United 
States. Scientific scrutiny of the effectiveness of the product, the potential 
harmful effects to humans, and the potential non-target effects is intense.   
 
Pesticide labels are legal documents that direct the use of the product for each 
pest species and location where it can be used. In addition to the label, a 
Material Safety Data Sheet (MSDS) has been prepared for each pesticide. The 
Pesticide label - Larvicide 

MSDS gives a great deal of additional 
information about the product. 

 
Links to product labels and MSDS for at 
least one product with each active 
ingredient used in California are provided in 
Tables 1 and 2.  
 
Information about every pesticide registered 
for use in California by the US EPA and the 
California Environmental Protection Agency 
- Department of Pesticide Regulation (DPR) 
is available at:  
http://www.cdpr.ca.gov/docs/label/m4.htm 
 
 
 
 
 

 

16

Pesticide resistance 
 
Mosquito control programs have worked to reduce mosquito populations in 
California since 1909. Pesticides have been applied to kill mosquitoes in 
California for over 70 years. During that time there have been some small but 
important genetic changes that have made the mosquitoes able to survive 
exposure to some pesticides. The increased ability to survive pesticide exposure 
is called resistance. Development of resistance to a pesticide can produce 
resistance to other pesticides with a similar active ingredient or that work in a 
similar manner. The ability to survive exposure to a chemical is often passed on 
genetically and will spread through a population. 
 
Pesticide resistance to older pesticides including organophosphates has been 
documented in many mosquito populations in California. Resistance to pyrethroid 
insecticides has been demonstrated in some species of mosquitoes in limited 
areas of California. This means that some pesticides should not be used in some 
areas of California because only a portion of the mosquito population would be 
killed when sprayed at the maximum legal rate. 
  
Throughout California, mosquito control professionals in conjunction with state 
and federal agency personnel and university researchers are working to develop 
effective mosquito control strategies that maximize the efficiency of pesticides 
and minimize their use. This helps ensure that when chemical control of 
mosquitoes is necessary, there will be effective chemicals to use against them.  
 

 

17

Larval Control 
 
Control of larval mosquitoes is the backbone of most mosquito control programs 
in California. Pesticides added to the water to kill mosquito larvae are called 
larvicides. These products may be applied by hand, with a power backpack, from 
all terrain vehicles (ATVs) or trucks, and in very large or inaccessible areas with 
helicopters and airplanes. 
 
Larval control products 
 
There are 4 families of larvicides with a total of 7 active ingredients registered for 
use in California. (Table 1). 
 
1.  Bacterial Products 
 
Bacillus thuringiensis var. israelensis (Bti) and B. sphaericus (Bs) sold under 
various trade names are bacterial products that are commonly put into the water 
to control mosquito larvae. When a larva consumes the bacteria, proteins 
produced by the bacteria bind with and destroy the stomach lining of the 
mosquito larva. The products remain effective for about 24 to 48 hours. Bs 
products contain live bacteria and if conditions are favorable remain effective for 
more than 30 days. These are very mosquito-specific products and when 
properly used pose little threat to non-target species, including humans.  
 
2.  Surface Agents 
 
Mosquito larvae and pupae breathe at the waters surface through special tubes 
that extend above the water surface. Surface agents are highly refined mineral 
oils or monomolecular films that spread across the surface of the water. Mineral 
oil works by clogging the breathing tubes causing the immature mosquitoes to 
suffocate. Mono-molecular films work by reducing the surface tension of the 
water causing larvae and pupae to drown. Surface products are effective for a 
few hours to a few days, depending on the product. These products may also 
affect other organisms (like aquatic beetles) that have do not have gills and 
breathe at the waters surface. Surface agents are the only products effective 
against mosquito pupae.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 

18

3.  Insect Growth Regulators (IGRs) 
Early spring larviciding 

 
Methoprene and dimilin are chemicals that are 
added to the water to disrupt the normal 
maturation process of mosquito larvae.  The 
effective life of the product varies with the 
formulation. One formulation of methoprene 
has an effective life of 150 days. Methoprene 
can be applied in known larval development 
sites prior to flooding.  
 
Dimilin is a restricted use pesticide because it 
is potentially toxic to aquatic invertebrates. 
Methoprene is not a restricted use product, and 
has minimal non-target effects.  
 
Like Bti, methoprene poses little health concern 
for mammals and is safe to use in human 
drinking water sources.  
 

 

Photo Courtesy of Lewis C. Keenan 
 
4.  Chemical Larvicides 
 
Temephos is currently the only organophosphate registered for use as a larvicide 
in California. This product can be safely and effectively utilized in areas of 
temporary water where there are few non-target organisms and livestock are not 
present. Effective life span of temephos is up to 30 days depending on 
formulation of the product. This product can be applied to known larval 
development sites prior to flooding.  
 
Common larvicides registered for use in California are listed in Table 1.  
 

 

19

Table 1:  Larvicides Registered in California 
 
 
Classification  Active Ingredient 
Bacteria 
 

Trade Name 
 

 
Bacillus sphaericus 
(Bs) 
 
 

Vectolex CG 
 
Vectolex WDG 
 
Vectolex WSP 
Label and MSDS link:  http://www.adapcoinc.com/product_larvicides.jsp  

 
 
 
 

Bacillus thuringiensis 
var. israelensis (Bti) 
 
 
 

Vectobac 12AS 
Vectobac G 
Vectobac G 
Vectobac technical 
powder 
Aquabac 200G 
 
Bactimos briquettes 
 
 
Teknar HP-D 
Label and MSDS link: http://www.adapcoinc.com/product_larvicides.jsp 

 
 
 

 
Surface film 
 
Agnique MMF 
Label and MSDS link: http://www.adapcoinc.com/product_larvicides.jsp 

 
monomolecular film 

EPA Reg. # 
 

275-77 
73049 
73049-20 

73049-38 
73049-10 
275-50 
73049-13 

72637-3 
6218-47 
73049-404 

 
2302-14 

 
Label and MSDS link:  Http://www.clarkemosquito.com/product_detail.cfm?productid=112&categoryid=6&parentlist=4.6  

petroleum oil 

GB-1111 

8329-72 

 
Insect growth regulator 
 
dimilin 
Dimilin 25W 
Label and MSDS link:  http://www.adapcoinc.com/product_larvicides.jsp 

Altosid pellets 
 
Altosid ALL 
 
Altosid briquettes 
 
Altosid SBG 
 
 
Altosid XR-G 
Label and MSDS link: http://www.adapcoinc.com/product_larvicides.jsp 

S-methoprene 
 
 
 
 

 
400-465 

2724-448 
2724-446 
2724-375 
2724-489 
2724-451 

temephos 
 

Organophosphate 
 
 
Label and MSDS link: 
http://www.clarkemosquito.com/product_detail.cfm?productid=106&categoryid=6&parentlist=4,6  
 
Refer to Appendix 1 for explanation of pesticide formulation abbreviations. 

 
5% Skeeter abate 
Abate 2-BG 

 
8329-70 
8329-71 

 

20

Truck mounted ULV spraying 

Adult Mosquito Control 
 
Adult mosquito control is a means to rapidly knockdown biting adult mosquitoes. 
This can become necessary when larval control measures are insufficient or not 
feasible. Adult mosquito spraying is an important part of an IPM mosquito control 
program. In some areas of California, chemical control of adults is the only 
mosquito control option. Chemicals used for adult mosquito control can be 
dispersed into the air to target flying mosquitoes, or applied to vegetation and 
structures to kill resting mosquitoes. 
 
ULV spraying 
    
Most products used for adult mosquito 
control (adulticides) are formulated for 
use via ultra-low volume (ULV) spray 
technology.  ULV spraying (also 
occasionally called cold fogging) is the 
process of putting very small amounts of 
liquid (typically 4 ounces per acre or 
less) into the air as a fine mist of 
droplets. These droplets float on the air 
currents for up to 1 hour and quickly kill 
mosquitoes that come into contact with 
them. ULV adulticides are applied when 
mosquitoes are most active  typically 
sunset and early evening.  
 
ULV spraying is usually done over large geographic areas consisting of several 
acres to several square miles. Unlike agricultural or structural pesticide 
applications where the chemical is applied directly to a crop or structure, a ULV 
formulation is sprayed into the air column where it can contact and kill active 
mosquitoes. Aerial movement of the ULV product is an essential part of the 

Photo Courtesy of Mike McGinnis 

Aerial ULV in a mountain valley 

Photo Courtesy of Mike McGinnis

 

21

application. ULV applications are only 
done during environmental conditions 
that insure desirable product 
movement.  
 
ULV products are most effective when 
applied during the period just before 
sunset into the early evening. A 
shorter window of time around dawn 
can also be an effective time to spray. 
 
ULV applications can be done from the 
ground using vehicle mounted 

sprayers, or from the air using helicopters or airplanes. All spray equipment is 
required to be regularly calibrated to insure safe and effective applications. 
 
Non-Target Effects 

In general, the risk of adverse effects from ULV applications to people living in 
the area being sprayed is low. Nevertheless, individuals with existing health 
problems such as severe asthma, emphysema, other respiratory impairments, or 
highly chemically sensitive conditions should contact the local vector control 
agency when they move into an area. Often, the local vector control agency will 
be able to provide individuals with information on which products are used and 
when the products will be applied. Some local agencies maintain lists of 
residents who indicate their property should be excluded from adult mosquito 
spraying.  

By spraying a very small volume of insecticide per acre, using small droplets, and 
spraying after sunset or at dawn, ULV applications are able to target mosquitoes 
while minimizing the affects to other insects.  
 
Barrier spraying 

Backpack barrier spray 

 
The other common type of adult mosquito control 
application is a barrier spray. This process is 
typically used prior to an outdoor event (like a 
wedding reception or family reunion). Barrier 
applications can be done on private property by a 
vector control agency, a private pest control 
contractor, or a private individual on their own 
property. Treatment may be effective in an area of up 
to several acres for a few days.  
 
In a barrier application, a broad spectrum insecticide 
Photo Courtesy of Lewis C. Keenan 
is applied directly to vegetation and other surfaces where a mosquito may land 
(under decks, gazebos, etc.). When mosquitoes land on the treated area they 
absorb a fatal amount of pesticide. 
 
Non-target effects 
 
Barrier sprays are effective because they use a higher rate of pesticide 
application than other adult mosquito control activities. The increased amount of 
pesticide will kill most insects for a few days where the product is applied. 
Pesticides used for barrier applications in California break down into inert 
chemicals rapidly under environmental conditions and have very low toxicity to 
mammals. 
 
 

 

22

 
Adult Control Products 
 
As of June, 2008, there are at least 2 families of pesticide with a total of 9 active 
ingredients registered for adult mosquito control in California.  
 
1.  Organophosphates 
 
Organophosphates (OPs) are neurotoxins that cause uncontrolled, repeated 
firing of neurons. Malathion and naled are OPs registered for use in California. 
Malathion is most frequently used early and late in the season, with pyrethroids 
being used as adulticides during the bulk of the mosquito control season.  
 
2.  Pyrethrin (natural) 
 
Pyrethrins are natural insecticides derived from plants, primarily 
chrysanthemums. Pyrethrins act to block chemical signals at nerve junctions. 
Pyrethrins are broad spectrum insecticides that are widely used in agricultural 
and structural pest control. 
 
2.  Pyrethroids (synthetic) 
 
Permethrin, resmethrin, sumithrin, and deltamethrin are all active ingredients 
classified as pyrethroid insecticides. Pyrethroids are synthetic pesticides that are 
very similar to natural pyrethrum in their chemical structure and mode of action. 
 
Insecticides with either natural pyrethrins or synthetic pyrethroids as the active 
ingredient usually incorporate a synergizing agent, piperonyl butoxide (PBO). 
PBO reduces the ability of the insect to break down the active ingredient, 
allowing the insecticides to be effective with less active ingredient than would 
otherwise be required. 

Pyrethroids can be toxic to fish. These products will not affect fish when used 
according to the label instructions, because there is a large safety margin built 
into the label restrictions. The products have very low toxicity in mammals, 
including domestic animals and people. In fact, flea and tick sprays that are 
applied directly on dogs and cats have much larger amounts of pyrethroids than 
mosquito control products but are not harmful to the animal.  

A list of products commonly used to control adult mosquitoes in California is 
presented in Table 2. Links to labels and MSDS for each adult control product 
are provided, as well as links to commonly asked questions for at least one 
product from each family of adulticide. 
 
In addition, the exciting agent prallethrin is combined with the toxicant sumithrin 
in the Clarke mosquito control product "Duet".

 

23

Table 2:  Adulticides Registered in California  
 
 
Classification 

Active Ingredient 
 
malathion 

Trade Name 
 
Fyfanon ULV 

Organophosphate 
 
Information Link:  http://www.health.state.ny.us/nysdoh/westnile/education/2740.htm 
Label and MSDS link:  http://www.adapcoinc.com/product_adulticides.jsp 

EPA Reg. # 
 
4787-8 

 
Label link:  http://www.stlucieco.gov/pdfs/Dibrome label.pdf 
MSDS link:  http://www.stlucieco.gov/pdfs/Dibrome msds.pdf 

Naled 

Dibrom concentrate 

5481-480 

 

Pyrethrin 

 

 
Evergreen Crop 
Protection EC 60-6 
Pyrenone 25-5 
Pyrenone crop spray 
Pyrocide 7396 

pyrethrins 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
Label and MSDS link:  http://www.adapcoinc.com/request msds.php 
Pyrethroids 
 
Information Link:  http://www.health.state.ny.us.nysdoh/westnile/education/2739.htm 
Label and MSDS link:  http://www.adapcoinc.com/request msds.php 

 
Scourge insecticide 4% 

 
resmethrin 

1021-1770 
432-1050 
432-1033 
1021-1182 

 
432-716 

sumithrin 

Anvil 10+ 10 ULV 

 
Information Link:  http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/consultations/west_nile_virus/phenothrin.html   
Label link:  http://www.clarkemosquito.com/product_detail.cfm?productid=5&categoryid=23&parentlist=4,23  
MSDS link:  http://www.clarkemosquito.com/product_detail.cfm?productid=5&categoryid=23&parentlist=4,23  
 
 
 
Label and MSDS link:  http://www.adapcoinc.com/request msds.php 
Label and MSDS link:  http://www.clarkemosquito.com/product_detail.cfm?productid=2&categoryid=23&parentlist=4.23 

Aqua-Reslin 
Permanone RTU 
Biomist 4 + 12 ULV 

permethrin 
 
 

432-763 
432-1182 
8329-34 

1021-1688-8329 

deltamethrin 

 
Label and MSDS link:  
http://www.backedbybayer.com/bayer/cropscience/backedbybayer.nsf/id/EN_Pest_Labels_MSDS  
 
Refer to Appendix 1 for explanation of pesticide formulation abbreviations. 

Suspend SC 

432-763 

 

24

Basic Toxicology 

Most chemicals and substances have the potential to negatively affect some 
living organism if they are present in large enough quantities. For a chemical to 
have a toxic effect, the amount taken in must be enough to overcome the natural 
protective mechanisms of the organism. Toxicology is the study of the harmful 
effects of chemicals and substances to living organisms. 

Definitions for toxicology 

Toxicity:  The inherent potential for a chemical or substance to harm living organisms. 
Exposure:  Coming into physical contact with a chemical or substance. Toxic effects can  
     occur from contact with skin, through breathing, through oral ingestion, or through  
     more than one route.   
Dose:  The amount of a chemical that gets to a location in an organism where  
     it can cause some change.  
Risk:  The likelihood of negative health effects associated with some substance.  
Relative Risk:  Comparing the likelihood of negative health effects associated with  
     different actions taken. 

Mosquito control products and human health  

Risks to people and domestic animals from mosquito control products are very 
low because people are exposed to small amounts of chemicals that are not very 
toxic. 

The following was taken from the New York Health Department web site relative 
to the use of adulticides in New York but is equally applicable to California:  

The risk associated with the use of these products depends on the toxicity of the 
ingredients and the extent of exposure an individual has to them. The application 
rates for the active ingredients in the adulticide products are quite low, ranging 
from 0.0035 to 0.23 pounds per acre. As a result, exposure of the general public 
to adulticides is likely to be very low. ... 

Human health risks associated with larvicides are lower than those associated 
with adulticides. Larvicides not only are very low in toxicity to mammals, but also 
are applied to sites where the potential for human contact is negligible. (e.g., 
storm drains, sewage treatment plants, abandoned swimming pools etc.). 

Bottom line  Relative risk 

Reported West Nile virus infections in the United States between 1999 and the 
end of 2004 resulted in 666 human deaths and 8313* cases of neuro-invasive 
disease. Tens of thousands of birds and thousands of horses have also died or 
been euthanized as a result of WNV.  

 

25

 
* Includes total human case count for 1999 through 2002. Data from 2003 and 2004 was  
  separated into neuro-invasive disease versus milder flu-like illness. Prior to 2003 milder forms  
  of the disease were not routinely diagnosed as WNV related illness. Case data is from the U. S.  
  Center for Disease Control and Prevention and the United States Geological Survey available  
  on their web sites. 
 
WNV clearly poses risks to the health and welfare of humans and domestic and 
wild animals. Unnecessary exposure to pesticides should be avoided; however 
the demonstrated health risks from WNV are greater than potential risks 
associated with mosquito control activities. (5) 
 

 

26

Toxicity of Mosquito Control Products 
 
How toxic a substance is to a particular type of animal is often reported as a 
lethal dose to 50% of a test population (LD50). Specifically what the LD50 
number indicates is how much of a given chemical it would take to have a 50% 
chance of killing an organism based on the body size of the organism. LD50 is a 
measure of a dose that quickly kills an organism, it does not account for chronic 
(non-fatal) effects. 
 
Human toxicity is looked at based on the fact that humans are similar in physical 
make up and function to other mammals. The following chart compares the 
mammalian oral LD50 for two substances that humans readily consume to 
mosquito adulticides and larvicides. 
 
A lower LD50 means a substance is more toxic - it would take less of the 
substance to kill the organism ingesting it. What is demonstrated below is that 
products used to control mosquitoes are less toxic (even when ingested) than 
Bayer aspirin or table salt. Mosquito control products have much lower dermal 
(skin exposure) toxicity than oral toxicity.   
 
Chart 1:  Relative LD50 Data for Mosquito Control Products 
     
* DEET is the active ingredient found in many insect repellents. 

Acute Oral LD - 50 (Rat)

Bayer Aspirin
Table Salt
DEET

1200
1400

2000

Fyfanon(malathion)
Anvil (sumithrin)
Biomist (permethrin)

Golden Bear 1111
Abate (temephos)
Vectobac (Bti)
Altosid (methoprene)

5000
5000
5000

10000

8600

30000
34600

0

2000

4000

6000

8000

10000

12000

14000

mg / Kg body weight

Note 1:  shorter lines = lower LD  50 = more toxic substance. 

 

 

27

Additional Sources of Information 

Pesticides - Additional information can be obtained from the Oregon State 
University web site:  http://npic.orst.edu 

Or from the EPA website:  http://www.epa.gov/pesticides 
 
Pesticide Poisoning - Detailed information about symptoms and treatment can 
be found in EPA publication:  Recognition and Management of Pesticide 
Poisonings, 5th ed. available as a handbook or on Compact Disc. The 
information is also available on the EPA website: 
     http://www.epa.gov/oppfead1/safety/healthcare/handbook/handbook.htm 
 
Pesticide Labels and MSDS  available on many web sites and an internet 
search of any pesticide name or EPA registration number will give additional 
information 
     http://www.greenbook.net/ 
   
West Nile Virus - Additional information is available from the CDC web site:  
     http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvbid/westnile/ 
 
Maps of WNV activity - Available from the United States Geological Survey: 
(USGS):  http://westnilemaps.usgs.gov/ 
 
Insect Repellent - Information is available from the CDC web site:  
     http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvbid/westnile/qa/insect_repellent.htm 
 
DEET - Information is available from CDC web site: 
     http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/factsheets/chemicals/deet.htm 
 

 

28

References 

1.  T. Jensen, Lampman, R., Slamecka, M.C., and Novak, R. J.  2000.  Field efficacy of 

commercial antimosquito products in Illinois.  Journal of the Amer. Mosq. Cntrl. Assn.   
16(2); 148-152. 

2.  L. McWilliams.  2005.  Variation in diet of the Mexican free-tailed bat (Tadarida brasiliensis 

mexicana). Journal of Mammology.  86(3): 599-605. 

3.  L. Podolsky.  California myotis (Myotus californicus).  Animal Diversity Web.  University of 

Michigan Museum of Zoology.  
Web link:  
http://animaldiversity.ummz.umich.edu/site/accounts/information/Myotis_californicus.html 

4.  Ghost-faced Bat. Family Mormoopidae. (Mormoops megalophylla).  Nature.  Texas Parks and 

Wildlife  
Web link: 
http://www.tpwd.state.tx.us/nature/wild/vertebrate/mammals/bats/species/ghostfaced.htm  

5.  Center for Disease Control and Prevention. Human exposure to mosquito-control pesticides  

Mississippi, North Carolina, and Virginia, 2002 and 2003. MMWR Morb Mortal Wkly Rep 
2005, 54(21); 529-532. 

 

 

29

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

What it means  

clay granule 
water dispersible granule 
water soluble packet 
aqueous solution 
granule 
high potency dipteran active 
mono-molecular film 
wettable powder 
Altosid liquid larvicide 
single brood granule 
extended residual granule 
Biodac granule 
ultra low volume 
ready to use 
soluble concentrate 

Appendix 1 
 
Definitions of pesticide formulation abbreviations 
 
Abbreviation   
 
CG 
 
WDG   
 
WSP 
 
AS 
G 
 
HP-D   
MMF   
 
W 
ALL 
 
SBG 
 
XR-G   
 
BG 
ULV 
 
 
RTU 
SC 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
This document was prepared by the Vector-Borne Disease Section, California Department of 
Public Health, (916) 552-9730, August 2005. (Updated July, 2008) 

 

 

30

