E-333 
8-08

Mosquito Control Around the Home

J. A. Jackman and J.K. Olson*

Mosquitoes not only irritate and annoy people, 

but they also can transmit many disease-caus-
ing organisms to humans and animals. They 
spread such diseases as West Nile virus, encephalitis, 
dengue, yellow fever, malaria  and filariasis. Mosquitoes 
are also responsible for transmitting heartworm in dogs.
To control mosquitoes effectively around the home, 
it helps to know about their lifecycle. There are different 
control strategies for different life-cycle stages.

Mosquitoes have four distinct stages during their 

life cycle: egg, larva, pupa and adult. They can complete 
this life cycle in as little as to 10 days, depending on 
food availability, weather conditions and the species of 
mosquito.

Egg stage: Mosquito eggs may be laid individually 
or in clusters on the surface of water or individually in 
dry locations that are subject to periodic flooding. Some 
mosquito eggs can remain dormant in dry conditions 
for many months.

Larva stage: Mosquito eggs hatch into larvae called 
wigglers, which are seldom more than 1/2 inch long. Wig-
glers have a small head, an enlarged thorax (center body 
section) and a long cylindrical abdomen. Wigglers live 
in the water. Most of them feed on microscopic plants, 
animals and organic debris suspended in the water.
Pupal stage: Mosquito pupae do not feed. They 

spend most of their time at the water surface and tend to 
move only when disturbed. They are sometimes called 
tumblers because of their tumbling motion in water 
when disturbed.

Adult stage: Unlike the other stages, adult mos-
quitoes live on land and are winged. The males feed 
only on nectar, plant juices and other sources of liquid 

*Professor and Extension Entomologist, Texas AgriLife Extension 
Service, and Professor of Entomology, Texas AgriLife Research, 
Department of Entomology

carbohydrates. Female mosquitoes also feed periodically 
on nectar, plant sap and other sources of plant carbohy-
drates for energy.

However, females of most mosquito species require 
a blood meal as a source of protein before they produce 
eggs.

Adult mosquitoes typically live for about a week to 
a month, but this can vary, depending on a number of 
environmental factors. Some species spend the winter as 
mated females that may live up to 6 months or more.

Some adult mosquitoes seldom travel more than 200 

yards from the breeding sites; other species can travel 
for more than a mile. This ability to travel long distances 
can create problems in management. If the source of the 
mosquito problem is far from your home, you may not 
be able to control them without cooperation from other 
individuals or groups.
How to reduce mosquito problems

Here are some ways to alleviate mosquito problems 

around your home:
Eliminate breeding sites for larvae
	 Reduce standing water that provides breeding sites. 
Eliminate containers such as old tires, buckets, cans 
and bottles that collect and hold rainwater and 
become good breeding sites for mosquitoes. Drain 
water from flower pots, bird baths, rain gutters, rain 
barrels, birdbaths, pet dishes, livestock watering 
troughs, etc. at least once a week.

	 Empty your plastic wading pool weekly and store it 
	 Fill holes or depressions in trees with sand or mortar, 

indoors when not in use.

or drain them after each rain by drilling holes into 
the tree.

	 Repair leaky pipes and outside faucets.

Reduce adult mosquito populations
	 Mow tall grass or reduce the amount of brush and 
other foliage in your area to reduce the resting sites 
for adult mosquitoes.
	 For temporary relief in yards or high traffic areas, use 
fog treatments or surface treatments of insecticides 
that are labeled for that use and apply them following 
directions on the product label.

	 Use Bacillus thuringiensis israeliensis products such 
as Mosquito Dunks to treat permanent water bodies 
to eliminate larvae.
		You can use oil treatments on the surface of standing 
water to kill larvae. Use commercial products ac-
cording to the instructions on the product label. Be 
aware that other organisms in the water body may be 
affected by the treatment.

Avoid contact with mosquitoes   
		Use screening in your homes and pet kennels. Keep 
the screens in good repair and be sure that they seal 
around the frames of the door or window.

	 Schedule outdoor activities during times when 

mosquitoes are not active. Mosquito species that are 
active at dusk and dawn can often be avoided. Spe-
cies that bite throughout the day are more difficult to 
avoid.
	 Wear long, loose-fitting clothing to avoid mosquito 
bites. Use head nets when mosquitoes are very abun-
dant.
	 Use repellents whenever in a mosquito infested loca-
tion. Products that contain DEET  have been shown 
to be the most reliable repellents.
	 For short-term relief in outdoor areas such as patios 
and picnic areas, use a fogger and citronella candles 
or punks as a deterrent.

		Protect your pets with drugs that eliminate heart-

worm.

Long-term control

To achieve effective long-term mosquito control, you 
need to use several management techniques. Mosquito 
control is often complex and expensive, requiring the 
cooperation of individual homeowners as well as such 
groups as state agencies, local governmental agencies, 
industry and agriculture.

Mosquito control personnel may be needed on a per-

manent basis, and communities may wish to consider 
taking an area wide approach. Sometimes area wide 
programs are the only solution to a mosquito problem.
The Texas Department of State Health Services in 
Austin can provide information on how to establish a 
mosquito control district, which is a local group that 
handles area wide mosquito management. The Texas 
Animal Health Commission tracks diseases of animals 
and knows the current situation of mosquito-borne 
animal diseases in Texas.

For more information on insect management, visit 

the Web site at: http://insects.tamu.edu

Treat larval breeding sites
	 Use mosquito fish or other fish species in permanent 
bodies of water whenever the water will support 
them. Mosquito fish can be found in other ponds, pet 
shops or bait stores.

The information given herein is for educational purposes only. Reference to commercial products or trade names is made

with the understanding that no discrimination is intended and no endorsement by the Texas AgriLife Extension Service is implied.

Produced by AgriLife Communications, Texas A&M System

Extension publications can be found on the Web at: http://AgriLifebookstore.org

Visit the Texas AgriLife Extension Service at http://AgriLifeextension.tamu.edu

Educational programs of the Texas AgriLife Extension Service are open to all people without regard to race, color, sex, disability, religion, age, or national origin.
Issued in furtherance of Cooperative Extension Work in Agriculture and Home Economics, Acts of Congress of May 8, 1914, as amended, and June 30, 1914, in cooperation with 
the United States Department of Agriculture. Edward G. Smith, Director, Texas AgriLife Extension Service, The Texas A&M System.

