what is a national park?

Stage 2 HSIE - Teachers Guide

a partnership initiative of the NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service
and the NSW Department of Education and Training

A c k n o w l e d g e m e n t s

This resource has been developed by NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service in 
collaboration with the NSW Department of Education and Training.

Written and developed by Steven Papp and Geoff Thompson

Illustrations and artwork by Neil Stanners, Status Ad Group

Thanks  go  to  the  following  people  for  their  valuable  input  into  the  development  of  this
resource: Jacqueline Cleary, Celia Jordan, Julia Sivell , David Cleary, Syd Smith, Sue Field, Jim
Scott, Stuart Cohen, Margrit Koettig, Chris Koettig, Leann Cross, Meital Katz, Shaun Hooper,
Denise Storr.

Thanks also to the members of the NPWS working group for their input: Susan Phillips, Kerry
Cooper,  Pat  Darlington,  Gabby  Wilks,  Chris  Grudnoff,  Xuela  Sledge,  Trish  Waters,  Tim
Lanyon, Cath Snelgrove, Rosie Williams and Karina Chin.

Thanks to these schools for their help:
Nicholson Street Primary School
Guildford Primary School
St Johns Park Primary School
Field of Mars Environmental Education Centre.

ISBN 0 7313 6648 4

c

Copyright 2003 NSW National Parks and Wildlife Service

F o r e w o r d

This  resource  has  been  developed  by  NSW  National  Parks  and  Wildlife  Service  in 
collaboration with the NSW Department of Education and Training.

What  is  a  national  park?  is  an  environmental  education  resource  that  provides  a  range  of
suggestions  for  achieving  Stage  2  learning  outcomes  of  the  Human  Society  and  Its
Environment  (HSIE)  K-6  syllabus.  This  resource  assists  students  to  achieve  many  of  the 
objectives  of  the  Environmental  Education  Policy  for  Schools  (for  government  schools).  This 
policy can be found on the Department of Education and Training website on 
www.curriculumsupport.nsw.edu.au/enviroed/files/Env_EE_policy.pdf

What  is  a  national  park?  covers  a  variety  of  subject  matter  and  a  range  of  issues  relating  to 
national  parks  including:  what  they  are,  why  we  have  them,  the  natural  environment,
Aboriginal perspectives on the natural environment, the roles and responsibilities of national
park workers, and national park management.

C o n t e n t s

FOREWORD

ABOUT THIS RESOURCE

LESSON PLANS
1. WHAT IS A NATIONAL PARK?
2. WHAT ARE NATIONAL PARKS FOR?
3. ARE ALL NATIONAL PARKS THE SAME?
4. WHAT ARE THE THREATS TO NATIVE PLANTS AND ANIMALS?
5. ATTITUDES TOWARDS ANIMALS
6. WHAT ARE ABORIGINAL SITES?
7. WHAT IS HISTORIC HERITAGE?
8. WHO WORKS IN NATIONAL PARKS?
9. WHAT IS YOUR LOCAL NATIONAL PARK LIKE?
10. CARING FOR NATIONAL PARKS
11. VISITING A NATIONAL PARK/GUEST SPEAKERS
12. NATIONAL PARKS MINI-PROJECT

STUDENT WORKSHEETS
1. PARK FACTS
2. NATURAL ENVIRONMENTS
3. ATTITUDES TO ANIMALS
4. ABORIGINAL ART
5. ABOUT MY NATIONAL PARK
6. LOOKING AFTER NATIONAL PARKS

STUDENT FACTSHEETS
1. WHAT IS A NATIONAL PARK?
2. WHY DO WE HAVE NATIONAL PARKS?
3. THREATENED SPECIES
4. FERAL ANIMALS AND WEEDS
5. CARE FOR YOUR NATIONAL PARKS
6. MEET THE RANGER
7. MEET THE FIELD OFFICER
8. MEET THE ABORIGINAL SITES OFFICER
9. MEET THE RESEARCHER
10. MEET THE INFORMATION OFFICER
11. ATTITUDES TO ANIMALS

TEACHERS NOTES
TYPES OF RESERVES AND PROTECTED AREAS
TYPES OF ECOSYSTEMS
THREATENED SPECIES
THREATENED SPECIES  SOME EXAMPLES
CONTACTS AND WEBSITES

GLOSSARY

3

5

7
8
12
14
16
20
22
24
26
28
30
32
34

37
38
39
40
41 
42
43

45
46
48
50
52
54
56
58
60
62
64
66

67
68
70
71
72
73

74

A b o u t   t h i s   r e s o u r c e

Intended audience
This resource is intended for teachers of students in Years 3 and 4 working towards Stage 2
outcomes in the Human Society and Its Environment (HSIE) Syllabus. The activities included
in the unit assist students to achieve outcomes in the Environments strand. Some outcomes in
the Change and Continuity, and Cultures strands are also addressed. 

The resource
What is a national park? is an environmental education unit that provides a range of 
suggestions for achieving Stage 2 learning outcomes and subject matter of the HSIE K-6 
syllabus. Some of the indicators listed in this resource may be found in the syllabus, while 
others have been created specifically for this unit. The resource supports the sample Stage 2
unit of work State and National Parks in the K-6 HSIE Units of Work.

The teaching and learning activities presented in this resource provide a selection of activities
that in total make up more than an average length unit of work. Each of the lessons can be
regarded as a mini-unit. Teachers can choose a selection of lessons or mini-units that suit their
needs or, if time permits, they can teach all the mini-units in sequence.

The activities may be modified to suit the needs of students. A variety of extension activities
have been included. 

What is a national park? meets many of the objectives of the NSW Department of Education and
Training Environmental Education Policy for Schools. Aboriginal content is incorporated into this
program.

The  resource  comprises  teaching  and  learning  activities  and  a  range  of  supporting  materials
including posters and a video.

Outline of the resource

The package comprises the following resources:
- What is a national park?, a cartoon poster about national parks
- A series of national parks photographic posters
- Cultural heritage in national parks poster
- Web of Life  for Kids video
- Teaching and learning activities
- Student factsheets/activity sheets
- Student worksheets
- Teachers notes
- Guide to NSW National Parks booklets

L e s s o n   P l a n s

1

L e s s o n

What is a national park?

Overview
Visit a local park, look at the national park cartoon poster and discuss the differences between various types of
parks.

Resources
 poster What is a national park? (see reverse of poster for explanatory notes)
 factsheet 1 What is a national park?
 butchers paper and textas
 paper, pencils, clipboards

Preparation
Permission notes for your students to walk to a local park.

Background Information
Its amazing to think that Australias first national park, the Royal National Park, was established way back in
1879. It was established at a time when conservation of natural areas was far from the norm; in fact the only
other national park in existence  was Yellowstone in the USA, which was created seven years earlier. Now, over
seven  per  cent  of  NSW  has  been  protected  in  national  parks  and  this  percentage  is  still  growing.  The 
primary role of these parks is to conserve the natural and cultural heritage values of an area and to provide 
representative samples that reflect the full range of landscapes and diversity of ecosystems.

National parks are areas of land that protect native plants and animals and their habitats, places of natural
beauty, historic heritage and Aboriginal cultural heritage.

Apart from national parks there are a number of other areas that have been set aside for the conservation of
natural and cultural heritage values. These include areas such as flora and fauna reserves, nature reserves and
state recreation areas. While these areas have a similar purpose to national parks they differ in the types of
recreational activities they allow.

Other protected areas such as state parks and state forests are not national parks but they do manage large areas
of native environments in NSW and make a significant contribution to management of biodiversity across the
landscape.

State Parks
In  2002  there  were  nine  state  parks  in  NSW  managed  by  the  NSW  Department  of  Land  and  Water
Conservation.  These  public  reserves  provide  natural  settings  for  a  range  of  recreational  and  leisure 
activities (now managed by the NSW Department of Lands).

State Forests
State forests exist to ensure a sustainable supply of timber resources for NSW and other markets. State Forests
of NSW manage over 750 state forests.

A list and explanation of the types of reserves and protected areas can be found in the Teachers Notes. These
also provide contact details and website addresses for more information.

L e s s o n

1

Te a c h i n g   a n d   l e a r n i n g   a c t i v i t i e s

O u t c o m e s   a n d   i n d i c a t o r s

ENS2.5 Describes places in the local area and other
parts of Australia and explains their significance.
 gives  reasons  why  particular  activities  may  be 
associated  with  particular  natural  or  built 
environments

  names and locates natural and built parks in their 

local area and beyond

  compares similarities and differences between local

parks and national parks.

ENS2.6 Describes peoples interactions with 
environments and identifies responsible ways of
interacting with environments.
 

identifies sustainable recreational activities that 
are associated with council parks and national 
parks

  compares the responsibilities of workers in local 

 

parks and national parks
identifies organisations associated with the care of 
local, state and national parks.

Objectives of the Environmental Education Policy
for Schools
Students will develop knowledge and understanding
about:
  the impact of people on environments (K2).

Students will develop values and attitudes relating to:
  an appreciation of their cultural heritage (V2).

To set the scene, go on a mini-excursion to one of your
local  parks  or  use  the  school  playground.  Take  paper,
pencils  and  clipboards  and  ask  the  students  to  write
down  10  words  that  describe  the  things  they  can  see,
such  as  play  equipment,  paths,  gardens,  and  people 
playing. Ask several students to read their words to the
class. Discuss:
  What is this park used for?

  Who uses the park? 

  Who looks after the park?

  Can you think of a park similar to this one?

  What can you see that people have made?

  Why is it important to have parks like this one?

As  a  class  create  a  definition  for  the  word  park  and
write it on a sheet of butchers paper.

Hold up the What is a national park? poster. Ask the 
students to look at it closely. Discuss:
  What is special about the place shown in the poster?

  What is this national park used for? 

eg homes  for animals and plants
sustainable recreation  canoeing, camping, 
painting, rock climbing, skiing 
education and study  rangers talking to people, 
looking at Aboriginal sites, studying kangaroos

  Who uses the national park?

  What animals can you see? 

eg kangaroos, koala, lizard, wombat, cockatoo, 
seagulls, tortoise, pelican, snake, frog, etc

  What can you see that people have made? 

eg buildings, historic hut, lighthouses, Aboriginal art
site

  Who looks after the park?

  Why is it important to have national parks like this

one?

  What is the difference between a national park and 

the park we are sitting in?
eg vegetation, loction, 
types of activity, type 
of landscape, size, 
rules.

L e s s o n

1

Te a c h i n g   a n d   l e a r n i n g   a c t i v i t i e s

O u t c o m e s   a n d   i n d i c a t o r s

Note. The poster also includes images of the city, an
urban backyard and a farm. While these things are
NOT in the national park they are included to demon-
strate the interconnectedness between the built and
modified environment and the national park. Most of
these environments also provide homes for a range of
native plants and animals (biodiversity).

As  a  class,  create  a  definition  for  the  words  national
park.  Add  this  to  the  butchers  paper.  This  should  be
revised throughout the unit and updated if required.

Students  read  and  complete  the  activities  associated
with 
factsheet.

is  a  national  park

the  What 

Students  begin  collecting  information  from  the  library
and  internet  on  national  parks  and  other  protected
areas.  This  research  material  will  provide  information
that can be used throughout the unit. As research mate-
rials  are  found  the  teacher  and  students  present  their
collected information to the class. These class research
materials can be collected and stored on a display table
or displayed around the room.

2

L e s s o n

What are national parks for?

Overview

Watch the Web of Life for Kids video and expand on the concept of a national park.

Resources
 factsheet 2 Why do we have national parks? 
 video Web of Life for Kids (12 minutes long)
 worksheet 1 Park facts

Background Information
The Web of Life for Kids video shows a variety of national parks in NSW and the plants and animals found with-
in them. It also highlights the value of Aboriginal and historic heritage in Australia.

L e s s o n

2

Te a c h i n g   a n d   l e a r n i n g   a c t i v i t i e s

O u t c o m e s   a n d   i n d i c a t o r s

If  possible,  allow  two  screenings  of  the  Web  of  Life  for
Kids video. Watch the video once without questioning
to allow the students time to digest the information pro-
vided.

Before the second viewing split the students into small
groups. Allocate each group a topic from the Parks facts
worksheet. The topics are plants, animals, Montague
Island, activities by people, different kinds of national
parks  and  interesting  facts.  As  the  students  view  the
video they record information relating to their topic in
the appropriate box on the worksheet. After viewing the
video students present their answers to the class. Each
group should record the key facts from the other groups
presentations in the appropriate box on their worksheet.

Students  read  and  complete  the  activities  associated
with the Why do we have National Parks? factsheet.

Revisit  the  national  parks  definition  developed  in
Lesson 1. Does the definition need to be updated based
on the knowledge gained during the video?

ENS2.5 Describes places in the local area and other
parts of Australia and explains their significance.
 

identifies natural Australian environments as the 
predominant environments in national parks
identifies that the purpose of national parks is to 
conserve native plants and animals and historic 
and Aboriginal cultural heritage.

 

ENS2.6 Describes peoples interactions with 
environments and identifies responsible ways of
interacting with environments.
 

identifies national parks as places for outdoor 
recreational activities

  discusses reasons why people manage national 

parks.

CCS2.1 Describes events and actions related to the
British colonisation of Australia and assesses
changes and consequences.
 

identifies some of the impacts on native plants and
animals since colonisation.

Objectives of the Environmental Education Policy
for Schools
Students will develop knowledge and understanding
about:
  the nature and function of ecosystems and how 

they are interrelated (K1).

Students will develop values and attitudes relating to:
  a respect for life on Earth (V1)
  an appreciation of their cultural heritage (V2).

3

L e s s o n

Are all national parks the same?

Overview
Look at the national parks posters and examine some important types of natural environments.

Resources
 the set of national parks photo posters
 poster What is a national park?
 worksheet 2 Natural environments

Background information
Location,  altitude,  rainfall,  soil  type  and  human  activity  are  some  of  the  factors  that  have  influenced  the 
development of ecosystems in NSW. The word ecosystem refers to a community of plants and animals and the
interactions that occur between them and their surrounding environment. Within an ecosystem you also find
habitats. A habitat is the specific place in which a plant or animal lives, eg under a rock or in a tree hollow or
rotting log. Each ecosystem and the species within it are perfectly adapted to suit the conditions where they
live. For example there are over 750 recorded species of wattle varying in size from tiny shrubs to large trees,
all of which are adapted to suit the conditions where they grow. Most likely each wattle species also plays host
to animal species that are adapted to feed on that particular wattle and so on.

NSW is blessed with a huge variety of different ecosystems, from semi-arid areas to grasslands and rainforests,
all of which have developed to suit their local conditions. The national parks network is aiming to conserve a
comprehensive, adequate and representative system of relatively large natural areas, which together reflect the
full range of landscapes, diversity of ecosystems and biodiversity of the state.

Most modified ecosystems such as agricultural and urban areas are found outside or adjacent to national parks.
They provide homes for some native animals as well as providing them with vegetation corridors through which
they can move between natural areas.

Further information on different types of ecosystem is provided in the teachers notes.

L e s s o n

3

Te a c h i n g   a n d   l e a r n i n g   a c t i v i t i e s

O u t c o m e s   a n d   i n d i c a t o r s

To begin this lesson ask the students to close their eyes
and  visualise  what  a  trip  to  a  national  park  would  be
like.  Select  a  few  students  to  describe  the  park  they 
visualised. Pose the question: did everyone think of the
same kind of national park? Explain that there are lots of
different  national  parks,  found  in  different  kinds  of 
environments.

Examine  the  What  is  a  national  park? poster  and 
identify  and  list  the  different  kinds  of  environments 
presented. The environments represented in the poster
are coastal, wetlands creeks and rivers, rainforest, alpine,
woodland and forests, grassland and semi-arid.

Introduce  the  national  park  photo  posters.  Some  of
these posters have photos of the environments found in
the cartoon poster. Ask the class to match environments
from  the  photographic  poster  to  the  corresponding 
environments on the cartoon poster.

(Note  that  there  is  not  necessarily  a  photo  poster  to
match each individual environment within the cartoon
poster.)

ENS2.5 Describes places in the local area and other
parts of Australia and explains their significance.
  examines visual texts and describes a natural 

Australian environment.

  reports to the class on features of a particular type 

of natural environment.

Objectives of the Environmental Education Policy
for Schools
Students will develop knowledge and understanding
about:
  the nature and function of ecosystems and how 

they are interrelated (K1).

Students will develop values and attitudes relating to:
  an appreciation of their cultural heritage (V2).

Split  the  class  into  six  groups  and  allocate  one  photo
poster  to  each  group.  Each  group  examines  the  poster.
Students 
environments 
worksheet.  Once  complete,  the  students  present  their
information to the class.

the  Natural 

complete 

Discuss:
  are all the environments the same?
  what makes them different?

4

L e s s o n

What are the threats to native plants and animals?

Overview
Play  the  Threatened  Species game  (described  next  page)  and  explore  issues  about
Australias threatened species.

Resources
 factsheet 3 Threatened species
 factsheet 4 Feral animals and weeds
 newspaper
 stereo with appropriate music (perhaps new age rainforest songs etc)
 various web sites
 library books, posters
 class research materials

Background Information
A threatened species is any animal or plant that is facing possible extinction, declining in numbers or 
considered at risk. 

There are two main factors that can lead to a species being threatened with extinction. These are:
 predation by feral animals
 habitat loss or disturbance.

One of the major roles of national parks staff is the conservation of threatened species. This is done by con-
trolling pest animals and weeds and protecting and restoring the habitats of threatened species.

For more details refer to the threatened species information in the Teachers Notes and student factsheet 3.

L e s s o n

4

Te a c h i n g   a n d   l e a r n i n g   a c t i v i t i e s

O u t c o m e s   a n d   i n d i c a t o r s

CCS2.1 Describes events and actions related to the
British colonisation of Australia and assesses
changes and consequences.
  explains that a number of animals introduced to 

Australia by the First Fleet and subsequent 
colonists have become feral animals

  explains that feral animals and weeds have a 
detrimental impact on the natural Australian 
environment.

ENS 2.6 Describes peoples interactions with 
environments and identifies responsible ways of
interacting with environments.
 

identifies national parks as places in which people 
manage threatened species to ensure their survival

  demonstrates an understanding of the need to 

protect threatened species.

Objectives of the Environmental Education Policy
for Schools
Students will develop knowledge and understanding
about:
  the nature and function of ecosystems and how 

they are interrelated (K1)

  the impact of people on environments (K2).

Students will develop values and attitudes relating to:
  a respect for life on Earth (V1).

Threatened species game
This  game  provides  students  with  an  insight  into  how
native  animals  can  become  threatened.  Students  will 
experience the effects of habitat loss and feral animals.

In an open space spread large squares of newspaper on
the ground. These represent bushland. Each square can
only  support  four  native  animals  (students)  if  intact.
When  the  music  plays  students  dance  or  move  like
native  animals  around  the  newspaper.  Liken  this  to
night  time  with  nocturnal  animals.  When  the  music
stops  (sunrise)  students  need  to  find  a  newspaper  to
stand  on.  Alternatively  the  students  could  be  diurnal
animals (awake during the day) and find a safe place to
hide in at night.

Start  to  remove  newspaper  sheets  while  providing  a 
scenario for clearing native vegetation such as We need
to  put  a  road  through  here,  a  housing  development,  a
new shopping centre, a school, etc.

As the newspapers are removed the students who are not
standing  on  a  newspaper  are  also  removed  from  the
game. They represent native animals that died because
their homes have been destroyed and they couldnt find
another.

As the game continues the sheets of newspaper become
tatty  and  torn.  These  represent  bushland  that  is  no
longer  big  enough  to  support  large  native  animals.
Remove the students and the paper from the game.

How  long  does  it  take  the  native  animals  to  die  off 
without sufficient bush? What happens when the bush is
cut up into small bits.

Add  another  element  to  the  game.  As  the  number  of
students  decreases  introduce  the  problem  of  feral 
animals. Choose a number of students who are sitting on
the  floor  to  become  feral  animals.  These  feral  animals
can  capture  the  native  animals  while  they  move
between the patches of bush. What happens to natives
once the ferals are introduced?

* * * * *

After the game ask the students to identify two reasons
why  the  native  animals  were  at  risk  of  becoming 
threatened, ie habitat destruction and feral animals. Can
the  students  think  of  ways  in  which  we  can  prevent
these  problems?  eg  establish  national  parks,  trap  feral
animals,  enclose  national  parks  in  feral-proof  fences.
Can the problems be fixed?

Students  read  and  complete  the  activities  associated
with  the  Threatened  species factsheet  and  Feral  animals

L e s s o n

4

Te a c h i n g   a n d   l e a r n i n g   a c t i v i t i e s

O u t c o m e s   a n d   i n d i c a t o r s

and weeds factsheets.

Brainstorm and list any threatened plants or animals the
students know of in Australia. Students can extend this
list by examining the collected research materials or by
collecting  additional  information  from  the  library  or
internet.

Using collected resources or the internet, students select
one threatened species they would like to use as the basis
for an art project, such as a collage, drawing, painting or
model.  The  art  project  should  be  labelled  with  the
animal or plants name and an explanation of why it is
threatened  with  extinction  and  what  can  be  done  to
save it.

In  NSW  there  are  a  number  of  threatened  species
drawing competitions each year, such as the Golden Paw
Award  (NSW  Foundation  for  National  Parks  and
Wildlife),  and  the  Gould  League  Project  Environment
Competition. If you are thinking of entering your classs
drawings in one of these, check the competition specifi-
cations before the children do the drawings.

Optional ongoing project.
Consider an ongoing class project in which the class (or
entire  school)  adopts  a  threatened  species  (plant  or
animal).  Maybe  it  could  become  your  class  emblem!
Choose a threatened species from your local area, learn
about  its  habitat,  what  it  eats,  where  it  lives,  what  it
looks  like,  and  why  it  is  threatened.  Find  out  what  is
being  done  to  protect  this  species.  Get  involved  in
surveys,  habitat  restoration  and  other  activities  being
done  by  local  community  groups  conserving  your 
threatened  species.  Find  other  ways  to  help  conserve
your  threatened  species.  How  can  your  class/school 
educate the rest of the community about this species and
how we can all help it to survive?

5

L e s s o n

Attitudes towards animals

Overview
Students investigate some of the reasons why conservation of all biodiversity is more effective than conserva-
tion of individual species.

Resources
 worksheet 3 Attitudes to animals
 factsheet 11 Attitudes to animals
 poster What is a national park?

Preparation
Make an overhead transparency of the Attitude to animals factsheet 11.

Background information
Media, peers, culture and religion have all shaped our ideas and beliefs in regard to the value of many types of
animals. These beliefs influence perceptions that some animals have more value than others, particularly those
that belong to the cute and cuddly category.

This  cute  and  cuddly  syndrome  can  influence  the  publics  view  on  conservation,  where  most  attention  is
focused on fluffy animals while the non-cute animals are forgotten. Just think about how you react to the
presence of a spider in your household: would you react the same if it were a kangaroos joey? If we are to have
a comprehensive view of conservation we need to respect animals based on the role they play in the system,
rather than just judging them on appearance.

The more we understand about particular species, the more we appreciate how amazing they are. Often we
dont like some animals because they are perceived as threatening, noisy, smelly, annoying, or cause damage to
gardens and buildings. When we are wise about them and understand their behaviour we can respect them on
their own terms and for their importance in healthy functioning ecosystems.

One solution to this issue is to look at conservation in a more holistic way. That is to look at conservation in
terms of biodiversity rather than individual species. Conservation of biodiversity protects whole ecosystems and
all the species they contain, while conservation of individual species can overlook the support mechanisms that
keep that species alive in the first place. An example of biodiversity conservation is the national parks system
in NSW. These protected areas and other places like them have been set up to conserve all the native species
they contain.

A plant or animals habitat is the place where it lives (ie its home). An ecosystem is a community of plants and
animals interacting with one another and the surrounding environment (ie the wider environment in which
its habitat is found).

L e s s o n

5

Te a c h i n g   a n d   l e a r n i n g   a c t i v i t i e s

O u t c o m e s   a n d   i n d i c a t o r s

ENS2.5  Describes places in the local area and other
parts of Australia and explains their significance.
identifies the importance of national parks in 
 
biodiversity conservation.

ENS2.6  Describes peoples interactions with 
environments and identifies responsible ways of 
interacting with environments.
  discusses the importance of conserving biodiversity
  examines how peoples attitudes can have a 

positive or negative impact on conservation of 
native animals.

Objectives of Environmental Education Policy 
for Schools 
Students will develop knowledge and understanding
about:
 the impact of people on environments (K2)
 the role of the community, politics and market 
forces in environmental decision-making (K3).

Students will develop skills in:
 

identifying and assessing environmental problems 
(S2).

Students  examine  pictures  of  four  animals    a  koala,
magpie, blue tongue lizard and bush cockroach  found
on the Attitudes to animals worksheet. Ask the students
to  think  about  how  they  feel  about  each  of  these
animals. Based on their feelings the students choose five
words from the list or choose their own words to describe
each  animal.  Select  several  students  to  read  their
responses to the class.

Pose  the  following  scenario.  These  four  animals
currently live in bushland that might be cleared to build
houses. Discuss: which of these animals would you try to
save and protect? The students number the animals in
terms of conservation priority:1 (high priority) to 4 (low
priority). Students report their answers back to the class,
providing at least one reason for the rating they gave to
each animal.

Display  the  overhead  transparency  and  examine  the
facts on each animal. Do these facts change the way the
students  feel?  Do  they  change  the  order  the  students
have  provided  for  the  conservation  of  the  animals?
Why/why not? Ask the students if there is a better way
to try and protect all four animals rather than looking at
them on an individual basis. Basically, to protect all four
animals you need to protect the whole environment in
which they are found. This is the basic role of national
parks in NSW.

Examine the What is a national park? poster. Brainstorm
and list all the things that help to make national parks
important to the conservation of biodiversity. 

For example, national parks:
  protect all the species they contain, not just the cute

and cuddly ones
Can  you 
national park is protecting?

identify 

the  plants  and  animals 

the 

  protect lots of different types of ecosystems

What kinds of ecosystems can you see in the national 
park?

  provide lots of habitats for animals and plants

Can you find five different animal habitats?

  contain workers who help look after the biodiversity

in the national park
Can you identify the workers and what they are doing to
help biodiversity?

  contain the greatest amount of biodiversity.

Apart from the national park are there any other areas in
the poster that also support biodiversity? eg the farm, the
backyard, the rooftop garden. How are these places 
looking after biodiversity?

6

L e s s o n

What are Aboriginal sites?

Overview
Investigate aspects of Aboriginal cultural heritage by examining pictures and making a rock engraving.

Resources
 poster Cultural heritage in national parks
 worksheet 4 Aboriginal art
 activity sheet 8 Meet the Aboriginal sites officer
 clay, old cardboard boxes

Preparation
Make an overhead transparency of the Meet the Aboriginal sites officer activity sheet 8.

Background information
Aboriginal people are the cultural owners and managers of their sites and cultural knowledge.

For thousands of years Aboriginal people have been living as part of the natural landscape of Australia. The
land and waterways feature in all facets of Aboriginal culture, from recreational to ceremonial, spiritual and as
a  source  of  food  and  medicine.  The  flora  and  fauna  of  NSW  hold  great  significance  as  totems.  Aboriginal 
people have an intimate knowledge of their local totem species that has been built up over thousands of years.
The  land  and  waterways  are  associated  with  Dreamings  and  cultural  learning  that  is  still  passed  on  today.
Aboriginal sites are an important link to Aboriginal cultural heritage. Aboriginal sites are objects and other
material evidence relating to Aboriginal habitation. Shell middens, rock art, axe-grinding grooves, shelter sites,
scarred trees, rock engravings, stone tools, initiation and burial sites are examples.

The  Cultural  heritage  in  national  parks  poster  has  a  selection  of  pictures  of  Aboriginal  sites  and  objects:
fishtraps  at  Brewarrina,  a  scarred  tree,  rock  engraving,  rock  art  at  Mutawintji,  axe  grinding  grooves,  and 
bushtucker (a rainforest fruit and bogong moth).

It is important to note that Aboriginal culture is a living and evolving culture. The natural landscape itself is
central  to  contemporary  Aboriginal  culture.  The  landscapes  depicted  in  the  national  parks  posters  have  a
cultural importance to Aboriginal people and should also be presented to the class as an example of Aboriginal 
cultural heritage in national parks.

The Meet the Aboriginal Sites Officer factsheet has more information. Aboriginal sites are important heritage
places. People visiting these sites should take care not to disturb them.

The artwork provided in this kit is a modern individual style. The style of Aboriginal art varies from region to
region.  To  find  out  more  about  the  type  and  style  of  art  that  belongs  to  your  region  contact  your  local
Aboriginal community.

L e s s o n

6

Te a c h i n g   a n d   l e a r n i n g   a c t i v i t i e s

O u t c o m e s   a n d   i n d i c a t o r s

Display  the  overhead  transparency  of  the  Meet  the
Aboriginal  Sites  Officer activity  sheet  for  the  class.
Examine  each  of  the  drawings  of  Aboriginal  sites  that
are  listed.  Link  the  text  boxes  to  their  drawings  and 
discuss how these things relate to Aboriginal life.

CUS2.4 Describes different viewpoints, ways of
living,  languages  and  belief  systems  in  a  variety  of
communities.
  examines the link between Aboriginal art and 

communication within Aboriginal culture.

ENS2.5 Describes places in the local area and other
parts of Australia and explains their significance.
  discusses the importance of the natural 

environment to Aboriginal culture
lists and describes some Aboriginal sites.

 

Objectives of the Environmental Education Policy for
Schools
Students  will  develop  knowledge  and  understanding
about:
  the impact of people on environments (K2).

Students will develop values and attitudes relating to:
  a respect for life on Earth (V1)
  an appreciation of their cultural heritage (V2).

Explain to the class that national parks not only protect
native  plants  and  animals  but  also  Aboriginal  cultural
heritage  and  historic  heritage  that  occurs  in  the
environments of national parks.

Display  the  Cultural  heritage  in  national  parks  poster.
These pictures contain examples of some Aboriginal and
historic heritage. Point out the photos of the Aboriginal
sites  and  objects.  (Captions  identifying  the  photos  are
on the back of the poster.) Discuss:
 what do these things tell us about Aboriginal culture?

Point  out  the  rock  engraving  photograph.  Aboriginal
rock  engravings  are  pictures  carved  into  rocks.  The
grooves are scratched or pecked into flat surfaces, often
sandstone.  They  often  depict  humans,  animals,  tracks
and  mythical  figures.  Like  Aboriginal  paintings, 
engravings  provide 
information  about
Aboriginal  culture  and  social  life.  Discuss  with  the
students why they think Aboriginal people have created
rock engravings.

important 

Students make an engraving of a threatened species of
their choice. The engravings can be done in clay, in sand
in the playground, or by pressing holes into a piece of
cardboard  box  with  the  tip  of  a  ball-point  pen.  The
drawings or symbols in the Aboriginal art worksheet, or
other examples of local Aboriginal art, can be displayed
as a style for the students to imitate.

7

L e s s o n

What is historic heritage?

Overview
Investigate aspects of historic heritage by examining pictures, precious items from home and by making a model
log hut.

Resources
 poster Cultural heritage in national parks
 video Web of Life for Kids
 materials for model hut construction

Preparation
Ask the students to bring in something that is old or precious to them and their family, eg clock, photos, books
etc.

Background information
Historic heritage (which also includes Aboriginal heritage) is important because it gives us a record of how
people  have  lived  and  what  the  land  has  been    used  for  in  the  past.  Historic  sites  are  sites  that  protect
buildings,  objects,  monuments,  landscapes,  sites  or  events  of  national  significance,  or  sites  of  special 
significance in the history of the state.

Historic sites are found in a variety of landscapes and are managed by different organisations including NPWS,
the National Trust and the Historic Houses Trust. Sites protected in NSW national parks include buildings,
structures such as roads, works, relics, archaeological sites and landscape elements. Historic heritage covers a
diverse range of former land uses. Often these reflect pastoralism, recreation and low level resource extraction
such as forestry and other timber industries, quarrying and mining. They also include abandoned townships,
fortifications,  defences,  and  places  of  major  social  importance.  They  have  national,  regional  or  local 
significance.

L e s s o n

7

Te a c h i n g   a n d   l e a r n i n g   a c t i v i t i e s

O u t c o m e s   a n d   i n d i c a t o r s

CCS2.1 Describes events and actions related to the
British colonisation of Australia and assesses
changes and consequences.
 
  examines changes in land use since colonisation.

identifies examples of historic heritage

ENS2.5 Describes places in the local area and other
parts of Australia and explains their significance.
 
lists and describes some types of historic heritage
  models an early settlers log cabin.

ENS2.6 Describes peoples interactions with 
environments and identifies responsible ways of
interacting with environments.
  suggests reasons why historic sites should be 

protected.

Objectives of the Environmental Education Policy
for Schools
Students will develop knowledge and understanding
about:
  the impact of people on environments (K2).

Students will develop values and attitudes relating to:
  an appreciation of their cultural heritage (V2).

Ask the class to sit in a circle with the special item that
they brought from home on display. Invite each student
to tell the class about their item. Discuss, 
  where does it come from?
 who does it belong to?
  why is it special?
  could you replace it if it was lost or stolen?
  does it tell us anything about the owner?

Use the discussion to introduce the idea that these items
help  to  tell  us  about  people  and  what  is  precious  to
them. This is also why we need to conserve our historic
heritage: it tells us about past lives. 

Re-watch the first few minutes of the Web of Life for Kids
video. Discuss:
  whats special about the lighthouse on Montague 

Island?

  can the students think of any other examples of 

historic heritage? 

Examine the examples of historic heritage shown in the
Cultural heritage in national parks poster.
  what do these tell us about the past?

Timber  stockmens  huts  are  one  example  of  historic
heritage  that  exists  in  alpine  areas.  These  were 
originally built and used by cattlemen or sheep graziers
seeking high country summer pastures. Ask the students
to  visualise  what  life  would  have  been  like  for  these 
people in the hut. Working in groups, students create a
time  line  showing  how  these  people  spent  their  day.
The time line could be used as a basis for a dramatic play
about past lives.

Poems such as The Man From Snowy River may be good
for  reflecting  on  times  when  stockmens  huts  were  in
common use.

To conclude,  students  can  build  a  model  log  hut  from
natural and non-natural materials. The huts will only be
temporary  and  will  be  dismantled  at  the  end  of  the
lesson.  Its  best  to  conduct  this  activity  in  the  school
playgrounds  as  the  students  will  have  ready  access  to
sticks,  rocks  and  so  on.  Set  a  time  limit  on  the  hut
construction.  When  complete,  students  can  report  to
the class on their design and evaluate their completed
hut.

8

L e s s o n

Who works in national parks?

Overview
Dress-up and perform a skit or charade to learn about the roles of people who work in national parks.

Resources
 factsheets 6 - 10 about workers in national parks
  poster What is a national park?
  props to help identify park workers, for example:

ranger  maps, compass, model 4WD, shoulder badge
field officer  hammer, saw, hat
Aboriginal sites officer  examples of the engravings from Lesson 5
information officer  phone, fact sheets
research officer  clipboard, measuring tape, binoculars

Preparation
Ask students to think about who works in a national park. For homework, invite students to choose a nation-
al park worker and to come dressed as that worker for the following lesson.

Background Information
Within national parks people have many roles ranging from office workers to rangers.

The jobs carried out in the management of national parks and other protected areas include wildlife surveys,
flora  surveys,  pest  species  control,  threatened  species  recovery  actions,  fire  management,  historic  research,
working with the community on land care, urban runoff and tourism projects. 

The  National  Parks  and  Wildlife  Service  in  NSW  employ  over  1600  people,  among  them  are  scientists,
technical  officers,  rangers,  field  officers,  Aboriginal  sites  officers,  legal  officers,  administrative  and  clerical 
officers, engineers, archaeologists, architects, librarians, pilots and crew, tradespeople, interpretive people and
media people.

See the workers featured in the student factsheets for more information.

L e s s o n

8

Te a c h i n g   a n d   l e a r n i n g   a c t i v i t i e s

O u t c o m e s   a n d   i n d i c a t o r s

ENS2.6 Describes peoples interactions with 
environments and identifies responsible ways of
interacting with environments.
 

identifies the role of various workers in national 
parks

  describes elements of the management of national 

parks

  recognises the effect of park management on 

conservation outcomes.

SSS2.7 Describes how and why people and 
technologies interact to meet needs and explains the
effects of these interactions on people and the 
environment.
  extracts information about the job of a worker in a

national park and reports to the class

  describes some of the tools that are used by 

workers managing national parks.

Objectives of the Environmental Education Policy
for Schools
Students will develop knowledge and understanding
about:
  the impact of people on environments (K2)
  career opportunities associated with the 

environment (K5).

Ask those students who dressed up to say which particu-
lar worker they represent. Ask them:
  what their job in the park is
 
  what they like about their job.

if they need any special equipment to do their job

Display the What is a national park? poster in front of the
class. Ask students to find all the people who are work-
ing within the park and identify the jobs they are doing.
Discuss how these jobs contribute to conserving native
plants and animals and Aboriginal and historic heritage.
Can students spot all of the following 
examples?
  animal collar and radio tracking device

= research officer  scientist

  Aboriginal site interpretation 

= Aboriginal sites officer

  guided tour 

= information officer

  trapping feral animals 

= ranger

 

fighting fire 
= field officer/ranger

  spraying weeds, building a board walk 

= field officer

  repairing a bush hut 

= research officer  historian

  NB the farmer is NOT in the national park but on 

an adjoining property

Split the class into five groups. Each group is allocated a
factsheet  about  a  different  worker.  Students  read  the
factsheets,  then  complete  the  activities  on  the  reverse
side. If groups finish early, provide them with a different
set  of  fact  and  activity  sheets.  Groups  reassemble  as  a
class  and  report  back  on  the  various  characteristics  of
the worker they investigated.

The remainder of the lesson involves individuals or pairs
of  students  preparing  and  presenting  a  skit  or  charade
about a type of worker and their activities in a national
park.  Each  pair  (or  small  group)  presents  their  skit  or
charade  to  the  rest  of  the  class  who  try  to  guess  what
type of worker it represents.

9

L e s s o n

What is your local national park like?

Overview
Use basic mapping, index and symbol interpretation skills to find out facts about a nearby national park(s).

(these free guides are published annually  to replace old copies contact your local NPWS office)

Resources
   Guide to NSW National Parks booklets

   worksheet 5 About my national park
   class research materials
   internet

Preparation
Trace a large map of Australia (eg outline of borders) onto butchers paper.

Background Information
National parks cover 7% of the state of NSW. They represent a variety of ecosystem types and can be found in
a  variety  of  areas  ranging  from  semi-arid  to  alpine  areas  to  rainforests.  Refer  to  the  map  in  Guide  to  NSW
National Parks booklet for more information about each park.

The  NSW  National  Parks  and  Wildlife  Service  website  has  comprehensive  information  on  state-managed
national parks in NSW.

Each  state  in  Australia  has  its  own  national  parks,  which  are  managed  by  state  government  agencies.  The
Federal Government is responsible for several commonwealth national parks such as Kakadu National Park,
and Uluru-Kata Tjuta National Park.

Environment  Australias  website  has  comprehensive  information  on  the  federally-managed  national  parks:
www.ea.gov.au/parks/commonwealth/index.html

L e s s o n

9

Te a c h i n g   a n d   l e a r n i n g   a c t i v i t i e s

O u t c o m e s   a n d   i n d i c a t o r s

ENS2.5 Describes places in the local area and other
parts of Australia and explains their significance.
 uses geographical terminology
 uses index and symbol interpretation skills
 gathers research material and extracts information 

about a local national park

 identifies significant features of a local national 

park

 compares local national parks to those in other 

parts of the country.

Working in small groups students use the Guide to NSW
National  Parks booklet  and  the  About  my  national  park
worksheet to find out about their local national parks.
Students use the location map of NSW at the front of
the guide to locate their town and the nearest national
park. They use the key to locate the page in the guide
that has a description of the national park. Reading the
description and interpreting the symbols gives students
the  information  they  need  to  answer  the  questions  on
the worksheet.

Mark  the  location  of  your  town  on  a  big  class  map  of
Australia. Mark in the location of nearby national parks
from  the  previous  exercise.  From  the  Guide  to  NSW
National Parks (or the NPWS website), find several other
well known NSW national parks and mark these on the
map. Develop a key for your map and add a four-point
compass: north, south, east and west.

Using the internet or collected class research materials,
research  information  about  a  major  national  park  in
another part of Australia, eg Kakadu, Uluru-Kata Tjuta.
Mark the location of this national park on your big map.
Make  a  list  of  the  similarities  and  differences  between
this national park and your local national park.

L e s s o n

10

Caring for national parks

Overview
Play a true or false game to learn the rules in national parks.

Resources
   factsheet 5 Care for your national parks
   list of True and False Park Rules (on next page)
   30 sheets of newspaper

Preparation
Label 15 sheets of newspaper with the letter T and 15 with the letter F.

Background Information
Physical impacts such as fire, feral animals, weed invasion and visitor impact are issues that need continuing
action by park managers. Without management, these problems can irreparably damage the biodiversity in the
park.

The impact of visitors on the environment can be severe, even though the damage they cause may be entirely
unintentional. The purpose of rules for visiting a park is to restrict damaging behaviour. Some of the obvious
impacts of visitors include:
   litter
   broken branches
   ringbarked trees
   trampled vegetation
   headless flower stalks
   graffiti
   missing or relocated rocks
   removal of timber
   noise
   artificial light
   graffiti on Aboriginal sites
   feeding native animals.

Good bushwalkers, campers and park visitors practise minimal impact behaviour. This means taking care to do
as little damage as possible to the environment. 

Remember: Take only photographs, leave only footprints.

L e s s o n

10

Te a c h i n g   a n d   l e a r n i n g   a c t i v i t i e s

O u t c o m e s   a n d   i n d i c a t o r s

Introduce  the  rules  for  a  game  of  True  and  False  Park
Rules. Randomly spread the sheets of newspaper with a
big T (true) or a big F (false) on the floor. Students
walk slowly around the room. The teacher reads one of
the true or false questions. Students have to step on a
piece of paper with the correct answer  one person per
piece of paper. Only those on the correct piece of paper
stay in the game. Two sheets from each category (T and
F)  are  removed  from  the  floor  each  round.  The  next
question  is  asked  and  the  process  repeats  itself  until
there is only one person left.

At the end the questions can be cut out and classified
into two piles. Discuss the true rules and the reasons why
they  are  in  place.  Referring  to  the  Care  for  your 
national parks factsheet, students could write a short arti-
cle  for  the  school  newsletter  to  educate  others  about
rules in national parks. 

List of True and False rules for visiting a national park

ENS2.6 Describes peoples interactions with 
environments and identifies responsible ways of 
interacting with environments.
  explains the importance of rules in a national park
  demonstrates an understanding of responsible 

behaviour for looking after a natural environment.

Objectives of the Environmental Education Policy
for Schools
Students will develop knowledge and understanding
about:
 the impact of people on environments (K2).

Students will develop skills in:
 identifying and assessing environmental problems 

(S2).

Students will develop values and attitudes relating to:
 a respect for life on Earth (V1).

Keep pets at home (T)

No kids allowed (F)

Remove all your rubbish (T)

Laughing is not permitted (F)

Do not disturb plants, animals, rocks and soil (T)

Picking flowers is allowed on Mondays only (F)

Motor bikes must stay on roads (T)

Rubbish should be thrown in the river (F)

Ride your mountain bike on roads but not on walking
tracks (T)

Dont use gas stoves  burn animal homes instead (F)

Dont feed the wildlife (T)

Only feed animals sausage rolls (F)

Tread lightly  keep to the tracks and trails (T)

Dont check the water depth before diving in (F)

Dont pick flowers (T)

Put your tent on top of endangered plants (F)

Use toilet facilities not the bush (T)

Use your four-wheel drive on walking tracks only (F)

Camp in camping areas only (T)

Dump weeds from your garden in the national park (F)

Do not touch or walk on historic sites or Aboriginal sites
(T)

11

L e s s o n

Visiting a national park / guest speakers

Overview
Take an excursion to a national park or other protected area, or have a national park guest speaker visit your
class.

Resources
   Discovery- walks, talks, and tours programs, NSW NPWS, national parks visitor centres, environmental   

education centres (Department of Education and Training).

   worksheet 6 Looking after national parks

Preparation
Pre-visit the venue of your excursion to avoid any nasty surprises.

Background Information
What is learnt inside the classroom about national parks needs to be reinforced by what happens outside the
classroom. Hands-on experiences within national parks or other protected areas bring to life all the learning
that has already occurred. Here are some suggestions for excursion programs  for further information please see
the Teachers Notes.

NPWS Discovery for Schools program
Discovery-walks,  talks  and  tours programs  operate  in  most  areas.  Contact  your  local  national  parks  office  to
arrange an in-park activity led by a Discovery Ranger. Many regions offer activities tailored to meet syllabus
needs.

Environmental Education Centres programs
There  are  over  20  Environmental  Education  Centres  (EECs)  around  NSW,  run  by  the  Department  of
Education and Training. Your local EEC can offer an extensive array of curriculumlinked activities, including
programs on the topic of national parks.

Conduct your own program
Conduct your own lesson in a local national park (but check with the local NPWS office about the location
you intend to use) or use any local bushland you have access to. Possible activities include: bushwalk, mini-
beast survey, sound maps, texture rubbings, outdoor education activities.

Invite a guest speaker from a national park
If an excursion is out of the question, contact the national parks office in your area and ask whether a member
of staff is able to come to your school to talk about national parks. 

Member of local Aboriginal community
Contact your local Aboriginal Land Council or Aboriginal Corporation to invite a local Aboriginal person to
share their knowledge. 

Virtual park visit
Your could also do a "virtual visit" to a park on the internet (www.nationalparks.nsw.gov.au); or visit the Virtual
Ranger website at www.virtualranger.net.au that will commence during term 1, 2004.

Contact details for the above organisations and groups can be found in the Teachers Notes.

L e s s o n

11

Te a c h i n g   a n d   l e a r n i n g   a c t i v i t i e s

O u t c o m e s   a n d   i n d i c a t o r s

Organise an excursion to a national park. Some places
you visit will have programs and guides or rangers who
can work with your students on the day. At some stage
during the visit ask your students to interview the guide
and  complete 
the  Looking  after  national  parks 
worksheet. If you conduct your own excursion, consider
focussing  on  types  of  ecosystems  and  the  plants  and 
animals they contain.

If an excursion is not practical, then try and arrange for
a  ranger  or  other  national  park  worker  to  visit  your
school  and  give  a  talk.  Invite  representatives  from  the
local Aboriginal community to visit the school and talk
about  their  view  of  land  management  practices,
Aboriginal  sites  and  correct  behaviour  when  visiting
Aboriginal sites.

These indicators may need to be modified according
to the lesson content (eg a guest speaker or an 
excursion).

ENS2.5 Describes places in the local area and other
parts of Australia and explains their significance.
 describes the physical environment of a national 

park or natural area.

ENS2.6 Describes peoples interactions with 
environments and identifies responsible ways of
interacting with environments.
 identifies responsible behaviour while visiting a 

national park

 describes how people manage national parks
 gives reasons why natural environments, features 

or places should be cared for

 examines some of the practices used by national 

parks staff to care for national parks.

Objectives of the Environmental Education Policy
for Schools
Students will develop knowledge and understanding
about:
 the nature and function of ecosystems and how 

they are interrelated (K1)

 the impact of people on environments (K2).

Students will develop skills in:
 adopting behaviours and practices that protect the 

environment (S5).

Students will develop values and attitudes relating to:
 a commitment to act for the environment by 

supporting long-term solutions to environmental 
problems (V3).

12

L e s s o n

National parks mini-project

Overview
Conduct a case study of a national park and its features.

Resources
   Guide to NSW National Parks booklet; or www.nationalparks.nsw.gov.au
   class research materials
   the completed About my national park worksheet (Lesson 9)
   big class map of Australia
   poster What is a national park?
   usual art/craft resources
   leaves, twigs, pebbles, other natural craft resources
   photos and drawings cut from leaflets and brochures

Background Information
This lesson is a follow-up to visiting a national park, but can be also be used if you are unable to conduct a park
visit.

L e s s o n

12

Te a c h i n g   a n d   l e a r n i n g   a c t i v i t i e s

O u t c o m e s   a n d   i n d i c a t o r s

Go back to the What is a national park? poster and ask
students to pick out the key features of a national park:
natural features, built features, plants and animals.

ENS2.5 Describes places in the local area and other
parts of Australia and explains their significance.
 describes the natural and built features of a 

national park

 explains the significance of national parks.

ENS2.6 Describes peoples interactions with 
environments and identifies responsible ways of
interacting with environments.
 describes the built features of a national park that 

promote conservation of natural and cultural 
heritage values.

Objectives of the Environmental Education Policy
for Schools
Students will develop knowledge and understanding
about:
 the impact of people on environments (K2).

Students will develop values and attitudes relating to:
 a respect for life on Earth (V1)
 an appreciation of their cultural heritage (V2).

Dont forget to leave 
room for us animals!

In  pairs,  students  develop  a  mini-poster  about  a
national  park  of  their  choice,  either  real  or  imaginary.
The centre of the page can be a drawing of the park, or
a photo cut from a brochure. Around the drawing place
boxes  with  information  about  the  following  things:
facilities,  natural  features,  plants,  animals,  historic 
heritage, Aboriginal heritage and workers.

Students  use  this  information  to  create  a  diorama  of
their  park.  Refer  back  to  previous  activities  for
additional sources of information and ideas. Some of the
features they might want to include are:
   natural features

eg mountains, plains, rivers, forests, cliffs, waterfalls,
etc

   built features

eg toilets, fresh water, camping sites, barbeques, 
information boards
cabins,  car  park,  caravan  sites,  fireplaces,  a  visitor
centre, walking tracks, roads

   special features

eg animals, plants, historic sites, Aboriginal sites

Does the park need an entry sign, or other types of sign?

To complete  the  activity,  students  design  and  write  a
promotional  brochure/poster  advertising  their  park. 
It could include things such as:
   how to get there

   opening hours

   tours available

   accommodation available

   food and meals available

   activities available

   areas of the park

   workers

   protected plants and animals

   rules.

