Network Security: History, Importance, and Future 
University of Florida Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering  

Bhavya Daya 

 
 

ABSTRACT 
 
Network  security  has  become  more  important  to 
personal  computer  users,  organizations,  and  the 
military.  With  the  advent  of  the  internet,  security 
became a major concern and the history of security 
allows a better understanding of the emergence of 
security  technology.  The  internet  structure  itself 
allowed  for  many  security  threats  to  occur.  The 
architecture  of  the  internet,  when  modified  can 
reduce the possible attacks that can be sent across 
the  network.  Knowing  the  attack  methods,  allows 
for  the  appropriate  security  to  emerge.  Many 
businesses secure themselves from the internet by 
means  of  firewalls  and  encryption  mechanisms. 
The  businesses  create  an  intranet  to  remain 
connected  to  the 
internet  but  secured  from 
possible threats. 
 
The entire field of network security is vast and in an 
evolutionary 
study 
encompasses  a  brief  history  dating  back  to 
internets beginnings and the current development 
in  network  security.  In  order  to  understand  the 
research  being  performed  today,  background 
knowledge of the internet, its vulnerabilities, attack 
methods 
internet,  and  security 
technology  is  important  and  therefore  they  are 
reviewed. 
 
INTRODUCTION 
 
The  world  is  becoming  more  interconnected  with 
the  advent  of  the  Internet  and  new  networking 
technology.  There  is  a  large  amount  of  personal, 
commercial, military, and government information 
on networking infrastructures worldwide. Network 
security  is  becoming  of  great  importance  because 

through 

stage. 

the 

The 

range 

of 

of intellectual property that can be easily acquired 
through the internet. 
 
There  are  currently  two  fundamentally  different 
networks, data networks and synchronous network 
comprised of switches. The internet is considered a 
data  network.  Since  the  current  data  network 
consists  of  computerbased  routers,  information 
can  be  obtained  by  special  programs,  such  as 
Trojan  horses,  planted 
in  the  routers.  The 
synchronous  network  that  consists  of  switches 
does  not  buffer  data  and  therefore  are  not 
threatened  by  attackers.  That  is  why  security  is 
emphasized in data networks, such as the internet, 
and other networks that link to the internet.  
 
The  vast  topic  of  network  security  is  analyzed  by 
researching the following: 
 

1.  History of security in networks 
2.  Internet 
and 
security aspects of the Internet 

architecture 

vulnerable 

3.  Types  of 
methods 

internet  attacks  and  security 

4.  Security for networks with internet access 
5.  Current  development  in  network  security 

hardware and software 

is 

 
Based  on  this  research,  the  future  of  network 
security 
forecasted.  New  trends  that  are 
emerging  will  also  be  considered  to  understand 
where network security is heading. 
 
 
1.  Network Security 
 
System and network technology is a key technology 
for a wide variety of applications. Security is crucial 

 
 

flexibility, 

easeofuse, 

is  a  critical  requirement 

to  networks  and  applications.  Although,  network 
security 
in  emerging 
networks,  there  is  a  significant  lack  of  security 
methods that can be easily implemented. 
 
There  exists  a  communication  gap  between  the 
developers  of  security  technology  and  developers 
of  networks.  Network  design  is  a  welldeveloped 
process  that 
is  based  on  the  Open  Systems 
Interface  (OSI)  model.  The  OSI  model  has  several 
advantages  when  designing  networks.  It  offers 
modularity, 
and 
standardization  of  protocols.  The  protocols  of 
different  layers  can  be  easily  combined  to  create 
stacks  which  allow  modular  development.  The 
implementation of individual layers can be changed 
later  without  making  other  adjustments,  allowing 
flexibility  in  development.  In  contrast  to  network 
design,  secure  network  design 
is  not  a  well
developed  process.  There  isnt  a  methodology  to 
manage  the  complexity  of  security  requirements. 
Secure network design does not contain the same 
advantages as network design. 
 
When  considering  network  security,  it  must  be 
emphasized  that  the  whole  network  is  secure. 
Network  security  does  not  only  concern  the 
security  in  the  computers  at  each  end  of  the 
communication chain. When transmitting data the 
communication  channel  should  not  be  vulnerable 
to  attack.  A  possible  hacker  could  target  the 
communication channel, obtain the data, decrypt it 
and reinsert a false message. Securing the network 
is just as important as securing the computers and 
encrypting the message. 
 
When  developing  a  secure  network,  the  following 
need to be considered [1]: 
 

1.  Access  authorized users are provided the 
means  to  communicate  to  and  from  a 
particular network 

2.  Confidentiality  Information in the network 

remains private 

3.  Authentication    Ensure  the  users  of  the 

network are who they say they are 

2 
 

4.  Integrity    Ensure  the  message  has  not 

been modified in transit  

5.  Nonrepudiation  Ensure the user does not 

refute that he used the network 

 
An  effective  network  security  plan  is  developed 
with the understanding of security issues, potential 
attackers, needed level of security, and factors that 
make a network vulnerable to attack [1]. The steps 
involved  in  understanding  the  composition  of  a 
secure network, internet or otherwise, is followed 
throughout this research endeavor.  

 

from 

it.  The 

To lessen the vulnerability of the computer to the 
network there are many products available. These 
tools  are  encryption,  authentication  mechanisms, 
intrusiondetection,  security  management  and 
firewalls.  Businesses  throughout  the  world  are 
using  a  combination  of  some  of  these  tools. 
Intranets are both connected to the internet and 
reasonably  protected 
internet 
architecture  itself  leads  to  vulnerabilities  in  the 
network.  Understanding  the  security  issues  of  the 
internet  greatly  assists  in  developing  new  security 
technologies  and  approaches  for  networks  with 
internet access and internet security itself. 
 
The  types  of  attacks  through  the  internet  need  to 
also  be  studied  to  be  able  to  detect  and  guard 
against  them.  Intrusion  detection  systems  are 
established  based  on  the  types  of  attacks  most 
commonly  used.  Network  intrusions  consist  of 
packets that are introduced to cause problems for 
the following reasons: 
 

  To consume resources uselessly 
  To  interfere  with  any  system  resources 

intended function 

  To  gain  system  knowledge  that  can  be 

exploited in later attacks 

 
The  last  reason  for  a  network  intrusion  is  most 
commonly guarded against and considered by most 
as  the  only  intrusion  motive.  The  other  reasons 
mentioned need to be thwarted as well.  
 

Typical  security  currently  exists  on  the  computers 
connected  to  the  network.  Security  protocols 
sometimes usually appear as part of a single layer 
of the OSI network reference model. Current work 
is being performed in using a layered approach to 
secure  network  design.  The  layers  of  the  security 
model  correspond  to  the  OSI  model  layers.  This 
security  approach 
leads  to  an  effective  and 
efficient  design  which  circumvents  some  of  the 
common security problems.  
 
2.  Differentiating Data Security and 

Network Security 

to  continue 

to  advance  due 

 
Data security is the aspect of security that allows a 
clients  data  to  be  transformed  into  unintelligible 
data  for  transmission.  Even  if  this  unintelligible 
data is intercepted, a key is needed to decode the 
message.  This  method  of  security  is  effective  to  a 
certain degree. Strong cryptography in the past can 
be  easily  broken  today.  Cryptographic  methods 
have 
the 
advancement of the hackers as well.  
 
When  transferring  ciphertext  over  a  network,  it  is 
helpful to have a secure network. This will allow for 
the  ciphertext  to  be  protected,  so  that  it  is  less 
likely  for  many  people  to  even  attempt  to  break 
the  code.  A  secure  network  will  also  prevent 
someone  from  inserting  unauthorized  messages 
into  the  network.  Therefore,  hard  ciphers  are 
needed as well as attackhard networks [2]. 
 

to 

Figure 1: Based on the OSI model, data security and network 

 

security have a different security function [2]. 

3 
 

 

and 

mechanisms, 

The  relationship  of  network  security  and  data 
security  to  the  OSI  model  is  shown  in  Figure  1.  It 
can  be  seen  that  the  cryptography  occurs  at  the 
application layer; therefore the application writers 
are  aware  of  its  existence.  The  user  can  possibly 
choose  different  methods  of  data  security. 
Network  security  is  mostly  contained  within  the 
physical  layer.  Layers  above  the  physical  layer  are 
also  used  to  accomplish  the  network  security 
required  [2].  Authentication  is  performed  on  a 
layer above the physical layer. Network security in 
the physical layer requires failure detection, attack 
detection 
intelligent 
countermeasure strategies [2].  
 
 
HISTORY OF NETWORK SECURITY 
 
Recent interest in security was fueled by the crime 
committed  by  Kevin  Mitnick.  Kevin  Mitnick 
committed  the  largest  computerrelated  crime  in 
U.S.  history  [3].  The  losses  were  eighty  million 
dollars in U.S. intellectual property and source code 
from  a  variety  of  companies  [3].  Since  then, 
information security came into the spotlight. 
 
Public  networks  are  being  relied  upon  to  deliver 
financial  and  personal  information.  Due  to  the 
evolution  of  information  that  is  made  available 
through  the  internet,  information  security  is  also 
required to evolve. Due to Kevin Mitnicks offense, 
companies  are  emphasizing  security 
for  the 
intellectual  property.  Internet  has  been  a  driving 
force for data security improvement.  
 
Internet protocols in the past were not developed 
to 
the  TCP/IP 
communication  stack,  security  protocols  are  not 
implemented.  This  leaves  the  internet  open  to 
attacks.  Modern  developments  in  the  internet 
architecture  have  made  communication  more 
secure. 
 
 
 

themselves.  Within 

secure 

1.  Brief History of Internet 

2.  Security Timeline 

 

The birth of the interne takes place in 1969 when 
Advanced  Research  Projects  Agency  Network 
(ARPANet)  is  commissioned  by  the  department  of 
defense (DOD) for research in networking.  
 
The ARPANET is a success from the very beginning. 
Although  originally  designed  to  allow  scientists  to 
share  data  and  access  remote  computers,  email 
quickly becomes the most popular application. The 
ARPANET becomes a highspeed digital post office 
as people use it to collaborate on research projects 
and  discuss  topics  of  various 
interests.  The 
InterNetworking Working Group becomes the first 
of  several  standardssetting  entities  to  govern  the 
growing  network  [10].  Vinton  Cerf  is  elected  the 
first  chairman  of  the  INWG,  and  later  becomes 
known as a "Father of the Internet." [10] 
 
In  the  1980s,  Bob  Kahn  and  Vinton  Cerf  are  key 
members  of  a  team  that  create  TCP/IP,  the 
common  language  of  all  Internet  computers.  For 
the  first  time  the  loose  collection  of  networks 
which  made  up  the  ARPANET 
is  seen  as  an 
"Internet", and the Internet as we know it today is 
born.  The  mid80s  marks  a  boom  in  the  personal 
computer and superminicomputer industries. The 
combination of inexpensive desktop machines and 
powerful,  networkready  servers  allows  many 
companies  to  join  the  Internet  for  the  first  time. 
Corporations  begin 
to 
communicate  with  each  other  and  with  their 
customers.  
 
internet  began  to  become 
In  the  1990s,  the 
available  to  the  public.  The  World  Wide  Web  was 
born.  Netscape  and  Microsoft  were  both 
competing  on  developing  a  browser  for  the 
internet.  Internet  continues  to  grow  and  surfing 
the internet has become equivalent to TV viewing 
for many users. 
 
 
 
 

Internet 

to  use 

the 

that  converted  plain  messages 

 
Several  key  events  contributed  to  the  birth  and 
evolution  of  computer  and  network  security.  The 
timeline can be started as far back as the 1930s.  
 
Polish  cryptographers  created  an  enigma  machine 
in  1918 
to 
encrypted  text.  In  1930,  Alan  Turing,  a  brilliant 
mathematician  broke  the  code  for  the  Enigma. 
Securing  communications  was  essential  in  World 
War II.  
 
In  the  1960s,  the  term  hacker  is  coined  by  a 
couple  of  Massachusetts  Institute  of  Technology 
(MIT) students. The Department of Defense began 
the  ARPANet,  which  gains  popularity  as  a  conduit 
for 
the  electronic  exchange  of  data  and 
information [3]. This paves the way for the creation 
of the carrier network known today as the Internet. 
During  the  1970s,  the  Telnet  protocol  was 
developed. This opened the door for public use of 
data  networks  that  were  originally  restricted  to 
government contractors and academic researchers 
[3]. 
 
During  the  1980s,  the  hackers  and  crimes  relating 
to  computers  were  beginning  to  emerge.  The  414 
gang  are  raided  by  authorities  after  a  nineday 
cracking  spree  where  they  break  into  topsecret 
systems.  The  Computer  Fraud  and  Abuse  Act  of 
1986 was created because of Ian Murphys crime of 
stealing  information  from  military  computers.    A 
graduate student, Robert Morris, was convicted for 
unleashing  the  Morris  Worm  to  over  6,000 
vulnerable  computers  connected  to  the  Internet. 
Based  on  concerns  that  the  Morris  Worm  ordeal 
could  be  replicated,  the  Computer  Emergency 
Response  Team  (CERT)  was  created  to  alert 
computer users of network security issues.  
 
In  the  1990s,  Internet  became  public  and  the 
security 
tremendously. 
Approximately 950 million people use the internet 
today  worldwide  [3].  On  any  day,  there  are 
approximately  225  major  incidences  of  a  security 

increased 

concerns 

4 
 

losses  of  a 

in  monetary 

breach  [3].  These  security  breaches  could  also 
result 
large  degree. 
Investment  in  proper  security  should  be  a  priority 
for large organizations as well as common users.       
 
INTERNET ARCHITECTURE AND 
VULNERABLE SECURITY ASPECTS 
 
Fear of security breaches on the Internet is causing 
organizations to use protected private networks or 
intranets  [4].  The  Internet  Engineering  Task  Force 
(IETF)  has 
introduced  security  mechanisms  at 
various  layers  of  the  Internet  Protocol  Suite  [4]. 
These  security  mechanisms  allow  for  the  logical 
protection of data units that are transferred across 
the network.  
 
 
 

The  security  architecture  of  the  internet  protocol, 
known  as  IP  Security, 
is  a  standardization  of 
internet security. IP security, IPsec, covers the new 
generation  of  IP  (IPv6)  as  well  as  the  current 
version  (IPv4).  Although  new  techniques,  such  as 
IPsec, have been developed to overcome internets 
bestknown  deficiencies, 
to  be 
insufficient 
shows  a  visual 
representation  of  how  IPsec  is  implemented  to 
provide secure communications.  
 
IPSec 
is  a  pointtopoint  protocol,  one  side 
encrypts,  the  other  decrypts  and  both  sides  share 
key  or  keys.  IPSec  can  be  used  in  two  modes, 
namely transport mode and tunnel modes. 

[5].  Figure  2 

seem 

they 

 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 2: IPsec contains a gateway and a tunnel in order to secure communications. [17] 

 
The  current  version  and  new  version  of  the 
Internet  Protocol  are  analyzed  to  determine  the 
security  implications.  Although  security  may  exist 
within  the  protocol,  certain  attacks  cannot  be 
guarded  against.  These  attacks  are  analyzed  to 
determine other security mechanisms that may be 
necessary.  
 
 
 

 
                                                                  
 
1.  IPv4 and IPv6 Architectures 

 

IPv4  was  design  in  1980  to  replace  the  NCP 
protocol on the ARPANET. The IPv4 displayed many 
limitations after two decades [6]. The IPv6 protocol 
was  designed  with  IPv4s  shortcomings  in  mind. 
IPv6 is not a superset of the IPv4 protocol; instead 
it is a new design.  
 

5 
 

The internet protocols design is so vast and cannot 
be covered fully. The main parts of the architecture 
relating to security are discussed in detail.  
 
1.1    IPv4 Architecture 

 

The  protocol  contains  a  couple  aspects  which 
caused  problems  with  its  use.  These  problems  do 
not  all  relate  to  security.  They  are  mentioned  to 
gain  a  comprehensive  understanding  of 
the 
internet protocol and its shortcomings.  The causes 
of problems with the protocol are: 
 

1.  Address Space 
2.  Routing 
3.  Configuration 
4.  Security 
5.  Quality of Service 

 
The IPv4 architecture has an address that is 32 bits 
wide  [6].  This  limits  the  maximum  number  of 
computers  that  can  be  connected  to  the  internet. 
The 32 bit address provides for a maximum of two 
billions computers to be connected to the internet. 
The  problem  of  exceeding  that  number  was  not 
foreseen when the protocol was created. The small 
address space of the IPv4 facilitates malicious code 
distribution [5].  
 
Routing is a problem for this protocol because the 
routing tables are constantly increasing in size. The 
maximum  theoretical  size  of  the  global  routing 
tables  was  2.1  million  entries  [6].  Methods  have 
been  adopted  to  reduce  the  number  of  entries  in 
the routing table. This is helpful for a short period 
of  time,  but  drastic  change  needs  to  be  made  to 
address this problem. 
 
The TCP/IPbased networking of IPv4 requires that 
the user supplies some data in order to configure a 
network.  Some  of  the  information  required  is  the 
IP address, routing gateway address, subnet mask, 
and  DNS  server.  The  simplicity  of  configuring  the 
network  is  not  evident  in  the  IPv4  protocol.  The 
user 
network 
configuration  from  a  central  server  [6].  This  eases 

appropriate 

can 

request 

configuration  hassles  for  the  user  but  not  the 
networks administrators.  
 
The  lack  of  embedded  security  within  the  IPv4 
protocol  has  led  to  the  many  attacks  seen  today. 
Mechanisms to secure IPv4 do exist, but there are 
no requirements for their use [6]. IPsec is a specific 
mechanism  used  to  secure  the  protocol.  IPsec 
secures 
the  packet  payloads  by  means  of 
cryptography. 
IPsec  provides  the  services  of 
confidentiality,  integrity,  and  authentication  [6]. 
This  form  of  protection  does  not  account  for  the 
skilled  hacker  who  may  be  able  to  break  the 
encryption method and obtain the key. 
 
When  internet  was  created,  the  quality  of  service 
(QoS)  was 
the 
information  that  was  transferred  across  the 
network.  The  original  transfer  of  information  was 
mostly  textbased.  As  the  internet  expanded  and 
technology evolved, other forms of communication 
began  to  be  transmitted  across  the  internet.  The 
quality  of  service  for  streaming  videos  and  music 
are  much  different  than  the  standard  text.  The 
protocol  does  not  have  the  functionality  of 
dynamic  QoS  that  changes  based  on  the  type  of 
data being communicated [6]. 

standardized  according 

to 

 

1.2    IPv6 Architecture 
 
When  IPv6  was  being  developed,  emphasis  was 
placed on aspects of the IPv4 protocol that needed 
to  be  improved.  The  development  efforts  were 
placed in the following areas: 
 

1.  Routing and addressing 
2.  Multiprotocol architecture 
3.  Security architecture 
4.  Traffic control 

 
The IPv6 protocols address space was extended by 
supporting  128  bit  addresses.  With  128  bit 
addresses,  the  protocol  can  support  up  to 

3.4(cid:1499)(cid:4666)10(cid:4667)^38 machines. The address bits are used 

less efficiently in this protocol because it simplifies 
addressing configuration. 

6 
 

is  also 

simplified.  Hosts 

 
The  IPv6  routing  system  is  more  efficient  and 
enables  smaller  global  routing  tables.  The  host 
configuration 
can 
automatically  configure  themselves.  This  new 
design allows ease of configuration for the user as 
well as network administrator.  
 
The security architecture of the IPv6 protocol is of 
great  interest.  IPsec  is  embedded  within  the  IPv6 
protocol.  IPsec  functionality  is  the  same  for  IPv4 
and IPv6. The only difference is that IPv6 can utilize 
the security mechanism along the entire route [6].  
 
The quality of service problem is handled with IPv6. 
The internet protocol allows for special handling of 
certain packets with a higher quality of service. 
 
From a highlevel view, the major benefits of IPv6 
are  its  scalability  and  increased  security.  IPv6  also 
offers  other  interesting  features  that  are  beyond 
the scope of this paper. 
 
It must be emphasized that after researching IPv6 
and its security features, it is not necessarily more 
secure than IPv4. The approach to security is only 
slightly better, not a radical improvement.  
 
2.  Attacks through the Current Internet 

Protocol IPv4 

These 

security 

attributes 

 
There  are  four  main  computer  security  attributes. 
They were mentioned before in a slightly different 
form,  but  are  restated  for  convenience  and 
emphasis. 
are 
confidentiality, integrity, privacy, and availability.  
 
Confidentiality  and  integrity  still  hold  to  the  same 
definition.  Availability  means  the  computer  assets 
can be accessed by authorized people [8]. Privacy is 
the  right  to  protect  personal  secrets  [8].  Various 
attack  methods  relate  to  these  four  security 
attributes.  Table  1  shows  the  attack  methods  and 
solutions. 
 

7 
 

Table 1: Attack Methods and Security Technology [8] 

 

the 

 
Common  attack  methods  and 
security 
technology will be briefly discussed. Not all of the 
methods  in  the  table  above  are  discussed.  The 
current  technology  for  dealing  with  attacks  is 
understood  in  order  to  comprehend  the  current 
research  developments  in  security  hardware  and 
software.  
 
2.1  Common Internet Attack Methods 
 
Common  internet  attacks  methods  are  broken 
down  into  categories.  Some  attacks  gain  system 
knowledge  or  personal 
information,  such  as 
eavesdropping  and  phishing.  Attacks  can  also 
interfere with the systems intended function, such 
as  viruses,  worms  and  trojans.  The  other  form  of 
attack 
the  systems  resources  are 
consumes uselessly, these can be caused by denial 
of  service  (DoS)  attack.  Other  forms  of  network 
intrusions  also  exist,  such  as  land  attacks,  smurf 
attacks,  and  teardrop  attacks.  These  attacks  are 
not  as  well  known  as  DoS  attacks,  but  they  are 
used  in  some  form  or  another  even  if  they  arent 
mentioned by name. 
 
 

is  when 

of 

by 

and 

into 

inserts 

communications 

2.1.1  Eavesdropping 
 
Interception 
an 
unauthorized party is called eavesdropping. Passive 
eavesdropping  is  when  the  person  only  secretly 
listens  to  the  networked  messages.  On  the  other 
hand,  active  eavesdropping  is  when  the  intruder 
listens 
something 
the 
communication  stream.  This  can 
lead  to  the 
messages  being  distorted.  Sensitive  information 
can be stolen this way [8]. 
 
2.1.2  Viruses 
 
Viruses are selfreplication programs that use files 
to infect and propagate [8]. Once a file is opened, 
the virus will activate within the system.   
 
 
2.1.3  Worms 

 

A worm is similar to a virus because they both are 
selfreplicating,  but  the  worm  does  not  require  a 
file to allow it to propagate [8]. There are two main 
types of worms, massmailing worms and network
aware worms. Mass mailing worms use email as a 
means  to  infect  other  computers.  Networkaware 
worms  are  a  major  problem  for  the  Internet.  A 
networkaware worm selects a target and once the 
worm  accesses  the  target  host,  it  can  infect  it  by 
means of a Trojan or otherwise.  
 
2.1.4  Trojans 
 
Trojans appear to be benign programs to the user, 
but  will  actually  have  some  malicious  purpose. 
Trojans usually carry some payload such as a virus 
[8]. 
 
2.1.5  Phishing 

 

personal data, such as credit card numbers, online 
banking 
sensitive 
information.  

credentials, 

other 

and 

 

too  many 

requests  cannot 

IP  protocol  technology, 

2.1.6  IP Spoofing Attacks 
 
Spoofing  means  to  have  the  address  of  the 
computer mirror the address of a trusted computer 
in  order  to  gain  access  to  other  computers.  The 
identity  of  the  intruder  is  hidden  by  different 
means  making  detection  and  prevention  difficult.  
With  the  current 
IP
spoofed packets cannot be eliminated [8]. 
 
2.1.7  Denial of Service 
 
Denial  of  Service  is  an  attack  when  the  system 
receiving 
return 
communication  with  the  requestors 
[9].  The 
system  then  consumes  resources  waiting  for  the 
handshake  to  complete.  Eventually,  the  system 
cannot respond to any more requests rendering it 
without service. 
 
2.2  Technology for Internet Security 
 
Internet threats will continue to be a major issue in 
the  global  world  as 
is 
accessible  and  transferred  across  the  Internet. 
Different defense and detection mechanisms were 
developed to deal with these attacks. 
 
2.2.1  Cryptographic systems 
 
Cryptography  is  a  useful  and  widely  used  tool  in 
security  engineering  today.  It  involved  the  use  of 
codes  and  ciphers  to  transform  information  into 
unintelligible data.  
 
2.2.2  Firewall 

information 

long  as 

 

is  an  attempt  to  obtain  confidential 
Phishing 
information 
individual,  group,  or 
organization [9]. Phishers trick users into disclosing 

from  an 

A firewall is a typical border control mechanism or 
perimeter  defense.  The  purpose  of  a  firewall  is  to 
block traffic from the outside, but it could also be 

8 
 

front 

used  to  block  traffic  from  the  inside.  A  firewall  is 
the 
line  defense  mechanism  against 
intruders.  It  is  a  system  designed  to  prevent 
unauthorized access to or from a private network. 
Firewalls  can  be  implemented  in  both  hardware 
and software, or a combination of both [8].  
 
2.2.3  Intrusion Detection Systems 

 

An Intrusion Detection System (IDS) is an additional 
protection  measure  that  helps  ward  off  computer 
intrusions. 
IDS  systems  can  be  software  and 
hardware  devices  used  to  detect  an  attack.  IDS 
products  are  used  to  monitor  connection 
in 
determining  whether  attacks  are  been  launched. 
Some  IDS  systems  just  monitor  and  alert  of  an 
attack, whereas others try to block the attack.  
 
 
2.2.4  AntiMalware Software and scanners 

 

Viruses, worms and Trojan horses are all examples 
of malicious software, or Malware for short. Special 
socalled  antiMalware  tools  are  used  to  detect 
them and cure an infected system.  
 
2.2.5  Secure Socket Layer (SSL) 

 

The Secure Socket Layer (SSL) is a suite of protocols 
that  is  a  standard  way  to  achieve  a  good  level  of 
security between a web browser and a website. SSL 
is  designed  to  create  a  secure  channel,  or  tunnel, 
between  a  web  browser  and  the  web  server,  so 
that any information exchanged is protected within 
the secured tunnel. SSL provides authentication of 
clients  to  server  through  the  use  of  certificates. 
Clients present a certificate to the server to prove 
their identity. 

 

3.  Security Issues of IP Protocol IPv6 
 
From a security point of view, IPv6 is a considerable 
advancement  over  the  IPv4 
internet  protocol. 
Despite  the  IPv6s  great  security  mechanisms,  it 
still  continues  to  be  vulnerable  to  threats.  Some 

areas  of  the  IPv6  protocol  still  pose  a  potential 
security issue. 
 
The new internet protocol does not protect against 
misconfigured 
poorly 
designed 
applications, or poorly protected sites.  
 
The possible security problems emerge due to the 
following [5]:  
 

servers, 

1.  Header manipulation issues 
2.  Flooding issues 
3.  Mobility issues 

is 

 
Header manipulation issues arise due to the IPsecs 
embedded  functionality  [7].  Extension  headers 
deter some common sources of attacks because of 
header  manipulation.  The  problem 
that 
extension  headers  need  to  be  processed  by  all 
stacks,  and  this  can  lead  to  a  long  chain  of 
extension headers. The large number of extension 
headers  can  overwhelm  a  certain  node  and  is  a 
form of attack if it is deliberate. Spoofing continues 
to be a security threat on IPv6 protocol.  
 
A type of attack called port scanning occurs when a 
whole  section  of  a  network  is  scanned  to  find 
potential  targets  with  open  services  [5].  The 
address space of the IPv6 protocol is large but the 
protocol  is  still  not  invulnerable  to  this  type  of 
attack. 
 
Mobility is a new feature that is incorporated into 
the  internet  protocol  IPv6.  The  feature  requires 
special  security  measures.  Network  administrators 
need  to  be  aware  of  these  security  needs  when 
using IPv6s mobility feature. 
 
SECURITY IN DIFFERENT NETWORKS 
 
The businesses today use combinations of firewalls, 
encryption,  and  authentication  mechanisms  to 
create  intranets  that  are  connected  to  the 
internet but protected from it at the same time.  
 

9 
 

Intranets 

differ 

protocols. 

Intranet  is  a  private  computer  network  that  uses 
internet 
from 
"Extranets" 
in  that  the  former  are  generally 
restricted  to  employees  of  the  organization  while 
extranets can generally be accessed by customers, 
suppliers, or other approved parties. 
 
There  does  not  necessarily  have  to  be  any  access 
from  the  organization's  internal  network  to  the 
Internet  itself.  When  such  access  is  provided  it  is 
usually  through  a  gateway  with  a  firewall,  along 
with  user  authentication,  encryption  of  messages, 
and  often  makes  use  of  virtual  private  networks 
(VPNs). 
 
Although  intranets  can  be  set  up  quickly  to  share 
data in a controlled environment, that data is  still 
at 
tight  security.  The 
disadvantage of a closed intranet is that vital data 
might not get into the hands of those who need it. 
Intranets  have  a  place  within  agencies.  But  for 
broader  data  sharing,  it  might  be  better  to  keep 
the networks open, with these safeguards: 
  

risk  unless 

there 

is 

1.  Firewalls  that  detect  and  report  intrusion 

attempts 

2.  Sophisticated virus checking at the firewall 
3.  Enforced  rules  for  employee  opening  of  e

mail attachments 

4.  Encryption  for  all  connections  and  data 

transfers 

5.  Authentication  by  synchronized, 

timed 

passwords or security certificates 

 
It was mentioned that if the intranet wanted access 
to  the  internet,  virtual  private  networks  are  often 
used. Intranets that exist across multiple locations 
generally run over separate leased lines or a newer 
approach  of  VPN  can  be  utilized.  VPN  is  a  private 
network  that  uses  a  public  network  (usually  the 
Internet) to connect remote sites or users together. 
Instead of using a dedicated, realworld connection 
such  as 
line,  a  VPN  uses  "virtual" 
connections routed through the Internet from the 
company's  private  network  to  the  remote  site  or 

leased 

employee. Figure 3 is a graphical representation of 
an organization and VPN network. 
 

Figure 3: A typical VPN might have a main LAN at the corporate 

headquarters of a company, other LANs at remote offices or 

facilities and individual users connecting from out in the field. [14] 

 

 
 

CURRENT DEVELOPMENTS IN NETWORK 
SECURITY 
 
The  network  security  field  is  continuing  down  the 
same  route.  The  same  methodologies  are  being 
used  with  the  addition  of  biometric  identification. 
Biometrics  provides 
a  better  method  of 
authentication  than  passwords.  This  might  greatly 
reduce the unauthorized access of secure systems. 
New technology such as the smart card is surfacing 
in  research  on  network  security.  The  software 
aspect  of  network  security 
is  very  dynamic. 
Constantly  new  firewalls  and  encryption  schemes 
are being implemented.  
 
in 
The 
understanding current development and projecting 
the future developments of the field.  
 
1.  Hardware Developments 

research  being  performed 

assists 

 

Hardware  developments  are  not  developing 
rapidly. Biometric systems and smart cards are the 
only  new  hardware  technologies  that  are  widely 
impacting security. 

10 
 

The  most  obvious  use  of  biometrics  for  network 
security  is  for  secure  workstation  logons  for  a 
workstation  connected 
to  a  network.  Each 
workstation  requires  some  software  support  for 
biometric  identification  of  the  user  as  well  as, 
depending  on  the  biometric  being  used,  some 
hardware  device.  The  cost  of  hardware  devices  is 
one thing that may lead to the widespread use of 
voice  biometric  security  identification,  especially 
among  companies  and  organizations  on  a  low 
budget.  Hardware  device  such  as  computer  mice 
with built in thumbprint readers would be the next 
step up. These devices would be more expensive to 
implement on several computers, as each machine 
would  require 
its  own  hardware  device.  A 
biometric mouse, with the software to support it, is 
available  from  around  $120 
in  the  U.S.  The 
advantage  of  voice  recognition  software  is  that  it 
can  be  centralized,  thus  reducing  the  cost  of 
implementation per machine. At top of the range a 
centralized voice biometric package can cost up to 
$50,000 but may be able to manage the secure log
in of up to 5000 machines. 
 
The main use of Biometric network security will be 
to 
system. 
Maintaining password security can be a major task 
for  even  a  small  organization.  Passwords  have  to 
be  changed  every  few  months  and  people  forget 
their  password  or  lock  themselves  out  of  the 
system  by 
incorrectly  entering  their  password 
repeatedly. Very often people write their password 
down  and  keep  it  near  their  computer.  This  is  of 
course  completely  undermines  any  effort  at 
network  security.  Biometrics  can  replace  this 
security 
identification  method.  The  use  of 
biometric  identification  stops  this  problem  and 
while it may be expensive to set up at first, these 
devices save on administration and user assistance 
costs. 

current  password 

replace 

the 

 

Smart  cards  are  usually  a  creditcardsized  digital 
electronic  media.  The  card  itself  is  designed  to 
store  encryption  keys  and  other  information  used 
in 
identification 
processes. The main idea behind smart cards is to 

authentication 

other 

and 

to 

network 

providing 

provide undeniable proof of a users identity. Smart 
cards can be used for everything from logging in to 
the 
secure  Web 
communications and secure email transactions. 
 
It  may  seem  that  smart  cards  are  nothing  more 
than a repository for storing passwords. Obviously, 
someone  can  easily  steal  a  smart  card  from 
someone  else.  Fortunately,  there  are  safety 
features built into smart cards to prevent someone 
from  using  a  stolen  card.  Smart  cards  require 
anyone  who  is  using  them  to  enter  a  personal 
identification  number  (PIN)  before  theyll  be 
granted  any  level  of  access  into  the  system.  The 
PIN is similar to the PIN used by ATM machines. 
 
When  a  user  inserts  the  smart  card  into  the  card 
reader, the smart card prompts the user for a PIN. 
This  PIN  was  assigned  to  the  user  by  the 
administrator at the time the administrator issued 
the card to the user. Because the PIN is short and 
purely  numeric,  the  user  should  have  no  trouble 
remembering it and therefore would be unlikely to 
write the PIN down. 
 
But the interesting thing is what happens when the 
user inputs the PIN. The PIN is verified from inside 
the  smart  card.  Because  the  PIN 
is  never 
transmitted across the network, theres absolutely 
no  danger  of 
intercepted.  The  main 
benefit,  though,  is  that  the  PIN  is  useless  without 
the  smart  card,  and  the  smart  card  is  useless 
without the PIN. 
 
There  are  other  security  issues  of  the  smart  card. 
The  smart  card  is  costeffective  but  not  as  secure 
as the biometric identification devices. 
 
2.  Software Developments 
 
The  software  aspect  of  network  security  is  very 
vast.  It  includes  firewalls,  antivirus,  vpn,  intrusion 
detection,  and  much  more.  The 
research 
development of all security software is not feasible 
to study at this point. The goal is to obtain a view 

it  being 

11 
 

improvement  of 

of where the security software is heading based on 
emphasis being placed now.  
 
The 
the  standard  security 
software still remains the same. When new viruses 
emerge,  the  antivirus  is  updated  to  be  able  to 
guard  against  those  threats.  This  process  is  the 
same for firewalls and intrusion detection systems. 
Many  research  papers  that  have  been  skimmed 
were based on analyzing attack patterns in order to 
create smarter security software.  
 
As the security hardware transitions to biometrics, 
the  software  also  needs  to  be  able  to  use  the 
information  appropriately.  Current  research 
is 
being performed on security software using neural 
networks.  The  objective  of  the  research  is  to  use 
neural networks for the facial recognition software. 
 
Many small and complex devices can be connected 
to  the  internet.  Most  of  the  current  security 
algorithms are computational intensive and require 
substantial  processing  power. 
This  power, 
however,  is  not  available  in  small  devices  like 
sensors.  Therefore,  there  is  a  need  for  designing 
lightweight  security  algorithms.  Research  in  this 
area is currently being performed. 
  
FUTURE TRENDS IN SECURITY 
 
What  is  going  to  drive  the  Internet  security  is  the 
set  of  applications  more  than  anything  else.  The 
future will possibly be that the security is similar to 
an immune system. The immune system fights off 
attacks  and  builds  itself  to  fight  tougher  enemies. 
Similarly,  the  network  security  will  be  able  to 
function as an immune system.  
 
The  trend  towards  biometrics  could  have  taken 
place  a  while  ago,  but  it  seems  that  it  isnt  being 
actively pursued. Many security developments that 
are taking place are within the same set of security 
technology  that  is  being  used  today  with  some 
minor adjustments.   
 
 

CONCLUSION 
 
Network  security  is  an  important  field  that  is 
increasingly  gaining  attention  as  the 
internet 
expands. The security threats and internet protocol 
were analyzed to determine the necessary security 
technology.  The  security  technology 
is  mostly 
software  based,  but  many  common  hardware 
devices  are  used.  The  current  development  in 
network security is not very impressive.  
 
Originally it was assumed that with the importance 
of  the  network  security  field,  new  approaches  to 
security,  both  hardware  and  software,  would  be 
actively researched. It was a surprise to see most of 
the  development  taking  place 
in  the  same 
technologies  being  currently  used.  The  embedded 
security  of  the  new  internet  protocol  IPv6  may 
provide many benefits to internet users. Although 
some  security  issues  were  observed,  the  IPv6 
internet  protocol  seems  to  evade  many  of  the 
current popular attacks. Combined use of IPv6 and 
security tools such as firewalls, intrusion detection, 
and authentication mechanisms will prove effective 
in  guarding 
intellectual  property  for  the  near 
future.  The  network  security  field  may  have  to 
evolve more rapidly to deal with the threats further 
in the future. 
 
REFERENCES 
 
[1] Dowd, P.W.; McHenry, J.T., "Network security: it's 
time to take it seriously," Computer, vol.31, no.9, pp.24
28, Sep 1998 
 
[2] Kartalopoulos, S. V., "Differentiating Data Security 
and Network Security," Communications, 2008. ICC '08. 
IEEE International Conference on, pp.14691473, 1923 
May 2008 
 
[3] Security Overview, 
www.redhat.com/docs/manuals/enterprise/RHEL4
Manual/securityguide/chsgsov.html. 
 
[4] Molva, R., Institut Eurecom,Internet Security 
Architecture, in Computer Networks & ISDN Systems 
Journal, vol. 31, pp. 787804, April 1999 

12 
 

[16]Curtin, M. Introduction to Network Security, 
http://www.interhack.net/pubs/networksecurity. 
 
[17] Improving Security, 
http://www.cert.org/tech_tips, 2006. 
 
[18] Serpanos, D.N.; Voyiatzis, A.G., "Secure network 
design: A layered approach," Autonomous Decentralized 
System, 2002. The 2nd International Workshop on, vol., 
no., pp. 95100, 67 Nov. 2002 
 
[19] Ohta, T.; Chikaraishi, T., "Network security model," 
Networks, 1993. International Conference on 
Information Engineering '93. 'Communications and 
Networks for the Year 2000', Proceedings of IEEE 
Singapore International Conference on , vol.2, no., 
pp.507511 vol.2, 611 Sep 1993 

 
[5] Sotillo, S., East Carolina University, IPv6 security 
issues, August 2006, 
www.infosecwriters.com/text_resources/pdf/IPv6_SSot
illo.pdf. 
 
[6] Andress J., IPv6: the next internet protocol, April 
2005, www.usenix.com/publications/login/2005
04/pdfs/andress0504.pdf. 
 
[7] Warfield M., Security Implications of IPv6, Internet 
Security Systems White Paper, 
documents.iss.net/whitepapers/IPv6.pdf 
 
[8] Adeyinka, O., "Internet Attack Methods and Internet 
Security Technology," Modeling & Simulation, 2008. 
AICMS 08. Second Asia International Conference on, 
vol., no., pp.7782, 1315 May 2008 
 
[9] Marin, G.A., "Network security basics," Security & 
Privacy, IEEE , vol.3, no.6, pp. 6872, Nov.Dec. 2005 
 
[10] Internet History Timeline, 
www3.baylor.edu/~Sharon_P_Johnson/etg/inthistory.h
tm. 
 
[11] Landwehr, C.E.; Goldschlag, D.M., "Security issues 
in networks with Internet access," Proceedings of the 
IEEE, vol.85, no.12, pp.20342051, Dec 1997 
 
[12] "Intranet." Wikipedia, The Free Encyclopedia. 23 
Jun 2008, 10:43 UTC. Wikimedia Foundation, Inc. 2 Jul 
2008 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Intranet&ol
did=221174244>. 
 
[13] "Virtual private network." Wikipedia, The Free 
Encyclopedia. 30 Jun 2008, 19:32 UTC. Wikimedia 
Foundation, Inc. 2 Jul 2008 
<http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Virtual_priv
ate_network&oldid=222715612>. 
 
[14] Tyson, J., How Virtual private networks work, 
http://www.howstuffworks.com/vpn.htm . 
 
[15] AlSalqan, Y.Y., "Future trends in Internet security," 
Distributed Computing Systems, 1997., Proceedings of 
the Sixth IEEE Computer Society Workshop on Future 
Trends of , vol., no., pp.216217, 2931 Oct 1997 
 

13 
 

