Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 0

1

Introducing Basic
Network Concepts

“In the beginning, there were
no networks. Life was bad.”
—MIKE MEYERS

In this chapter, you will learn
how to:
■

Identify human and computer
networks

■

Describe the benefits of networks

■

Distinguish between the different
types of networks

N

etworks are everywhere—or so it seems. You can hardly do anything with
data that does not involve a network. Like the human networks that we are

all part of, computer networks let us share information and resources. In business,
the reliance on networks is even more pervasive than in homes or schools.
Networks help individuals and businesses alike save money, but they also help
create income. Without a doubt, networking within the home will catch on over
the next few years as it has in business. Soon, nearly all individuals in even
moderately developed nations will have networked components throughout their
homes. Those that don’t will be netologically disadvantaged because they will not
be able to learn or to function at the same level as those who are networked.
In this chapter, you’ll begin by relating networks to situations and concepts
you already know. Once you have a basic understanding of what networks are
and what they can do, it helps if you can actually begin working with them. In
fact, it is so helpful to learn the ropes of networking through hands-on guided
practice that that’s what is planned for you here. You will play the role of an
employee in a fictional company, and you’ll have to learn on the job. The more
you become the person, the more you will learn about the need for and operation
of computer networks.

xiv

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:13 PM

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 1

■

Understanding Networks

Although you are probably taking this class to learn about computer networks, and some of you probably already know how important networks
are to businesses that want to survive, we will begin this discussion as
though you are an employee in a netologically disadvantaged (my term for
those who have minimal network awareness) company. You might actually
be an employee working for such a company and trying to help it out of that
predicament, or you may know of people or companies that are in this sort
of struggle.
Lauren has recently been hired as the computer manager for SinkRSwim
Pools. Lauren is a certified networking administrator, but her new company
unfortunately has only outdated computers. The owner recognized that the
company’s lack of growth was directly tied to the employees’ lack of computer skills, so in her first meeting after being hired, Lauren was given the
authority to purchase the additional computers and create the network she
had proposed to the owner in her initial job interview. The owner gave her a
six-month timeline in which to implement networking at SinkRSwim Pools
in such a way that the workers will understand its use and welcome the new
knowledge it requires. She was also informed that the thought of learning
new computer skills frightened some long-term SinkRSwim Pools employees. The owner expects Lauren to help them become more at ease with
the computers so they will be more likely to learn the necessary skills.
Lauren’s first goal is to ease the workers’ fears by teaching them about
computers and showing them how a need for networks develops naturally.
Lauren knows that if her fellow employees understand the concept of networking, the computer network will more likely be successful in the company.
Lauren has decided to review basic network concepts with her coworkers as
she works with them on their new computers.

Human Networks
In its broadest sense, a network consists of two or more entities, or objects,
sharing resources and information. Although this book is about computer
networks, there are networks that don’t involve computers, and those
networks are everywhere. You have grown accustomed to working with
them, possibly without even knowing it.
It may not matter to you that, in a basic sense, sharing (giving or getting)
is a fundamental aspect of networking. You just know that you do it.

Family Network
Most people belong to a family network in which related people share their
resources and information. This sharing is bi-directional because even the
youngest family members share information of some sort. As the family
grows, so does the network.

• A network connects members of a
family together.

Peer Network
Outside the family, there is a community that offers a wider array of resources than the typical family can provide. Naturally, it makes sense to

Chapter 1: Introducing Basic Network Concepts

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:13 PM

1

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 2

connect the family to this community to take advantage of the wealth of resources available around town. This type of information/resource sharing
can be as simple as loaning a hammer to a neighbor, car-pooling with work
associates, or helping a friend with his or her homework. All of these activities involve sharing, or trading, resources. This kind of network is represented by a two-way relationship, a give and take among equals or peers.

Restaurant Network: The Client and the Server

• The family network connects with the
greater community.

In sidebars and the end-ofchapter exercises throughout
this coursebook, you will be
working with a real-world company called Technology Education and Acquisition Center of
Houston (TEACH) that is currently undergoing a sudden
expansion. In fact, it has just
posted an announcement in the
local newspaper, listing several
available management positions
within the company. It seems
there is an opportunity to acquire
another highly successful facility
in another part of the state, and
all the current employees are
moving. Later in the chapter,
you will find yourself roleplaying as one of the replacement candidates vying for one
of the company’s high-paying
positions.

2

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:14 PM

So, in any type of human network, there’s a lot of giving and taking. You’re
already more accustomed to the client/server perspective in networking
than you realize. For instance, when you go to dinner at a restaurant, you become a customer, or client, enjoying the food and drink prepared and served
to you by the restaurant. On the other hand, the waiter works as a server,
controlling and providing his customers with access to resources in the form
of placing orders for and delivering food items. The server knows that requests will be made of him (access is sought when an order is placed) and
that he will service those making the requests (access is granted when the
order is delivered).

• In a dining situation, it is easy to know whether you are supposed to be serving or
being served.

Contact Network
Anyone who has looked for a job knows that one of the best ways to find a
job is to network. That is, create a list of friends and associates who will help
you find the perfect job. The more people you meet and get to know, the
better your chances of obtaining work. As you develop and nurture your career, this contact network will serve you best because your role in it will

Networking Concepts

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 3

change as you gain more experience. Soon, you may be able to help
the people who helped you. And as your personal and professional
networks grow, so do your opportunities.
These examples of human networks should help you understand that networking is common between people and is not just an
activity restricted to computers. However, this book will focus on
computer networks—connecting computers and having them
communicate with each other.

Computer Networks
A computer network consists of two or more computing devices that
are connected in order to share the components of your network
(its resources) and the information you store there, as shown in
Figure 1.1. The most basic computer network (which consists of just
two connected computers) can expand and become more usable
• The more people in your network, the better your
chances of finding that perfect job.
when additional computers join and add their resources to those
being shared.
The first computer, yours, is commonly referred to as your local computer. It is more likely to be used as a location where you do work, a workstation, than as a storage or controlling location, a server. As more and more
computers are connected to a network and share their resources, the network becomes a more powerful tool, because employees using a network
with more information and more capability are able to accomplish more
through those added computers or additional resources.
The real power of networking computers becomes apparent if you enviFor the remainder of this text,
sion your own network growing and then connecting it with other distinct
the term network will be used to
networks, enabling communication and resource sharing across both netmean computer network.
works. That is, one network can be connected to another network and become a more powerful tool because of the greater resources. For example,

• Figure 1.1

A computer network can be as simple as two or more computers
communicating.

Chapter 1: Introducing Basic Network Concepts

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:15 PM

3

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 4

you could connect the network
you and your classmates develop
for this course to similarly conIdentify Your Networks
structed networks from other introYou have already seen that you have been involved in networks for a
ductory networking classes if you
long time and that computer networks are important tools for businesses.
wanted them to share your inforUse what you have learned as you answer the following questions:
mation and networked resources.
Those classes could be within
1. Which basic human network best represents the interaction
your own school, or they could be
between you and your classmates in a discussion about your
anywhere in the world. Wherever
homework assignments?
that newly joined network is, the
2. If your lab had only stand-alone computers, what would be
communication and resource sharneeded to convert it to a networked classroom?
ing activities in that new network
could then be shared with anyone
connected to your network. All you have to do is join that new network’s
community or allow its members to join yours.
In addition, a company’s cost of doing business can be reduced as a
result of sharing data (defined as a piece or pieces of information) and resources. Instead of having individual copies of the data at several locations
around the company, and needing to keep all of them similarly updated, a
company using a network can have just one shared copy of that data and
share it, needing to keep only that one set of data updated. Furthermore,
sharing networked resources (like printers) means that more people can use
a particular resource and a wider variety of resources (like different printers)
can be used by each network user. Any time a company can do more with
less, or buy fewer items to do the same job, its total costs are reduced, and it
is able to make more money per dollar spent.

Cross Check

Network Plan
Networking computers first and tracking the connections later can quickly
become confusing and unmanageable as you try to find which computer
communicates with and shares resources with which other computers. In
your human network, do you share everything with your friends? In your
family network, would you want your parents or guardians to know your
every thought? You have your information-sharing plan in your head, and
it is important to keep track of it so you don’t make a mistake and share
something where it was not intended.
Similar concerns must be considered while designing a computer network.
Before you even connect your first computers together, you should have a
plan. A network plan, therefore, is a formally created product that shows all
the network’s components and the planned connections between them.
Such a plan is also used to manage the various types of information. Your
plan should show what types of information are stored where, and who is
allowed to use each type.

Information Management
Your network plan should help you manage the information gathered,
stored, and shared between your users. If you were given an empty
three-drawer filing cabinet and told to use it to organize your company’s information, you would have an excellent (although manual) example of a filing system that needs a plan. Having an overall guide that tells you who will
4

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:16 PM

Networking Concepts

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 5

be allowed access to the three drawers will help determine what you store in
each one. Once you have that part of the plan, you could put the least-used
information in the bottom drawer, the more-used in the middle drawer, and
the most-used in the top drawer so that it is easier for your users to access
their information. Knowing who needs to know what, and its corollary—
who does not need to know what—lets you determine whether to lock a particular drawer, too.
Even when we discuss implementing a three-drawer manual filing system, the importance of having a network plan ahead of time becomes evident. If you put the limited-access material in a drawer open to all
employees, how do you keep it secure? Additional security measures (like
adding a lock to a drawer, or moving the secure information somewhere
else) may be required later.
A networking plan could tell you that as specific types of sensitive data
(like medical, personal, or payroll information) are gathered or grouped,
they should be stored higher in the hierarchical structure (ranked from most
sensitive to least sensitive), and this can save you time in the end. That plan
should specify that the access requirements are stricter for sensitive data
and reduce the number of people able to use specific types of information.
The distribution side of the networking plan, as opposed to the accumulation side of the plan discussed above, should spell out that the more an individual has access to the data in storage, the less they should be able to
share groups of information entrusted to them. For example, you may not
mind sharing your first name, but you would probably object to an instructor openly distributing all information in your school records to anyone requesting it.

The format—or the strict requirements placed on the order
and structure of how you enter
data—is very important. The
number 123456789, for instance,
could be either a zip code or a
Social Security number. If it is
formatted as 123-45-6789, you
know that it is a Social Security
number. What would you do if
you were told that your life depended on your making a payment to the bank on the date
010203? When would that payment be made? Would the payment date change if that date
were in the year-month-day
format? Of course it would,
and the payment would be
long overdue. Format, then,
is important!

Information’s Importance
If you think about the manual filing system we discussed using a filing cabinet, an important computing concept is easy to recognize. Some information is more important or more sensitive than the rest. It is usually
obvious in real filing cabinet systems, because the top drawer is usually where the most sensitive information is stored, and it is locked.
Few people in an organization have access to that information. For
example, credit card or Social Security numbers are information
that should be given the highest level of security—access to that
information is given only to a limited number of people in a
company. On the other hand, some information, such as Web
pages, newsletters, and product information, is created for
everyone to see, even outside a company. Figure 1.2
shows how this kind of information is organized into a
hierarchy of information, where the most detailed information is found at the top and the more general, less
secure information is located at the bottom. How
much information would you be willing to provide about yourself to a perfect stranger? Country of birth? Sure. State of residence? Why not?
But you might have second thoughts about
• Figure 1.2 The hierarchy of information—The more specific the
advertising your street address or phone
information becomes, the more restricted it should be.
number to a stranger.
What kind of data would you be willing to give to a stranger?

Chapter 1: Introducing Basic Network Concepts

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:16 PM

5

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 6

The collection and proper manipulation of many seemingly unimportant pieces of information,
Thinking About a Network Plan
and the effective tracking of them,
You have just learned about the need to describe information managemakes information management
ment and data hierarchies in your network plan. It can be equally imon networks so important, just as
portant when you receive data to know that such a plan is in place. Use
when you are maintaining a manwhat you have learned about creating a network plan as you answer the
ual filing system. A single piece of
following questions:
information in a data field, such as
your first name, can seem unim1. If you knew that your school’s (or your employer’s) plan
portant. However, by combining
stipulated that sharing sensitive information was to be strictly
your first name with other pieces
controlled, and you agreed with those controls, how would that
of related information, like your
knowledge affect the degree of data sensitivity that you would
last name, address, age, gender,
be willing to share over that network’s resources?
and phone number (stored in
2. Although you might choose to share some (or all) of your
other data fields), the pieces can be
personal information with selected classmates, would you feel
put together to create a data recomfortable if you thought your instructor planned on sharing
cord, which can accurately deyour whole file freely with everyone in your class without your
scribe something (or someone)
permission?
that is important—like you. Finally,
combining similar records (such
3. Even if it were not yet true, would the thought of your instructor
as records describing all your classsharing your information freely affect the amount of information
mates) creates a file that, because
you shared when someone else in authority on the network
it contains sensitive information
requested sensitive data?
from more than one source, is more
sensitive than a single record.
Information sharing, therefore, has serious security issues to be considered,
and network access to data must be evaluated carefully so that only those who
need it can access it.

Cross Check

■

Identifying the
Benefits of Networks

Ricky finds himself pondering the question, “What are networks used for?”
He is the second person brought aboard SinkRSwim Pools to enhance its
1961

1965

Leonard Kleinrock at MIT
publishes the first paper on
packet switching theory
discussing communications
using packets rather than
circuits.

First wide area network (WAN)
is created by MIT researchers
Lawrence G. Roberts and
Thomas Merrill.
■
Ted Nelson first uses the term
“hypertext.”
■
First use of Moore’s Law:
Gordon Moore, at Fairchild,
declares computing power will
double every 18 months.

6

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:17 PM

1969

A small group at Bell Labs
begins to work on what
eventually becomes UNIX.
■
ARPANET is created, the first
step in the building of the
Internet.
■
The network originally consists
of four hosts.

1970

Ray Tomlinson of BBN creates
and sends the first person-toperson e-mail over a network.
He also designates the @ sign
to separate the user name and
the host in an e-mail address.
■
The Network Control Protocol
(NCP) was created. NCP was the
first standardized network
protocol used by ARPANET.

Networking Concepts

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 7

network use. Remember, that’s where Lauren is creating a network to replace the company’s outdated computers. Ricky volunteered to help Lauren
explain the benefits of networking to the company’s workers as part of his
computer class project at school. The workers already have the new computers Lauren ordered and are happily doing more with them, but Ricky is
helping Lauren network them and is encouraging the workers to use the
network.
Ricky remembers Mike’s words at the opening of this chapter: “In the
beginning there were no networks. Life was bad.” This may have meant one
thing to Mike when he said it, but the beginning for these workers is right
now. They haven’t had networks, and they don’t see why they should need
them. Ricky decides to discuss the historical development of computers and
show how they helped other businesses.
In the early days of the personal computer (PC), during the late ’70s and
early ’80s, often a PC was used as a stand-alone computer and operated independently from other computers, as shown in Figure 1.3. When, over the
span of just those few years, their use proliferated and more PCs were found
relatively close to each other, users began sharing information. The information was either printed out or copied from one computer to another using
backup or storage devices, such as tapes, disks, or other digital storage media.
The printout or the storage device was then physically carried to another
computer where the information was reentered or copied from the portable
media into the next computer. This process was referred to as a sneakernet
because users actually had to walk from computer to computer. It was

• Figure 1.3

Stand-alone computers are operated independently.

1973

1974

1975

Vint Cerf and Bob Kahn design
TCP/IP, today’s most widely
used network protocol.
■
BBN creates TELENET, the first
packet-switched network.
■
Intel releases the
8088 processor.

PARC creates the Altos, the first
PC with a GUI, laser printer, and
a connection to the first
Ethernet network.

Chapter 1: Introducing Basic Network Concepts

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:18 PM

1976

Apple Computer founded by
Steve Jobs and Steve Wozniak.
■

MITS Altair 8800 is introduced
in Popular Electronics.
■
Bell Labs releases UNIX version 6.
■
Bill Gates and Paul Allen write a
programming language called
BASIC.

The Apple I computer is
released.

7

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 8

probably the cheapest type of network—unless the computers were large
distances apart or the information needed to be shared among many computers. Other drawbacks to sneakernets were that printouts were often
bulky, and the storage devices could hold a relatively small amount of data
compared to the large amount of output users produced.
Once computers were connected by networks, information sharing increased dramatically. People found that more data helped them make better
decisions, and companies started saving money. Many original networks
were designed to facilitate communication, but they were quickly expanded
as businesses noticed increased productivity and reduced costs.

• One sneakernet alternative was
the floppy disk, which was used to
transfer data between computers
that were not networked.

Inside Information
Computers Assist
Communication
Without computers, TEACH personnel would have a difficult time
keeping up with all that is going
on in the company. Even though
they are in close proximity to
each other, the executive section
and the training section constantly communicate over the
network. All employees send electronic mail, have Internet access,
and keep current with company
policies because they use their
network’s capabilities fully.

1977

Apple II introduced at the West
Coast Computer Faire.
■
Commodore PET is introduced.
■

Microsoft is founded by Bill
Gates (bottom left) and Paul
Allen (bottom right).

8

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:19 PM

Sharing Information
Computers increase your ability to communicate. Once you begin working
with a computer, you are likely to become more productive. However, what
do you do with that increased productivity if you are not connected to anyone? Communication requires not only someone with information to share
but also someone on the other end with whom to share it. Companies don’t
benefit by creating sheer volumes of output—they benefit when the increased output helps them make better decisions or increases the likelihood
of increased income. Having your computers networked allows you to do
both with your newfound increases.
The initial reason for developing most computer networks was to assist
users with sharing their increased output, especially between computers in
the same general vicinity, as shown in Figure 1.4. However, users wanted
not only to share information with others, they wanted to communicate
about that information after someone else had it, too. In addition to transmitting the user’s original information, computer networks enabled those
users to discuss what was being transmitted, and this resulted in even more
communication. Additional network communications techniques thus
came into being, such as e-mail and video conferencing. Furthermore, with
the increases in the sizes of networks, sharing no longer had to be concerned
with proximity. The use of networks has effectively erased distance and

1978

Apple Computer introduces
a 5.25-inch disk drive for the
Apple II.
■
Berkeley Software Distribution
(BSD) UNIX is developed at
UC Berkeley.
■
Bell Labs releases UNIX
version 7.
■
TCP is split into two protocols:
TCP and IP.

1979

Novell Data Systems starts
manufacturing computers and
creating disk operating systems.
■
Jim Ellis and Tom Truscott
develop the idea for Usenet, the
first peer-to-peer networking
program designed to exchange
files between two computers.
■
There are over 100 hosts on the
Internet.

1981

Adam Osborne introduces the
Osborne 1.
■
IBM PC introduced—uses MS
BASIC in ROM and PC DOS 1.0.
■
First time Internet is used to
describe the ARPANET.

Networking Concepts

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 9

• Figure 1.4

The ability of networks to be
joined together to form larger
networks has resulted in what is
called the Internet—a worldwide
collection of connected computers able to communicate with
each other.

Computer communication—Two computers in the same general vicinity
should be able to communicate.

time constraints. You can communicate almost instantly to anywhere in the
world that is connected to your network.
Networks are an effective way to communicate. Using networks, companies can send the same information to large numbers of employees or customers quickly and efficiently. Examples include company newsletters and
announcements for employees, as well as advertisements and purchase information for customers. Also, individual employees are more likely to
communicate with larger numbers of individuals both inside and outside
the company using e-mail, an electronic means of communicating that is
similar to mail but done on computers, usually over the Internet, over networks. E-mail is the most commonly used feature of the Internet, and its use
is growing dramatically. In fact, e-mail is fast becoming the primary choice
for much of our daily communication.

You should be aware that
there is next to no privacy when
sending e-mail. Your electronic
message can not only be intercepted and read anywhere along
its route to your ultimate recipient, but it can later be forwarded,
without your permission, to any
number of additional recipients.
You should, therefore, use care
in what you say as well as how
you say it.

Sharing Resources
In the sneakernet era, users spent huge amounts of time attempting to share
their resources. They had to physically distribute files that others needed.
Expenditures for printers and other attached computer components rose

1982

Mitch Kapor announces Lotus
1-2-3 spreadsheet software.
■
Apple introduces the Lisa, the
first commercial computer with
a purely graphical operating
system and a mouse.
■
TCP/IP is established as the
standard for the Internet.

1983

Novell’s NetWare, the first
client-server software, is
demonstrated at the National
Computer Conference.
■
The PING code is created by
Mike Muuss at U.S. Army
Ballistics Research Lab.
■
The Domain Name System
(DNS) is created and the .com,
.net, .gov, .org, .mil, and .int
extensions are designated.
■
Cisco Systems, a manufacturer
of internetworking systems, is
founded.

Chapter 1: Introducing Basic Network Concepts

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:23 PM

1984

Apple releases the Macintosh
with Mac OS System 1.
■
Apple releases a Mac with 512K
of memory, called the Fat Mac.

IBM PC AT introduced with
80286 processor and 20MB
hard drive.
■
3.5 floppy drives introduced.
■
SRI introduces the WordPerfect
word processor.

9

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 10

rapidly while the individual components themselves were not being used to
their full capacity. On top of that, the hard disk storage on each local computer
began filling up, partly because everyone had a copy of every document.
One copy of that data, and even the applications that produced it, could
more efficiently be stored in a single location and shared over a network.
The ability to share resources was another reason networks were created,
and it is still one of the main purposes for using networks. The inevitable
technology creep (the continuing need for additional investment in technology
that is required to stay current) extends the computer user’s involvement in
technology because companies expect employees to learn new systems as
they are installed. Companies also look for ways to make the best use of
their investments by sharing the purchased resources among multiple departments. Let’s look at some of the resources that are commonly shared
over computer networks.

Peripherals
Many companies start with multiple stand-alone computers. Not too long
after the initial computer purchase, however, additional components that
attach to a computer, called peripherals, like printers, scanners, and speakers, are purchased and are connected to that computer to expand its use (see
Figure 1.5). When there are multiple users and computers, it soon becomes apparent that the peripheral devices are seldom fully utilized. Money can be
saved if some of these peripherals are shared, instead of having to purchase a
separate set for each computer. Networking enables the sharing of peripherals.
The ability to share printers was very often enough of a cost savings for
companies to invest in implementing and supporting a simple network. The
company could then also realize additional cost savings as it shared additional

• Figure 1.5

1985

Microsoft ships the first version
of Microsoft Windows.
■
Bell Labs releases UNIX
version 8 to universities.
■
Intel releases the 80386
processor (also called the 386).
■
Hewlett-Packard introduces the
Laser Jet laser printer.
■
IBM Token Ring networking
system is developed.

10

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:24 PM

Common network peripherals

1986

Microsoft ships
Windows/286 1.03.
■
IBM delivers the PC Convertible
computer, the first Intel-based
computer with a 3.5-inch
floppy disk drive.

1987

Microsoft and IBM announce
OS/2, a character-mode OS.
■
Novell introduces the NetWare
network operating system.
■
There are over 2,300 hosts on
the Internet.

Networking Concepts

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 11

peripheral devices, such as faxes, modems, scanners, plotters, and virtually
any other device that connects to computers. Sharing peripherals often ends
up producing significant cost savings and more than justifies the expense of
adding a network.

Storage
Data was being loaded on the computers of every fledgling network user as
they expanded their network use. Users quickly ran out of space on their
own local computers, so the people in charge of the networks began devising ways to store data centrally so that it was accessible to any user who
needed it. Large amounts of storage capacity, usually in fast, very powerful
computers, were set up to act as storage locations for this data where access
to it could be controlled by the person storing the data.

Applications
Cost and space savings are achieved when computer users can centrally
store their software applications—the computer programs (organized sets of
computer instructions) that make a user’s computer do what needs to be
done. Applications, such as those used for preparing taxes, creating text
documents, or playing computer games, have grown in complexity and size
and often take up considerable local storage. Installing an application once
on a network and then sharing it cuts down on the storage space required
when multiple users need the same application.
Unfortunately, there are still several problems with this type of arrangement. Some applications work fine with different setups for each user (different choices for screen settings and other custom features), but normally
all such settings must be the same for all users. Sometimes, applications still
function better when installed on a user’s local computer.

Assisting Collaboration
Once you have digital information and the ability to share it instantly with others over networks, you can have multiple people working on the same process
collectively. Much of the initial communication about computer-produced
products that occurred during and immediately after the sneakernet era dealt

1989

Intel releases the 80486 chip
(also called the 486).
■
Tim Berners-Lee develops
HTML, the foundation for the
World Wide Web.

1990

Microsoft releases Windows 3.0.
■
Motorola announces its 32-bit
microprocessor, the 68040.
■
The Internet Toaster is
connected to the Internet—the
first machine remotely operated
by computer.
■
World.std.com is the first
commercial provider of dial-up
Internet access.

Chapter 1: Introducing Basic Network Concepts

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:25 PM

1991

Microsoft releases MS-DOS 5.0.
■
Linus Benedict Torvalds creates
a free version of UNIX for the
Intel platform.
■
Apple Computer launches the
PowerBook series of portable
computers.
■
Macintosh System 7.0 released.
■
Internet opened to commercial
application.

1992

Microsoft releases Windows 3.1,
the first widely accepted version
of Windows.
■
Microsoft Windows for
Workgroups 3.1 released.
■
IBM releases OS/2 2.0, the first
32-bit OS for PCs.
■
IBM introduces its ThinkPad
laptop computer.

11

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 12

Inside Information
Networks Help
Trainers
TEACH trainers are a creative
bunch when it comes to developing training materials. They also
like to share their work so they
can get everyone else’s opinions
about it before they go into production with their courses. Before
networks, that discussion was
handled using the sneakernet procedure and was greatly inhibited.
It was just too much trouble to
get that information out to everybody, wait for their input, and
then incorporate it back into the
documents before using them. It
was not practical if there was any
kind of time constraint, and there
always was.

with coworker collaboration, with coworkers discussing each other’s work
or possibly even exchanging opinions about what other users had created.
Those early computer users found that once they created something and
sent it out for review, the comments returned often led to important adjustments that would improve the original product. Such collaboration assisted
the widespread use of computers because it provided a tangible benefit that
businesses could associate with the increased costs of installing computers
in the first place.
Many software makers took this early form of collaboration into consideration and added that feature to the capabilities of their software. The newest versions of the applications included in Microsoft’s Office suite (such as
Word, Access, Excel, and PowerPoint) allow multiple users to access and
make changes to the same document at the same time. That way, all users
can work together on the original document, and changes made by any collaborating member are immediately posted within the document. A more
powerful implementation of this concept can be found in an application
designed to facilitate collaboration, such as Microsoft’s Terminal Server
(see http://www.microsoft.com/windows2000/technologies/
terminal/default.asp for more information).

Facilitating Centralized Management
Just connecting computers to a network meant that some sort of similarity
existed among them (or else the computers would not be able to communicate),
and a maintenance capability may have been available in the early networks.
However, it wasn’t until much later (in the mid ’90s) that maintenance personnel started using networks to assist with the management tasks associated
with the network’s operation and maintenance.
It came about as a direct result of standardization and interoperability,
which meant computers worked the same way and could work with each
other. This was a drastic change to the original networks, where all the different networked components had different computer programs, or software (a set of instructions that control the operation of a computer) running
them. Having more similarities meant lower support costs. These savings
were usually due to economies of scale brought about by buying more similar computers and obtaining a lower per-unit cost. Companies soon began

1993

Microsoft releases the first
version of Windows NT (3.1).
■
Microsoft releases MS-DOS 6.0.
■
Mosaic, the first web browser,
developed by National Center
for Supercomputing
Applications (NCSA).
■
Intel releases the Pentium
processor.
■
Novell releases NetWare 4.0.

12

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:25 PM

1994

Microsoft releases
MS-DOS 6.22.
■
IBM releases OS/2 Warp
(OS/2 version 3).
■
Netscape Communications
releases Netscape Navigator.
■
CompuServe, America Online,
and Prodigy add Internet access.
■
Yahoo! born in trailer on
Stanford University campus.

1995

Microsoft ships Windows 95.
■
Intel releases the Pentium Pro
microprocessor.
■
Motorola releases the
PowerPC 604 chip.
■
Sun Microsystems creates the
Java development language.
■
Toy Story, the first fully
computer animated film,
released.

Networking Concepts

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 13

directing technicians to purchase similar equipment to obtain the benefit of
those savings. Once that happened, the network could be used to help maintain those similar components, and this further increased efficiency and reduced the total amount companies would spend on a particular component
over that equipment’s usable lifetime, called total cost of ownership (TCO).

Managing Software
Using the network helped reduce software costs. Savings occurred when all
users on a network used the same software and when software was bought
in bulk quantities for a discount. Centralizing the installation of that software also reduced operation costs because the installations could be accomplished remotely—over the network. The computer programs that were
needed to perform the installations were stored on servers and made accessible
over the network. The maintenance personnel would then simply log on to
the network from a client computer and install the needed applications using the installation software stored on the server.
Within the past few years, even more savings have been achieved by
having the centralized server initiate the software installations or updates
on the client computers without the need for maintenance personnel to
actually visit any of the clients.

Maintaining the Network
Purchasing similar equipment for use on the network meant that network
maintenance costs were reduced because there were fewer dissimilar
components. Maintenance workers no longer had to attend numerous
training sessions on many different components, which meant they could
spend more time maintaining the actual components.

Inside Information
Maintenance
Enhanced over Network
Even when everyone was located
in a single facility, and more so
later when they expanded, the
TEACH maintenance personnel
were spending far too much time
and money keeping equipment
operating properly. Without a
network, they had to visit each
computer every time anything
had to be done. Additionally,
there was no incentive for employees to use even vaguely similar software to perform their
work. Despite the fact that they
were a training facility, the time
spent keeping the maintenance
technicians trained on all those
different pieces of software and
the numerous individual
computer components was just
getting out of hand.

Backing Up Data
Along those same lines, a network minimizes the time spent backing up
(saving extra copies, called backups) of necessary files. In the event of a
hardware or software failure that causes information or applications to be
lost, vital information and necessary applications can be restored if sufficient
backups exist. The backup process is normally a regular activity in a company,

1996

1997

1998

Intel releases the Pentium II chip.
■
Microsoft releases Windows NT
Workstation 4.0.
■
Apple computer buys NeXt.
■
IBM releases OS/2 Warp Server,
an OS for network servers.
■
IBM releases OS/2 Warp 4,
which can simultaneously
connect to almost any
network server.

Digital Video/Versatile Disk
(DVD) technology is introduced.
■
Macintosh OS 8 ships.
■
There are over 15 million hosts
on the Internet.
■
U.S. Robotics releases
the PalmPilot.

Chapter 1: Introducing Basic Network Concepts

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Tuesday, June 03, 2003 8:33:34 AM

Apple Computer releases
the iMac.
■
Microsoft releases Windows 98.

13

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 14

and all transactions between scheduled backups are recorded so that the
files can be restored as completely as possible. Technicians can access the
backup files and recorded transactions from a central location without having to physically visit the source computers.

■

Distinguishing Between
Network Classifications

Lauren may have been hired into her networking administration position at
SinkRSwim Pools by a forward-thinking company owner, but she has to remember that it was that forward-thinking manager who kept his workers
away from the increases in technology and did not furnish them with computers until now. She knows that even though she was given a budget, she will still
have to get her network approved by her new boss. Therefore, Lauren will only
get the network she has designed by increasing her new boss’s knowledge
about the different types of networks and convincing him that the network is
necessary as designed. She decides to explain the different ways networks can
be classified so she can elicit his input and support to come up with the choice
she has already decided upon for the company’s network.

Classifying Networks by Their Geography

There is much current debate
about the usefulness of any of the
three geographical classifications
(LAN, MAN, or WAN) now that
the Internet can effectively join all
computers.

1999

Intel unveils the Pentium III
processor.
■
Advanced Micro Devices (AMD)
releases Anthlon CPU, which
surpasses Intel Pentium III’s
clock speed.
■
Napster, a peer-to-peer filesharing program, is created. It is
an instant hit, allowing millions
of people to share music files,
but it raises copyright concerns
among music publishers.

14

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:28 PM

Networks are frequently classified according to the geographical boundaries
the network spans. Two basic geographical designations for networks—local
area network (LAN) and wide area network (WAN)—are the most common.
A third designation, metropolitan area network (MAN), is also used, although
its use has become clouded (because it might not be a clear-cut classification
anymore) as networks continue connecting to the Internet.
These three classifications, unlike the other methods used to describe
networks, are based upon the specific levels of technology they use when
going from one level to the other. The three geographical classifications are
discussed next because the geographical concepts and the increased emphasis they place on technology as you go from one level to the next still apply.

2000

2001

2002

Microsoft releases Windows XP.
■
Macintosh OS X released.

Microsoft introduces
Windows 2000 and Windows Me.
■
First large-scale denial of
service attacks shut down
major Web sites, including
Yahoo!, eBay, and Buy.com.

Mac OS X Jaguar released.
■
Microsoft releases Visual
Studio.NET.
■
Intel releases new Pentium 4 HT
processor, which offers core
speeds beyond 3 GHz.

Networking Concepts

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 15

Local Area Network (LAN)
If the network is contained within a relatively small area, such as a classroom, school, or single building, as shown in Figure 1.6, it is commonly referred to as a local area network (LAN). This type of network has the lowest
cost and least overall capability of the three geographic classifications. Because the pieces of equipment in a LAN are in relatively close proximity,
LANs are inexpensive to install. Despite their decreased capability, however, their closeness and resultant low costs typically result in the use of the
fastest technology on a LAN. Thus, this network classification usually has
the highest speed components and fastest communications equipment before the other network classifications see such equipment using the same
speeds. This is because it takes less overall investment to get the smaller network running the faster equipment. LANs, therefore, are commonly considered the building blocks for creating larger networks.

Metropolitan Area Network (MAN)
As the computers get further apart, a LAN becomes more difficult to install,
and additional measures such as additional communications equipment may
need to be employed. When the network spans the distance of a typical metropolitan city, as shown in Figure 1.7, it can be referred to as a metropolitan
area network (MAN). Although this term is beginning to lose its popular use,
the concept of the network outgrowing its local confines and requiring additional resources still applies. Much of the same technology, such as the fast
networking components and communications equipment used in LANs,
can be used in MANs, but more are required, so this classification is not
quite as technologically advanced as are LANs. Although the speeds
achieved in a MAN are typically as high as in a LAN, it requires high-speed
connections, such as fiber optics. Increasing the distance and the technology
levels increases the relative installation and operation costs of MANs.

• Figure 1.6

A LAN covers a relatively small distance.

Chapter 1: Introducing Basic Network Concepts

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:28 PM

15

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 16

• Figure 1.7

The MAN covers a somewhat wider area than a LAN.

Wide Area Network (WAN)
The MAN outgrows its usefulness when the network must expand beyond
the confines of the typical metropolitan area. When the network spans a
larger area, as shown in Figure 1.8, it is classified as a wide area network
(WAN). Because of the extensive distances over which WANs communicate,
they use long-distance telecommunications networks for their connections,
which increases the costs of the network. The Internet is just a giant WAN.

Classifying Networks by Component Roles
Another method used to classify networks focuses on the roles the networked
computers play in the network’s operation, and more specifically on which
computer controls that operation. There are two basic types of role classifications for networks—peer-to-peer networks and server-based networks. The
difference between the two revolves around which computer is in charge of
the network. A third classification, client-based networks, has come into
existence because of the increased capabilities of the typical client computer.

• Figure 1.8

16

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:29 PM

The WAN covers an extremely wide area and involves numerous transmission
technologies.

Networking Concepts

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 17

Peer-to-Peer Networks

Try This!

A peer is considered an equal. All
computers on a peer-to-peer netDetermine Organizational Needs
work can be considered equals, as
It’s time to determine the computer and networking needs of your
shown in Figure 1.9. That is to say,
company. Try this:
no one computer is in charge of
1. Refer to the TEACH organizational chart (see Lab Project 1.3, at
the network’s operation. Each
the end of this chapter) and analyze it to determine how many
computer controls its own inforcomputers the organization should have for its executive,
mation and is capable of functionsupervisory, and support personnel.
ing as either a client or a server
depending on which is needed at
2. Use the organizational chart itself, or a copy of the chart, to mark
the time.
the location of each management workstation with the letter W
Peer-to-peer networks are
enclosed in a green circle. For now, disregard the possible use of
popular as home networks and for
portable computers in your assessment.
use in small companies because
3. Using the geographical classification possibilities, determine the
they are inexpensive and easy to
TEACH network’s classification and mark the location of where
install. Most operating systems
you would put servers. Mark the server locations with the letter
(the software that runs the basic
S enclosed in a red triangle.
computer functionality) come
4. At the bottom of the TEACH organizational chart, write the
with peer-to-peer networking catotal number of servers and workstations you determined were
pability built in. The only other
necessary based upon your analysis.
cost involved with setting up a
peer-to-peer network comes into
play if a computer does not have a network interface card, or NIC (the device that physically connects your computer to your network’s cabling), already installed.
Typical initial peer-to-peer networking involves no security measures.
Rather, each peer simply shares its resources and allows others open access
to them. In fact, a peer-to-peer network becomes difficult to manage when
more and more security is added to the resources. This is because users control their own security by adding password protection to each share they
create. Shares are any resources users control on their computers, such as
document folders, printers, and other peripherals. Each shared resource can
actually have its own password. Someone wanting access to numerous
shared resources has to remember many passwords. Security on a peerto-peer network can quickly become complex and confusing.

• Figure 1.9

A peer-to-peer network. Peer-to-peer networks have no centralized control.

Chapter 1: Introducing Basic Network Concepts

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:30 PM

17

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 18

While peer-to-peer networks are inexpensive to set up, they are extremely limited in scope. The accepted maximum number of peers that can
operate on a peer-to-peer network is ten. They are, therefore, not appropriate
for larger, more secure networks.

Server-Based Networks

Most servers can actually operate as clients but rarely ever
do, because such use may interfere with their server capability,
and they are usually not in an accessible location. Typically, once
a server is set up, it is secured in
a location where users cannot access it. Only the network administrator should have access to a
server. Therefore, users do not
operate it as a workstation, and
the client functionality of servers
is rarely employed.

Unlike peer-to-peer networks that operate without central control and are
difficult to secure, a server-based network offers centralized control and is
designed for secured operations, as shown in Figure 1.10. While there are
still both clients and servers on a server-based network, a dedicated server
controls the network. A dedicated server is one that, for all practical purposes, operates solely as a server.
A dedicated server on a server-based network services its network clients
by storing data, applications, and other resources, and then providing access
to those resources when called for by a client. When a client requests a resource
such as a document, the server sends the whole resource (the document)
over the network to the client, where it is processed and later returned to the
server for continued storage.
Dedicated servers can also control the entire network’s security from
one central location or share that control with other specially configured
servers. This central network control also contributes to the economies of
scale discussed under the “Facilitating Centralized Management” section
earlier in this chapter (using similar equipment results in cheaper equipment
prices and fewer training costs) and makes the server-based network the
dominant networking model used in networks today.

• Figure 1.10

18

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:31 PM

A server-based network. Server-based networks involve centralized control.

Networking Concepts

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 19

Client-Based Networks
Client-based networks are a further refinement to the concept of a serverbased network that relieves the heavy burden on the network’s capacity resulting from frequent server-performed transactions. A client-based network takes better advantage of the server’s powerful processors and of the
increasingly powerful computers used in typical workstations. A clientbased network utilizes a client workstation’s power in processing some
functions locally while requesting additional processing from a server
whenever it is needed for increased speed.
Client-based network servers process requests from clients and return
just the results, rather than sending the original resource to the client to be
processed and returned after computations are complete. Client-based networks, therefore, take advantage of the powerful processing capabilities of
both the client and the server, as shown in Figure 1.11. This type of arrangement may include application servers (where entire computer programs are
shared from the server) and communications servers (where e-mail and
other communications media are operated).

• Figure 1.11

A client-based network. A client-based network takes advantage of the
power of both the server and the client alike.

Chapter 1: Introducing Basic Network Concepts

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:31 PM

19

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 20

Chapter 1 Review
■ Chapter Summary
After reading this chapter and completing the
Try This! exercises, you should understand the
following facts about networking:

■

The ability to share resources is another main
purpose for initiating networks.

■

Peripherals are additional components that attach
to computers to expand their use.

Identify Human and Computer Networks

■

Sharing peripherals, such as printers, often offered
enough of a cost savings for companies to invest in
networks.

■

A network consists of two or more entities sharing
resources and information.

■

Examples of basic networks include your human
network, school lunchrooms, restaurant dining,
and business contact development.

■

Large computers can be set up as storage locations
where data is offloaded and access to it is controlled
by the person storing the data.

■

The capability to share is enhanced when information
is stored on computers.

■

■

Computer networks consist of two or more
computers that are connected and able to
communicate.

Installing an application on a network and then
sharing its use cuts down on the storage space
required when multiple users need the same
application.

■

Coworkers discussing each other’s work, or
collaboration, assisted the widespread use of
computers.

■

Networks help centralize the management of
software and maintenance of computers, such
as installing upgrades and backing up data.

■

Networked computers share resources and
information.

■

Powerful networks result when additional computers
are added to the communication possibilities.

■

As more and more data becomes available over a
network, some kind of a control system must be
established.

■

The hierarchy of data should be used in network
planning.

■

Access to data stored higher up in this chain is more
strictly controlled, which means fewer people can
view that data.

■

Data is defined as a piece or pieces of information.

■

The collection, proper manipulation, and effective
tracking of data makes information management
on networks so important.

Distinguish Between the Different Types of Networks
■

Networks are frequently classified according to the
geographical boundaries spanned.

■

A network contained within a relatively small area,
such as a classroom, school, or single building, is
commonly referred to as a local area network.

■

A network that spans the distance of a typical
metropolitan area is sometimes referred to as
a metropolitan area network.

■

A network covering a larger area than a single
city is classified as a wide area network.

■

Another method used to classify networks focuses
on which computer controls the network’s operation.

Describe the Benefits of Networks
■

Computers operated independently from others
are known as stand-alone computers.

■

All computers on a peer-to-peer network can be
considered equal.

■

Sneakernet was the term used for running data
from one computer to another on disk.

■

■

Most computer networks develop to facilitate
communication, initially to share output and
later to communicate through e-mail.

Peer-to-peer networks are popular as home networks
and for use in small companies because they are
inexpensive and easy to install.

■

Server-based networks offer central control and are
designed for secured operations.

20

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:32 PM

Networking Concepts

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 21

■

A dedicated server operates solely as a server by
storing data, applications, and other resources, and
providing access to those resources when called for
by a client.

■

Client-based network servers process requests
from clients and return just the results.

■

Client-based networks take advantage of
their own powerful processors as well as
the increasingly powerful computers used
as typical workstations.

■ Key Terms List
applications (11)
backups (13)
client (2)
client-based networks (19)
collaboration (12)
computer network (3)
data (4)
dedicated server (18)
economies of scale (12)
e-mail (9)

format (5)
hierarchy of information (5)
local area network (LAN) (15)
local computer (3)
metropolitan area network
(MAN) (15)
network (1)
network plan (4)
operating systems (17)
peer-to-peer network (17)
peripherals (10)

programs (11)
server (2)
server-based network (18)
shares (17)
sneakernet (7)
software (12)
stand-alone computer (7)
total cost of ownership (TCO) (13)
wide area network (WAN) (16)
workstation (3)

■ Key Term Quiz
Use terms from the Key Terms List to complete the
following sentences. Not all the terms will be used.
1. A(n)____________________ consists of two or
more entities, or objects, sharing resources and
information.
2. A(n) ___________________ controls and provides
access to resources.
3. The ____________________ is the plan used when
controlling data access in the higher levels of
accumulated data storage.
4. When strict requirements are placed on the
order and structure of how data is entered, that
information’s ____________________ is said to
be important.

6. The process of physically carrying data from one
computer and entering it into another computer
came to be known as a(n) ____________________.
7. Additional components attached to a computer to
expand its use are called ____________________.
8. A user’s own computer is commonly referred to
as a(n)____________________.
9. The lowest geographical network classification,
also considered the building block when creating
larger networks, is the ____________________.
10. The role-based network classification where all
computers can be considered equal and no one
computer is in charge of the network’s operation
is a(n) ____________________.

5. A computer operating independently from other
computers is called a(n) ____________________.

■ Multiple Choice Quiz
1. A network consists of what minimum number of
entities sharing resources and information?
a. One
b. Two

Chapter 1: Introducing Basic Network Concepts

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:32 PM

c. Three
d. Ten
2. In network terms, your ability to decide whether
to share your food in the school’s lunchroom

21

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 22

puts you mostly in which of the following
positions?

8. Which of the following is the most often used
feature of the largest known WAN?

a. Client

a. Exchange music

b. Client/server

b. E-mail

c. Peer-to-peer

c. Games

d. None of the above

d. Centralized maintenance

3. A waiter in a restaurant fulfills which of the
following roles?

9. Which of the following cannot be considered
a peripheral device?

a. Client

a. Computers

b. Server

b. Printers

c. Peer

c. Modems

d. All of the above

d. Scanners

4. Which of the following is required before a
computer network is present?

10. Which of the following is not a purpose for
a network?

a. Two or more computing devices

a. Assist collaboration

b. Connections between devices

b. Share resources

c. Electronic resources and information to share

c. Inhibit communication

d. All of the above

d. Centralize management

5. What should be done before connecting the first
computers when initiating cross communication
between computers?

11. The cost savings usually brought about due to
buying increased numbers of an item involves:
a. Economies of scale

a. Plan

b. Network collaboration

b. Request permission

c. Communicated price comparisons

c. Grant permission

d. Client/server relations

d. Expand
6. Which of the following is true regarding the
hierarchy of data?

12. Which of the following is not a reason for reduced
maintenance costs when using networks?
a. Fewer dissimilar components

a. Data stored higher should be shared freely

b. Training

b. Access requirements are stricter at lower levels

c. Backups

c. More people should have access to the
highest level

d. Less frequent software upgrades

d. The higher your access, the less you should
share
7. Whether a nine-digit number is easily recognized
as a zip code or a Social Security number is
determined by which of the following?
a. Its magnitude
b. The sum of the digits
c. Its format
d. Its use

13. Which of the following is a geographical network
classification?
a. Client
b. WAN
c. Server
d. Peer-to-peer
14. Which of the following describes a network where
all computers are considered equal with no one
computer in charge?
a. Client
b. WAN

22

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:32 PM

Networking Concepts

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 23

c. Server

b. WAN

d. Peer-to-peer

c. Server

15. The Internet can be classified as a giant:

d. Client

a. LAN

■ Essay Quiz
1. Let’s say that you were the one hired by
SinkRSwim Pools in this chapter instead of Lauren.
If a coworker asked you to explain yourself after
you used the phrase network of computers, what
would you say to her? Elaborate so that a novice
would understand completely.
2. Chaos is happening within your network. Security
was discussed when you started working at your
current job, but not much emphasis was placed on
it at first. Now, confidential company information
is appearing in competitors’ planning sessions.
You remember the warning you were given by
your supervisor about devising a plan. Fully
discuss the concept that a hierarchy of data must
be established.
3. Assume that you are a member of the TEACH
organization’s training department. Make out a
purchase order requesting that a new training lab
in the TEACH training center be joined to the

network. Fully explain on your purchase order
why it is necessary to join this new lab to the
network and what existing components the lab
will rely upon once it is connected.
4. Explain the concept of a network client and, after
analyzing the TEACH organizational chart
once again, determine the maximum number
of network clients you would expect to have
on that company’s entire network.
5. Ricky is still out there helping Lauren enlist the
cooperation of the SinkRSwim Pools workers by
having them become network users. Help him
come up with convincing arguments that will make
those workers want to join their new workstations
to the network as soon as they take delivery.
Remember, they are computer novices and do not
yet have access to their computers, and don’t forget
to be convincing.

Lab Projects
• Lab Project 1.1
In this project, you are going to use your personal
information and apply for the TEACH employment
opportunity discussed later in Lab Project 1.3. You
will be developing a resume and a job application
form. The steps that follow identify the information
you need in your resume, along with an example of
an application format that has been used at TEACH
in the past. Plan how you will complete both your
resume and the application form, and then create
both items manually. Remember that although you
are applying for a job that interests you, someone
else may be selected. You should ensure that your
qualifications make you eligible for at least two
alternative positions.

Chapter 1: Introducing Basic Network Concepts

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:32 PM

You will need the following:
■

Bright blue and black ink pens.

■

Blank 8½ × 11 paper.

■

A ruler for creating straight edges.

■

Your own personal information gathered in
this chapter.

■

The research information you gathered about
the networking profession.

■

Your job and school history (made up, if
you wish).

■

Three references (made up, if you wish).

23

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 24

Then do the following:

•
1

•
2

Design your own application form using
the best sample you can find on the Web
as a guide if you’d like. Create the form
yourself, by hand, with bright blue lines
and black-ink printed lettering, and make
it look as professional as you can.
After you have chosen the TEACH position
you would most like to fill, complete your
form as an actual TEACH application, using
at least the following information on your
newly created form.

Be sure to include:
Name (last, first, middle initial)
Street address
City, state, zip code
Phone number
Education—List in reverse chronological order all
classes taken in the past year, giving teachers’ names,
grade for the class, and the school.
References—List at least three character references
(excluding anyone related to you or under 25 years
of age).
State whether or not you are physically capable of
performing the work required to fill the position
you have chosen.

• Lab Project 1.2
Now you will create a resume and submit it, along
with the application you created in Lab Project 1.1,
to your instructor. Using those resumes and
application forms, your instructor will choose the
company president. All other positions in TEACH
will be filled by that new president, acting as the
hiring official, by choosing from the remaining
applications according to your instructor’s criteria
discussed in class.
You will need the following materials:
■

Your application form from Lab Project 1.1.

■

A lab computer running a suitable word
processing application and connected to a
suitable printer.

■

A data or distribution CD to use in your test of
the Startup disk you create.

you would like to obtain. Your finished resume will
also have a one-inch margin formed by a black inked
box that you must draw by hand.

•
1

•
2

Then create a resume using the following
TEACH resume information and action verbs list.
TEACH Resume Information Your TEACH
resume is a one-page “word snapshot” of yourself
that you share with potential employers when trying
to convince them to invite you in for an interview.
It should be neat, clear, and concise, and should
accurately portray all your qualifications for the
position you are seeking. You should use action
words as much as possible in your resume to show
what you did and the results of your actions.
TEACH’s format includes a requirement that you
clearly state your objective concerning which job

24

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:33 PM

•
3

Include the following major categories in your
resume:
Objective
Employment History
Hobbies
Computer Expertise

Education History
Job Qualifications
Personal Information

Strive to use action verbs in your resume; here
are some samples you might use:
accomplished
analyzed
created
directed
established
improved
launched
organized
planned
reduced
revised
solved
translated

achieved
coordinated
designed
eliminated
evaluated
initiated
motivated
performed
proposed
reorganized
simplified
supported

Use your own discretion when creating your
resume layout. Do some research to become
aware of the current resume philosophy
regarding the length and data you want to
show. Remember, though, that your resume

Networking Concepts

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 25

•
•

is a snapshot of you and what you are bringing
to the company. Occasionally, you will run into
an interviewer who is intimidated by what
you have on the table, and you must be
aware of that, too.

4

Submit your completed application and your
resume to your instructor when requested.

5

Plan to be present when your application is
reviewed by the hiring official—your instructor
or designated lead student—and prepare

yourself for that review by asking yourself
hypothetical sets of questions about the position
you have chosen.
Note: If you want to apply for a particular position
but know that you do not meet the job prerequisites, you
may have to role-play just enough so that you qualify
for that position, but don’t get carried away and spoil
the application process by claiming unrealistic years of
experience or technical expertise that would actually
make you over-qualified.

• Lab Project 1.3
You now know what networks are, and what their
purposes can be in typical companies. You have also
been partially introduced to the fact that you will
become a working member of a fictional company—
TEACH in this case. It is time to better introduce you
to TEACH’s personnel and relate the company’s
present network status to what you have learned.
A company’s organizational chart can often
be used to reveal network requirements. Refer to
TEACH’s organizational chart, shown in the following illustration. When reading the following sections,
locate each person’s position within the company

Chapter 1: Introducing Basic Network Concepts

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:33 PM

as it is discussed. Remember, this scenario is fictitious. You may also have to refer back to this
TEACH organizational chart after you have your
position so you can confirm your job relationships
based on your location within the organization. You
should also note that the names used indicate the
user login name conventions you should set up with
your network.
Headquarters The president and chief executive
officer (CEO), RichardM, spent years working in the
training industry before starting the new TEACH
corporation. Just over ten years ago, RichardM and
the vice president, his
wife SheronnaM, started
the company and formed
the executive
management of TEACH
when the previous
occupants of the training
center requested a
bailout. Many things
have changed since that
time, but the corporation
remains a family
operation with their son,
RickyM, the head of
corporate administration,
and daughter, AnnaliseM,
the manager of the
sales department.
AnnaliseM recently
worked as a teacher in
the public school system
for many years and came
back to TEACH to help
increase sales. The last
employee at the corporate
office is the receptionist,
25

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 26

LindaK, who performs much of the company’s data
entry while acting as the focal point for all customer
on-site interaction.
Training Center All other corporate activities are
accomplished in the separately maintained training
center section. These include training-center
management (two shifts), document production,
off-site training development, maintenance, web
development, content development, processing,
inventory control, center administration, and
operation of an independent consulting department.
RichardM, temporarily also acting as the training
manager, brought with him to the center significant
previous management training and experience, and
a high level of involvement in computer technology.
RichardM’s night-shift manager until just recently
was HarryS, who was promoted two months ago
from the manuscript-processing department. HarryS
and his trainers just came back to the day shift until
after the present sales slump and business needs
again require a night shift’s coverage.
EzraO is the center’s maintenance department
supervisor, where he also supervises the document
production section run by HenryP. Both EzraO
and HenryP have been with the company from its
formation in 1992. KarenD, the online course development manager, has a master’s degree in computer
science and has worked directly with RichardM on
many projects in the past. CamilleG is the human
resources manager, assists with inventory control,
and has significant experience with training center
operations at all levels. MaryT is the training center’s
consulting manager.
SteveR was just recently put in charge of off-site
training. Inventory control, purchasing, and shipping/receiving are handled by WassimJ, who recently transferred to the center from one of the
vendors that previously supplied TEACH off-site
trainers. Training-center administration functions
are handled by MarieC, who also acts as the purchasing representative, controlling all input and
output documents. In addition, there are 20 hourly
employees working at the center in their respective
departments.
Now that you have some background information about TEACH, you should be aware of the
company’s employment needs and begin thinking
about being “hired” into one of those impending va-

26

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:34 PM

cancies. In this activity, you will view the announced
vacancy in TEACH and begin investigating and
making some decisions about which position will
best fit your desired network involvement.
You will need the following materials:
■

The TEACH Help Wanted advertisement
(shown below)

■

Access to the Internet (in the classroom, at
home, or somewhere on campus)

■

A copy of your own personal information
gathered earlier in this chapter

Then read the TEACH employment announcement below and decide which of the listed jobs you
might be able to apply for based upon what you
want to do in this course. Remember, you will be assuming that role for the rest of the course. However,
you can later apply for another position that is more
advanced. List two alternative choices.

•
1

Open your Internet browser and initiate a
search using the words “Occupational Outlook
Handbook” as shown in the following
illustration. This will search the Internet and
return information that may assist you with
deciding which job will best suit you. Your

Networking Concepts

Color profile: Generic CMYK printer profile
Composite Default screen

BaseTech / Networking Concepts / team / 223089-4 / Blind Folio 27

computer’s desktop and your Internet browser
will likely look different from those used in
this and all other exercises throughout this text.
That should not affect your results.

•
5

•
2

•
3

Scroll through the returned results and locate
the one for Occupational Outlook Handbook. It will
likely be the first one in your list. Click the
Occupational Outlook Handbook’s link to go to
that site. If, for some reason, it is not returned in
your search, enter http://www.bls.gov/
oco/ in your browser’s address field and press
the ENTER key.
Click the Occupational Outlook Handbook’s
link to go to that site. Once there, enter the term
“networking” in the Search by Occupation
window field in the upper-right hand corner
of the web site, as shown next.

•
6

•
4

Read the article on this group of computer
careers. Pay particular attention to the section
on networking, shown in the following
illustration, and the other sections on Working
Conditions, Employment, Training, Job
Outlook, and Earnings. Apply what you read to
the decision you are trying to make regarding
your TEACH employment possibilities.

Scroll to and click the return link entitled
Systems Analysts, Computer Scientists, and
Database Operators/Administrators.

Chapter 1: Introducing Basic Network Concepts

P:\010Comp\BaseTech\089-4\ch01\ch01.vp
Monday, June 02, 2003 3:12:39 PM

Prepare a summary of this site’s information,
and submit a copy of your work to your
instructor, along with four other summaries
of similar sites you locate by following the
links at the bottom of this initial site. Keep
your information handy in case you need it
again during this course. Additional links
you might use to obtain information are
http://computerjobs.com and
http://www.dice.com.

27

