 

ICO lo 
 
Notification of PECR security breaches  

 
 
Privacy and Electronic Communications 
Regulations 

Contents 

 
Introduction ............................................................................. 2 
Overview ................................................................................. 2 
Relevant security breaches ........................................................ 3 
What is a service provider? ................................................... 3 
What is a personal data breach? ............................................ 6 
Breaches of encrypted information ........................................... 6 
Notifying the ICO ..................................................................... 6 
Within 24 hours of detection ................................................... 7 
What information to include .................................................... 8 
What happens next ................................................................ 9 
Notifying customers ................................................................ 10 
If a breach is likely to adversely affect them ........................... 10 
What to tell customers ......................................................... 11 
When and how to notify customers ........................................ 11 
Keeping a log of security breaches ............................................ 12 
More information .................................................................... 13 

 
 
Notification of PECR security breaches 
20150319 
Version: 2.2 

 

Introduction 

1.  The Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC Directive) 

Regulations 2003 (PECR) provide rules about sending 
marketing and advertising by electronic means, such as by 
telephone, fax, email, text and picture or video message, or by 
using an automated calling system. PECR also include other 
rules relating to cookies, telephone directories, traffic data, 
location data and security breaches.  

2.  An overview of the main provisions of PECR can be found in 

The Guide to Privacy and Electronic Communications.  

3.  This is part of a series of guidance, which goes into more detail 

than the Guide, to help organisations fully understand their 
obligations and promote good practice.  

4.  This guidance explains to organisations who provide electronic 
communications services to the public when and how to notify 
the ICO about a security breach. 

Overview 

 
  This guidance applies to organisations providing electronic 

communications services to the public (eg telecoms providers 
and internet service providers). 
 

  Service providers must notify the ICO that a personal data 

breach has occurred within 24 hours of becoming aware of the 
basic facts. Full details must be provided as soon as possible. 
The ICO provides a secure online form for all notifications. 
 

  If the breach is likely to adversely affect individuals, the service 
provider must also notify those individuals without undue delay. 

 
  Service providers must also keep a log of any breaches, and 

should submit this to the ICO on a monthly basis. 

 

 
 
Notification of PECR security breaches 
20130319 
Version: 2.2 

 

2 

 

Relevant security breaches 

5.  Under regulation 5A of PECR, service providers have a specific 

obligation to notify the Information Commissioner  and in 
some cases their own customers  about a personal data 
breach. They are also required to keep a log of those breaches. 

What is a service provider? 

6. 

In essence, a service provider is someone who provides any 
service allowing members of the public to send electronic 
messages. It will include telecoms providers and internet 
service providers. 

7.  Regulation 5(1) of PECR defines a service provider as a 

provider of a public communications service. Regulation 2 
incorporates further relevant definitions from the 
Communications Act 2003. 

8.  A public communications service is defined in section 151 of 

the Communications Act 2003 as any electronic 
communications service that is provided so as to be available 
for use by members of the public. What constitutes electronic 
communications is further defined in section 32  in short, any 
electrical, magnetic or electro-magnetic signals (including 
speech, music, sounds, visual images or data of any 
description) conveyed over a transmission system. 

9.  However, the definition excludes content services. Section 

32(7) of the Communications Act 2003 defines a content 
service as: 

 
so much of any service as consists in one or both of the 
following 
 
(a) the provision of material with a view to its being 

comprised in signals conveyed by means of an electronic 
communications network; 

 
(b) the exercise of editorial control over the contents of 

signals conveyed by means of such a network. 

 

 
 
Notification of PECR security breaches 
20130319 
Version: 2.2 

 

3 

 

10.  So, for example, a shopping portal or an online newspaper 

would be a content service, and not an electronic 
communications service. 

11.  Organisations will therefore need to consider a range of factors 

to determine whether they are service providers with 
notification obligations under PECR. Any organisation which 
meets the following criteria is likely to be a service provider: 

  it provides a service which transmits electronic signals (and 

is not purely providing content); 

  the service is available to members of the public; 

  the service is provided as a primary activity, rather than as a 
supplementary service such as wi-fi provided in a pub or on a 
train; and 

  if there are multiple organisations involved in providing the 

service, this organisation directs and controls the provision of 
service to the end user. 

12.  This is not intended to be an exhaustive list, and organisations 

will need to give full consideration to their own specific 
circumstances. The flowchart on the next page summarises the 
steps organisations need to go through to determine whether 
they are service providers, and therefore whether they are 
required to notify personal data breaches to the ICO. 

13.  It is useful to remember that the purpose of these provisions is 

to protect individuals data and privacy in the context of their 
electronic communications. Therefore it is important for 
organisations to consider the type of personal data they hold 
and whether any security breach could adversely affect an 
individual  for example, by causing financial loss, reputational 
damage or identity fraud. If an organisation does not hold this 
type of data, it is unlikely to be caught by these provisions. 

14.  If an organisation is responsible for delivering part of the 

service but does not have a direct contractual relationship with 
end users, it does not have to notify the ICO of a personal data 
breach  but it must immediately notify the organisation that 
does have the contractual relationship with end users, and that 
organisation must then notify the ICO. 

 

 

 
 
Notification of PECR security breaches 
20130319 
Version: 2.2 

 

4 

 

 
 

Q1: Does the organisation provide a service allowing 
members of the public to send electronic messages  
eg internet access or a telecoms service? 

 

Yes   
go to Q2 

No   
not a service provider 

Q2: Does the organisation provide a content service 
 eg a shopping portal or an online newspaper? 

Yes   
go to Q3 

No   
go to Q4 

Q3: Does the organisation also control the means of 
communicating that content? 

Yes   
go to Q4 

No   
not a service provider 

Q4: Does the organisation operate or deliver the 
technology or infrastructure behind the service as 
well as facilitating access to it, so that it is the 
person directing and controlling the provision of that 
service? 

Yes   
It is a service 
provider and must 
notify personal data 
breaches to the ICO 

 
 
Notification of PECR security breaches 
20130319 
Version: 2.2 

 

No   
not a service provider 

5 

 

What is a personal data breach? 

15.  A personal data breach is defined in PECR as: 

 
a breach of security leading to the accidental or unlawful 
destruction, loss, alteration, unauthorised disclosure of, or 
access to, personal data transmitted, stored or otherwise 
protected in connection with the provision of a public 
electronic communications service. 
 

16.  In short, there will be a personal data breach whenever any 

personal data is accidentally lost, corrupted or disclosed, or if 
someone accesses it or passes it on without proper 
authorisation.  

17.  A personal data breach is broadly defined as an incident which 

affected the availability, integrity or confidentiality of the 
personal data. This therefore includes a network intrusion by 
an unauthorised third-party and also a deliberate or accidental 
action by the service provider. For example, an employee 
causing the unintended deletion of personal data and no 
appropriate back-up exists would constitute a personal data 
breach. There is no threshold for how serious the breach must 
be  all breaches must be notified. 

18.  More information on what exactly constitutes personal data is 

available on our guidance pages. 

Breaches of encrypted information 

19.  If the personal data was encrypted to an appropriate standard, 

and the decryption key remains secure, service providers 
should strictly speaking still notify us of the breach. However, 
the ICO is unlikely to take formal enforcement action against 
an organisation that fails to notify us of a breach if the 
information was properly encrypted and remains secure. 

Notifying the ICO 

20.  Regulation 5A(2) of PECR states: 

 
5A.(2) If a personal data breach occurs, the service provider 

 
 
Notification of PECR security breaches 
20130319 
Version: 2.2 

 

6 

 

shall, without undue delay, notify that breach to the 
Information Commissioner.   
 

21.  From 25 August 2013, European Commission Regulation 

611/2013 (the Notification Regulation) sets out further rules 
about exactly how and when to notify, and what the notification 
must contain. Service providers must now notify the ICO of any 
personal data breach within 24 hours of detection.  

Within 24 hours of detection 

22.  Article 2(2) of the Notification Regulation states: 

 

 

The provider shall notify the personal data breach to the 
competent national authority no later than 24 hours after the 
detection of the personal data breach, where feasible. 
 
The provider shall include in its notification to the competent 
national authority the information set out in Annex I. 
 
Detection of a personal data breach shall be deemed to have 
taken place when the provider has acquired sufficient 
awareness that a security incident has occurred that led to 
personal data being compromised, in order to make a 
meaningful notification as required under this Regulation. 

23.  In other words, service providers must tell us within 24 hours 
of becoming aware that a personal data breach has occurred. 
As soon as they have enough information to confirm that there 
has been a breach and provide some basic facts, they must 
notify, even if they cant yet provide full details. 

24.  We do accept that in many cases it will not be feasible to 

provide us with full details within 24 hours. In such cases, 
article 2(3) of the Notification Regulation requires that service 
providers should still make an initial notification within 24 
hours, essentially just to tell us that they have detected a 
breach. They should then follow this up with a second 
notification within three days of the initial notification, to 
provide further information. 

25.  If the service provider still cannot provide full details within 

that extra three days, it should still submit the second 

 
 
Notification of PECR security breaches 
20130319 
Version: 2.2 

 

7 

 

notification with as much information as possible, together with 
a reasoned justification for the further delay. It should then 
send us the remaining information as soon as possible.  

26.  We accept that service providers may need to undertake an 
investigation to understand exactly what has happened and 
what needs to be done to mitigate the breach, and that in 
many cases this will take longer than three days. However, 
they must still notify us of the existence of the breach within 
24 hours, and submit a second notification within three days 
justifying any further time required to investigate. We will 
expect service providers to prioritise the investigation, to give 
it adequate resources, and expedite it as a matter of urgency. 
They must provide us with any missing details as soon as they 
have completed their preliminary investigations  we would 
expect that this should not normally take longer than two 
weeks. 

What information to include 

27.  The initial notification (within 24 hours) must always include 

the following summary information: 

 

  The name of the service provider. 

 

  The name and contact details of the data protection officer 

or other contact point where more information can be 
obtained. 
 

  Whether it is an initial notification or a full notification. 

 

  The date and time of the breach (or an estimate) and the 

date and time of detection. 
 

  The circumstances of the breach (eg theft, loss, copying). 

 

  The nature and content of the personal data concerned. 

 

  Technical and organisational measures applied (or to be 

applied) to the affected personal data. 
 

  Relevant use of other providers (where applicable). 

    

 
 
Notification of PECR security breaches 
20130319 
Version: 2.2 

 

8 

 

28.  If possible, the initial notification should also include the more 

detailed information set out below. Otherwise, this should be 
included in the second notification, or as soon as possible after 
that: 

 

  A summary of the incident that caused the breach, including 

the physical location of the breach and the storage media 
involved. 
 

  The number of individuals concerned. 

 

  The potential consequences and potential adverse effects on 

those individuals. 
 

  The technical and organisational measures taken to mitigate 

those potential adverse effects. 
 

  The content of any notification to customers. 

 

  The means of communication used to notify customers. 

 

  The number of customers notified. 

 

  Whether the breach affects individuals in other EU member 

states. 
 

  Any notification of other data protection authorities. 

 

  If all these details cannot be included in the second 

notification, a reasoned justification for the further delay. 

    

29.  In line with the Notification Regulation, we now provide a 

secure PECR security breach notification web form for service 
providers to use to notify us of breaches. Additional documents 
can be attached to this form if necessary.  

What happens next 

30.  We will consider the information provided to assess whether 

the service provider is complying with its obligations under 
PECR, including the duty to take appropriate technical and 
organisational measures to safeguard the security of its 
service, the duty to notify us of a breach, and the duty to notify 
customers of breaches adversely affecting their privacy. 

 
 
Notification of PECR security breaches 
20130319 
Version: 2.2 

 

9 

 

31.  We will contact service providers within two weeks of their 

notification to indicate what the next steps will be. 

Notifying customers 

32.  Regulation 5A(3) of PECR states: 

 

 

5A.(3) Subject to paragraph (6), if a personal data breach is 
likely to adversely affect the personal data or privacy of a 
subscriber or user, the service provider shall also, without 
undue delay, notify that breach to the subscriber or user 
concerned.   

33.  In other words, service providers must also notify their 

customers if the breach is likely to adversely affect them. 

If a breach is likely to adversely affect them 

34.  Whether the breach is likely to adversely affect individuals is 

primarily a decision for the service provider, based on the 
circumstances of the case. Service providers should consider 
the following factors: 

  the nature and content of the personal data. 

  whether it includes sensitive personal data, as defined in the 

DPA, or other details people might consider intrusive  
especially financial information, location data, internet log 
files, web browsing histories, email data or itemised call lists. 

  what harm could be caused to the individual  and in 

particular whether there is a threat to physical safety or 
reputation or a risk of identity theft, fraud, financial loss, 
psychological distress or humiliation. 

  who now has access to the data, to the extent this is known. 

35.  A service provider does not have to notify customers if the 
Information Commissioner confirms that he is satisfied the 
information was properly encrypted when the breach occurred. 

 
 
Notification of PECR security breaches 
20130319 
Version: 2.2 

 

10 

 

What to tell customers 

36.  Any notification to customers must include the following 

information: 

 

  The name of the service provider. 

 

  The name and contact details of the data protection officer 

or other contact point where more information can be 
obtained. 
 

  A summary of the incident causing the breach. 

 

  The estimated date of the incident. 

 

  The nature and content of the personal data concerned (and 

in particular whether it included sensitive personal data, 
financial information, location data, internet log files, web 
browsing histories, email data or itemised call lists). 
 

  The likely consequences of the breach on the individual 

concerned (and in particular whether there is a risk of 
identity theft or fraud, physical harm, distress or damage to 
reputation). 
 

  Measures taken by the provider to address the breach. 

 

  Measures the individual could take to mitigate any possible 

adverse effects of the breach. 

    

37.  We recommend that the notification includes a helpline number 

or web address if possible. It must be in clear and simple 
language, and must not include any marketing messages or 
other content. In particular, it should give clear, specific advice 
on steps the individuals can take to protect themselves from 
harm, and explain what the service provider is willing to do to 
assist them. 

When and how to notify customers 

38.  Service providers must notify affected customers without 

undue delay  in other words, as soon as they have sufficient 
information about the breach. If doing so would put a proper 
investigation of the breach at risk, a service provider can ask 

 
 
Notification of PECR security breaches 
20130319 
Version: 2.2 

 

11 

 

the ICO to approve a delay in notification until it has completed 
its investigation.  

39.  The means of communication should be prompt and secure. It 

should be a specific message about the breach, and not be 
combined with a communication on another topic. 

Keeping a log of security breaches 

40.  Service providers are also required to keep a log of security 

breaches. Regulation 5A(8) of PECR states: 

 

 

5A.(8) Service providers shall maintain an inventory of 
personal data breaches comprising 

(a) the facts surrounding the breach, 

(b) the effects of the breach, and 

(c) remedial action taken   

 
which shall be sufficient to enable the Information 
Commissioner to verify compliance with the provisions of this 
regulation. The inventory shall only include information 
necessary for this purpose. 

41.  We have produced a template log to help you record the 

information you need. To ensure that all breaches have been 
properly notified to us, service providers should submit their 
completed log to us on the first working day of each month. As 
with breach notifications, completed logs should be submitted 
using our secure notification form. Service providers should 
simply select the completed monthly log option and attach a 
copy of their log.  

42.  If there have not been any personal data breaches in a 

particular month, service providers can email us at 
datasecuritybreach@ico.org.uk to confirm a nil return. As nil 
returns do not have to be sent securely, there is no need to use 
the online form. 

43.  Strictly speaking, PECR does not require this monthly return. 
However, we believe that this remains a useful exercise as it 
will demonstrate that service providers are monitoring their 
security properly and taking their responsibilities seriously. If 

 
 
Notification of PECR security breaches 
20130319 
Version: 2.2 

 

12 

 

we do not receive a monthly return from a service provider, 
this may trigger further investigation. 

44.  We will also inspect logs of personal data breaches during PECR 
audits. We will use the logs and any other relevant information 
that comes to our attention to check that service providers are 
complying with their obligations under PECR, including the duty 
to maintain a log and notify us of any personal data breaches. 

45.  As the ICO is subject to the Freedom of Information Act, we 

may receive requests for a service providers logs and 
associated information. We will take the service providers 
views into account when considering any request. 

46.  We will usually keep the logs for two years; longer if the 

information leads to us taking formal regulatory action. We will 
also retain a summary record for as long as is necessary to 
help inform our future work, but no individuals will be 
identifiable from this record. However, service providers may 
need to keep their logs for longer than this for their own 
business purposes. 

More information   

48.  Additional guidance is available on our guidance pages with 

more information on other aspects of PECR and the Data 
Protection Act. 

49.  This guidance has been developed drawing on ICO experience.  

Because of this it may provide more detail on issues that are 
often referred to the ICO than on those we rarely see. The 
guidance will be reviewed and considered from time to time in 
line with new decisions of the Information Commissioner, 
Tribunals and courts.  

50.  It is a guide to our general recommended approach, although 

individual cases will always be decided on the basis of their 
particular circumstances. 

51.  If you need any more information about this or any other 

aspect of PECR, please contact us: see our website 
www.ico.org.uk.   

 
 
Notification of PECR security breaches 
20130319 
Version: 2.2 

 

13 

