Volunteers-In-Parks

National Park Service
U.S. Department of the Interior

www.nps.gov/volunteers

You are a Very Important Person

About Volunteers-In-Parks

Volunteer with the National Park Service (NPS) 
and help care for these special places.

Volunteers-In-Parks (VIPs) work side-by-side 
with National Park Service employees and 
partners in parks from Maine to Hawaii, from 
Alaska to Florida, in big cities and small towns, 
even in remote wilderness areas. 

There are more than 390 national parks throughout the United States 
and its territories. Whether you work behind the scenes or with park 
visitors, you can make a difference by helping to connect people with 
their parks.

Become a VIP and put yourself at the heart of the park experience. 

These are a few of the many opportunities available that 
require  a  wide  variety  of  talents,  skills,  and  abilities.  VIP 
positions can be highly competitive depending on location 
and  type  of  activity.  VIPs  should  be  in  good  health  to 
successfully  carry  out  their  duties  and  responsibilities. 
A  medical  exam  may  be  required  for  some  volunteer 
positions. Some opportunities may 
also  require  a  background 
investigation due to increased 
security.  Contact  the  park 
volunteer  manager  if  you 
have questions by visiting 
nps.gov and selecting the  
park of your choice.

Who can be a VIP?
Anyone can be a VIP. Individuals, couples, families, students, 
and organized groups can volunteer. Those under 18 years 
of age may volunteer with the official, signed permission of 
a parent or guardian. We welcome Volunteers-In-Parks from 
all over the United States and the world.

What do VIPs do?
Volunteers-In-Parks play an ever-increasing role in national 
parks doing a variety of jobs. Here is a sampling of volunteer 
activities that may interest you:

Working at an information desk answering visitor questions;
Presenting living history demonstrations in period costume;
Building fences, painting buildings, and making cabinets;
Giving guided nature walks and evening campfire programs;
Assisting with preservation of museum artifacts;
Maintaining trails and building boardwalks;
Designing computer programs or park websites;
Serving on a bike, horseback, or beach patrol.

How to Become a VIP

Application

Its a piece of heaven, and I get to work here!

Complete the application on the Web
Volunteer  program  information,  opportunities,  events, 
and activities are featured on nps.gov/volunteer. You may 
also  visit  volunteer.gov/gov  to  search  the  numerous  NPS 
VIP  opportunities  and  to  apply  on-line.  Your  electronic 
application goes directly to the parks volunteer manager. If 
you are interested in a particular site that is not listed, visit 
the parks web page at nps.gov for contact information.

Complete the application on this folder
If you do not wish to apply online, complete and mail or 
fax this application. If you select more than one park, send 
a copy to each. Be specific in describing your talents, skills, 
and interests to enable the VIP Manager to better match 
your skills with the parks needs.

VIP, Grand Canyon National Park, Arizona

The VIP Manager will review your application
If  your  application  meets  the  parks  needs,  you  will  be 
contacted for an interview or to discuss further details. A 
park may find that there is no match with their current needs. 
You will be notified in either case.

If you are selected
When selected as a VIP, you and your supervisor will discuss 
and  sign  an  agreement  that  describes  your  duties  and 
responsibilities,  outlines  a  tentative  work  schedule,  and 
includes  any additional details of the volunteer arrangement. 
To meet increased security concerns, some volunteer jobs 
may require a background investigation. After appropriate 
training and orientation, you will begin work as a VIP with 
the National Park Service. You are a Very Important Person.

Working as a VIP
As a VIP you will represent the National Park Service, work in 
unique settings, preserve this countrys natural and cultural 
legacy, and help visitors discover the resources, meanings, 
and values found in your national parks.

out-of-pocket  expenses  may  also  be  available.  You  will 
be covered for workers compensation in the event of an 
injury while on duty and, in the event of property damage 
or personal injury, you will be covered for tort claim liability.

Based  on  your  job  assignment,  you  may  wear  an  official 
volunteer  uniform.  Park  housing  and  reimbursement  for 

Volunteer time can be counted as work experience for future 
jobs, but does not count towards Federal Civil Service time 
if you should later become a Federal employee.

Continued on other side...

The National Park System

Application

For More Information

Every day is a learning experience. Ive never had a dull day.

VIP, Boston National Historical Park, Massachusetts

Information Summary
Visit nps.gov/volunteer or volunteer.gov/gov to search  
for volunteer positions
Go to nps.gov for park contact information 
Email us at volunteer@nps.gov
Write us:
National Park Service
1849 C Street NW, 2450
Washington, DC 20240
Consult your local library for computer access 
or books, magazines, and other materials 
on your national parks.
Contact your local tourism office  
or volunteer center for information on 
national parks and volunteering.

International Volunteers
Additional information and procedures 
on how to become an International 
VIP are available on the internet at 
nps.gov/oia/topics/ivip/ivip.

