From  Major  Driver  of  Deforestation  and  Greenhouse  Gas  Emissions  to 
Forest Guardians? New Developments in Brazils Amazon Cattle Industry 

Nathalie Walker, Barbara Bramble and Sabrina Patel  
National Wildlife Federation 

December 2010 

Cattle and Deforestation in Brazil 

 

 
In the past decade, deforestation has 
accounted for over 50% of Brazils 
annual greenhouse gas (GHG)
emissions1, ranking it as the worlds 
third largest emitter of GHGs, after 
China and the US2. Between the years 
2000 and 2005, half of all tropical 
deforestation occurred in Brazil.3  
 
Cattle ranching in the Brazilian 
Amazon drives over three-quarters of forest clearing and is a source of other 
environmental and social concerns, including bonded labor4 and land-
grabbing5. Recent success in reducing deforestation for cattle expansion is 
greatly improving the chances for Amazon forest conservation and reduction 
of GHG emissions. 

The role of ranching in contributing to Amazon deforestation has been recognized for decades, 
but the Brazilian Amazon is enormous, government institutions have been largely absent on the 
frontier and they have been unable to enforce laws. This has created a situation in which many 
ranchers do not acquire or register their land legally. An additional complication is that cattle can 
be moved hundreds of miles from ranches to slaughterhouses, and hides are transported 
thousands of miles from slaughterhouses to shipping ports; so buyers, therefore, are not aware of 
their products origins. Brazil has the worlds largest commercial cattle herd and is the largest 
exporter of beef and leather    with exports totaling over US$5 billion/year. Many products make 
their way to into major leather brands via processing in Italy and China and the demand is 
growing. Brazilian beef and leather exports have increased almost four times in the past decade6 
and Brazil has plans to double its share of the global beef trade by 2018.7 

Recent Action to Reduce Deforestation 

In the past 18 months, significant strides have been taken towards solving cattle-raisings impacts on 
rates of deforestation. This has been spurred by influential NGO reports detailing the environmental and 
social impacts of the cattle industry. Reports by Greenpeace and Amigos da Terra, Amazonia-Brasileira 
last year showed how major meat and leather brands were selling products sourced from ranches 
implicated in illegal deforestation, and how the Brazilian National Development bank (BNDES) was the 
major funder of a rapid expansion of slaughterhouses into the Amazon. 8 Campaigns by NGOs put 
pressure on Brazilian meatpackers and international retailers.  
 
Because there has been no comprehensive traceability system in place, meat and leather retailers and 
brands were unable to determine whether or not their supplies were tainted with deforestation. 
Following the release of these reports and campaigns, the largest meatpackers in Brazil and major 
leather brands announced new policies against deforestation in their supply chains. 

Enforcement 

Monitoring & Tracking 

At the same time, under threat of prosecution by 
the Federal Public Prosecutors Office in Para state, 
the major slaughterhouses signed an agreement 
(Terms of Adjustment of Conduct, known as the 
TAC) that from February 2010 they would only buy 
cattle from ranchers registered with the Para State 
Rural Environmental Register (Cadastro Ambiental 
Rural, or CAR). 9  A similar agreement was later 
signed in Mato Grosso state, the largest cattle 
producing state in the Amazon. In order to obtain 
the CAR, ranchers must provide the GPS 
coordinates of their properties boundaries. Brazils 
state of the art deforestation monitoring system 
can be used to detect whether there is new 
deforestation within these ranch boundaries. 
 
Paras Federal Public Prosecutors Office also 
warned Brazils largest supermarket chains that 
they too could face prosecution if they did not act 
to avoid purchasing meat originating in ranches 
breaching environmental laws. As a result of both 
government and civil society action, the impacts of 
deforestation in remote areas of the Amazon were 
linked to major, international meat and leather 
retailers and brands; and a willingness to 
implement change was shown throughout the 
supply chain. 

On October 5th, 2009, Brazils largest 
slaughterhouses, (JBS-Bertin, Marfrig and Minerva) 
signed an agreement with Greenpeace setting out a 
timeline by which they would only buy from 
ranches which they can show have no deforestation 
from that date.  The slaughterhouses started by 
obtaining one geo-referenced location point from all 
their direct suppliers and overlaying these points on 
maps of recent deforestation, protected areas and 
indigenous lands. Any supplier found to be located 
close to protected areas or areas of new 
deforestation were then required to prove that the 
new deforestation was not on their property or they 
would be suspended from supplying the 
slaughterhouse. In July 2010, this process led to the 
slaughterhouses announcing that they had 
suspended purchases from 221.10 This represents a 
very small proportion of the tens of thousands of 
ranches that supply them but shows how in a matter 
of months, they were able to eliminate deforestation 
from their direct suppliers. 
 
The next steps are to obtain full GPS boundary 
coordinates of all the directly supplying ranches (often 
large fattening farms); and subsequently to address 
indirect suppliers, which are often small calving 
ranches. This latter step is likely to present a much 
greater challenge. 

The leather industry has linked the efforts of slaughterhouses to their own supply chains 
through the international Leather Working Group.11 This group was set up to improve 
environmental standards in the leather industry and its members include major leather 
brands and tanneries such as Adidas, New Balance, Nine West, Puma and Nike.12 This year, 
the Group agreed on new standards in a revised Tannery Auditing Protocol, which calls for 
improved traceability for leather sourced from Brazil and processed by tanneries that 
supply its members.  The zero deforestation language in the Protocol demonstrates how, 
for the first time, key players in the leather industry are acting to prioritize Amazon 
conservation.  

Notable Achievements and Way Forward 

These efforts are bearing fruit  deforestation in Brazil has been dramatically reduced in 
the past year to less than a quarter of its 2004 peak. 13 This represents a GHG reduction of 
850 million tons of CO2 annually. 14 In Mato Grosso state, 2010 deforestation figures are 
startling; deforestation has been reduced to only 7% of its peak in 2004. 15 
 
However, continued progress in Brazil cannot be taken for granted; Brazils Forest Code, 
which requires properties in the Amazon to retain up to 80% as forest cover, is currently 
under threat of being significantly weakened by Brazils Congress. 16 In addition, the 
slaughterhouses which are working to map and monitor their suppliers do not represent 
the whole industry; a significant clandestine, informal market exists.  
 
The average stocking rate of cattle in the Amazon is only around one head per hectare. 
Methods to at least double the number of animals per hectare are being promoted by 
Brazils Agricultural Research Agency, Embrapa. 17 This will be vital in order for Brazil to 
meet its target to expand the cattle industry without putting forests at further risk. In 
addition, in November 2010, BNDES launched a 1 billion BRL (approximately 600 million 
USD) fund to provide low cost loans for reducing GHG emissions from agriculture through 
reforestation and restoration of degraded land.18 

Continued support within Brazil and internationally, by all consumers of Brazilian beef 
and leather, for deforestation-free products, is needed in order to build on the remarkable 
progress of the past couple of years. 

Find out about National Wildlife Federations work supporting solutions to 
deforestation for agriculture and livestock at www.nwf.org/deforestation 

End Notes 

1  Bustamante et al. 2009. Estimativa de Emissoes Recentes de Gases de Efeito Estufa pela Pecuaria no Brasil. Resumo e 
Principais Conclusoes. Available at: http://www.inpe.br/noticias/arquivos/pdf/
Resumo_Principais_Conclusoes_emissoes_da_pecuaria_vfinalJean.pdf  
2  Climate Analysis Indicators Tool (CAIT) version 8.0. (Washington, DC: World Resources Institute, 2010). Available at 
http://cait.wri.org. 
3  Data for period 2000-2005. Houghton, R.  2008.  Carbon Flux to the Atmosphere from Land-Use Changes: 1850-2005. In 
TRENDS: A Compendium of Data on Global Change. Carbon Dioxide Information Analysis Center, Oak Ridge National Labora-
tory, U.S. Department of Energy, Oak Ridge, Tenn., U.S.A  
 4   Trabajo esclavo y el desatamiento. Terra Magazine. 2010. Availablie online at: http://www.cl.terra.com/terramagazine/
interna/0,,EI12867-OI3940890,00.html;  Cadastro de Empregadores, Ministerio do Trabalho e Emprego. Available online at: 
http://www.mte.gov.br/trab_escravo/lista_suja.pdf 
5   Greenpeace. 2009. Slaughtering the Amazon Report. Available online at: http://www.greenpeace.org/usa/press-center/
reports4/slaughtering-the-amazon  
6   MDIC. 2009. Ministerio do Desenvolvimento Industria e Comercio Exterior, Secretaria do Comercio Exterior (Secex), 
Brasil. Available online at:  http://aliceweb.desenvolvimento.gov.br/ 
7   MAPA. 2009. Ministerio da Agricultura, Pecuaria e Abastecimento (Ministry of Agriculture, 
Livestock and Food) Projecoes do agronegocio Brasil 2008/09 a 2018/19 February 2009 
8   Greenpeace. 2009. Slaughtering the Amazon Report. Available online at: http://www.greenpeace.org/usa/press-center/
reports4/slaughtering-the-amazon ; Amigos da TerraAmazonia Brasileira. 2009 Time to Pay the Bill. 
9   Barreto & Silva. 2010. Will cattle ranching continue to drive deforestation in the Brazilian Amazon? Paper presented at the 
International Conference: Environment and Natural Resources Management in Developing and Transition Economies. 
10   Amazonia Informa. 2010. Tres maiores frigorificos suspendem compras de 221 fazendas. Available online at:  http://
amazoniainforma.blogspot.com/2010/07/tres-maiores-frigorificos-suspendem.html 
11   Leather Working Group. 2010. Available online at: http://www.leatherworkinggroup.com 
12   See list from Leather International Magazine: http://www.leathermag.com/news/fullstory.php/aid/14230/
LWG__96_improving_tanners_green_credentials.html 
13   INPE. 2010. Desmatamento na Amazonia cai 14%.  INPE estima 6.451 km2 no periodo 2009/2010 01/12/2010  
Available online at: http://www.inpe.br/noticias/noticia.php?Cod_Noticia=2379 
14   Union of Concerned Scientists. 2010. Brazil Outpaces All Other Countries in Reducing Global Warming Emissions, Accord-
ing to New Rainforest Data. Available onlien at: http://www.ucsusa.org/news/commentary/brazil-outpaces-all-other-
0474.html 
15   INPE. 2010. Available online at: http://www.obt.inpe.br/prodes/prodes_1988_2010.htm                                                                    
16   IPAM. 2010. Estudo mostrara impactos de alteracoes no Codigo Florestal. November 22nd, 2010. Available online at:  
http://www.ipam.org.br/noticias/Estudo-mostrara-impactos-de-alteracoes-no-Codigo-Florestal/909                                         
17   Embrapa. 2010. Good Agricultural Practices  Beef Cattle. Available online at: http://bpa.cnpgc.embrapa.br/                     
18   BNDES. 2010. BNDES aprova programa de R$ 1 bi para reduzir emissoes de gases de efeito estufa na agricultura. 

National Wildlife Federation 

901 E Street NW 

Suite 400 

Washington D.C. 20004 

United States of America 

Phone: (+1) 202.797.6817 

E-mail: walkern@nwf.org 

This publication is funded by the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation. The National Wildlife 

Federation is grateful for their generous support of our efforts to confront the economic 

drivers of tropical deforestation. 

