INFORMATION SYSTEMS SERVICES

Overview of the Internet

An introduction to the
Internet, Internet concepts,
the programs necessary to
use the Internet and how to
connect to the Internet.

AUTHOR: Information Systems Services

DATE: July 2004

EDITION: 3.0

OVE 8

UNIVERSITY OF
LEEDS

Contents
Introduction

1

What is the Internet?
What is a Network?
Local Area Networks
Wide Area Networks
Combinations of Networks
The Internet

2
2
2
2
3
3

What do you do with the Internet?
Talk to other people
Many-to-Many Discussions
The World Wide Web (WWW or W3)

4
4
5
7

Clients and Servers

8

How Do I Get On?

9

Internet Jargon Terms

10

Appendix – More Information

15

Format Conventions
In this document the following format conventions are used:
Commands that you must type in are shown
in bold Courier font.
Menu items are given in a Bold, Arial font.
Keys that you press are enclosed in angle
brackets.

WIN31
Windows Applications
<Enter>

Feedback
If you notice any mistakes in this document please contact the Information Officer.
Email should be sent to the address info-officer@leeds.ac.uk
Copyright
This document is copyright University of Leeds. Permission to use material in this
document should be obtained from the Information Officer (email should be sent to
the address info-officer@leeds.ac.uk)
Print Record
This document was printed on 10-Aug-04.

1

Introduction
There has been a lot of talk in the press about the “Information
Superhighway”. People talk about “cruising the net”, “surfing in
Cyberspace” and a number of other largely meaningless and highly
jargonised phrases. But for many people, even some computer users,
it is still a thing shrouded in mystery and, to an extent, suspicion.
Unfortunately, getting access to this ‘Internet’ isn’t that obvious.
There are some difficult concepts to overcome, often some obstructive
hardware to grapple with. Consequently many who have managed to
conquer their fear and lack of knowledge when they first came to
computing now find themselves in exactly the same situation again
facing the world of international computing.
This document has been compiled to help such people. In preparing
this overview extensive use has been made of a particular document,
details of which are on the back page. The aim of this document is to
explain:

What is the Internet?
A brief explanation of physically what it is and how it came about.

What can I do with the Internet?
To whet your appetite. Also, because the Internet is best described
from a functional point of view (“What do I want to do”) rather than
from a list of available software and what it does.

How do I get connected to the Internet
Having whet your appetite, this is how you actually get on.
This document will not explain how to use any of the software
programs involved when using the Internet, otherwise it would be
huge. Many of those programs are documented separately in other
ISS documentation and so may be explored separately.
If you want a more detailed introduction to the Internet there are
some recommendations in the Appendix.

1

What is the Internet?
To explain what the Internet is, we’ll start from the bottom up.

What is a Network?
Most of the time, PC users work on their own with their PC connected
to nothing more exciting than a printer. However, it has always been
possible to connect two PCs with a piece of wire so that they can
communicate – usually just to transfer files.

This, in essence, is all a network is – two or more computers
connected by a physical piece of wire. The connection between the
two computers is then managed and operated by some special
software.

Local Area Networks
It makes sense, most often for
financial reasons but also for others,
to network groups of computers
where they share a common
workload. Networking computers
means that the people using them
can share files easily, send each
other messages and share each
other’s printers. This idea has
developed into Local Area Networks
(LANs). Nowadays most
organisations have a local area
network. LANs can be as small as
just one shared office or as large as
a whole city.

Wide Area Networks
In some cases an organisation is spread over a large area, and you do
not have the easy concentration of computing to provide a LAN for. In
this instance computers may be connected by a Wide Area Network
(WAN). The difference between a WAN and a LAN is partly one of
scale (although this is relative) but also relates to the technology.
With a LAN you will typically get a fast network that can network PC
file servers. With a WAN the network will often be much slower and
will usually involve some mainframe computer as the server rather
than a PC.

2

Combinations of Networks

LANs and WANs are not mutually exclusive. In fact they combine
very well together. Many organisations now have both, where a WAN
has been created by connecting up a series of LANs. A good example of
this is the Academic Community. Every University has its own LAN
providing email, printing, file sharing and other facilities. Then every
University is connected to the Joint Academic Network (JANET) which
is a WAN running the length of the country. Through JANET someone
in Leeds can log into a mainframe computer in Southampton.

The Internet
If you take the principle of small, locally-managed, networks
connected up to form a larger network, which in turn is connected up
to form a larger network, and so on, you get some idea of what the
Internet is. Physically it is just a collection of LANs and WANs that
have been connected up at a national and international level.
The Internet is more than this, however. It not only is the physical
wire, but also how information is sent from one computer to another.
Take the example of making a road journey. If you are sending
someone in a car to go somewhere, you can do one of two things:
•

give them precise written details of how to get to their destination.
As they have no other means of finding their way they will have to
stick to your instructions even if they can see roadworks ahead.

•

give them a map and let them find their own way. If roadworks,
or some other blockage occurs then the person can either read the
map and work out a fresh route, or else follow the diversion signs.

Originally information on networks followed the first method – it was
given precise instructions on how to reach its destination. However,
if there was a hold-up, say a computer was switched off, the
information was also held up until the hold-up cleared.
Now information is more intelligent and can work out its own route,
so if there is a hold-up it will try and get through some other way. It’s
all rather clever, and was invented by the American Defence Industry
who asked “If someone dropped a very large bomb on our computer
network, would it still function?”. The intelligent information transfer
– a mechanism called the Internetworking Protocol (hence “Internet”)
– means now that it can.

3

What do you do with the Internet?
Talk to other people
A traveller was very impressed by a hotel in Hong Kong. Upon arrival
at the hotel from the airport, he checked in, and went to his room.
When the TV was switched on there was a message waiting for him on
the TV screen.
This system is available to everyone who uses the Internet. To get on
to the Internet you have to have an identification unique to you called
your username. Everyone who connects to the Internet has a
username, and if you have their username and the name of the
machine they log into you can send a message to that username and
they will receive it when they next log in. This system is called
Electronic Mail or email for short.
The basic concepts behind email parallel those of regular mail. You
send mail to people at their particular addresses. In turn, they write
to you at your email address. You can subscribe to the electronic
equivalent of magazines and newspapers. If you have email you will
almost certainly get electronic junk mail (or spam) as well.
Email has two distinct advantages over regular mail. The most
obvious is speed. Instead of several days, your message can reach the
other side of the world in hours, minutes or even seconds. The other
advantage is that once you master the basics, you’ll be able to use
email to access databases and file libraries as well as transfer files
and programs.
Email also has advantages over the telephone. You send your
message when it’s convenient for you. Your recipients respond at
their convenience. No more frustration whilst you phone someone
who’s out, then they phone you back whilst you’re out. And while a
phone call across the country or around the world can quickly result
in huge phone bills, email lets you exchange vast amounts of mail for
only a few pennies – even if the other person is on the other side of
the earth.
Email is your connection to help – your Net lifeline. The Net can
sometimes seem a frustrating place! No matter how hard you try, no
matter where you look, you just might not be able to find the answer
to whatever is causing you problems. But when you know how to use
email, help is often just a few keystrokes away: you can ask your
system administrator or a friend for help in an email message.
Even if you use the Internet for no other purpose, email makes getting
a connection worthwhile all by itself. Very quickly you’ll find yourself
writing to friends who are on the Internet, contacting colleagues
interested in similar professional areas all round the world,
discussing politics and asking for advice on how to use some of the
software on your computer. It is very powerful and incredibly cheap.

4

Many-to-Many Discussions
Mailing Lists
Mailing Lists can be used to share information via email with people
who have a common interest.
An electronic mailing list is quite similar to a postal mailing list in
that it is a method of distributing the same information to lots of
different people. Mailing lists are typically used to discuss work with
colleagues at other Universities, share news, collaborate on projects
and publications, announce jobs and conferences and keep in touch
with current developments in your subject area.
In order to get information from an email mailing list you need to
subscribe − that is, you need to ask that your name be added to the
list. Other people can then send information to you and others on the
mailing list simply by posting a message to a single email address.
These messages are then automatically forwarded on to all members
of the list.
How Do You Find Mailing Lists?
There are a number of different services you can use for finding out
about what mailing lists exist, and how you can join them.
The National Academic Mailing List Service (JISCmail) is based at the
Information Technology Department, Rutherford Appleton Laboratory.
It hosts a wide number of different mailing lists for the academic
community in the UK. This service was formerly known as Mailbase
at the University of Newcastle. To explore the mailing lists hosted by
JISCmail you can connect to their home page on the web:
http://www.jiscmail.ac.uk

5

JISCmail Website
To search for a list about a subject of interest, type a word (or words)
into the keyword search box shown on the right of the screen, or
select a category of list from the category pages dropdown box.
Browse through the lists and find a list which looks as though it may
be of interest to you. You can find out more about the mailing list by
clicking on the appropriate links on screen.
Additional help on using JISCmail mailing lists is available on the
web at http://www.jiscmail.ac.uk/help/using/index.htm

Newsgroups
A newsgroup is a discussion area on the Internet. Newsgroups are a
public area (a little like a noticeboard) where people can post
information on a variety of topics, and discuss their interests with
other people.
Newsgroups are organised into subjects. They are also organised by
type − for example: news; rec (recreation); soc (society); sci (science);
comp (computers) and so forth (there are many more). Users can
post to existing newsgroups, respond to previous posts, and create
new newsgroups.
You can use Google Groups http://groups.google.com to search the
recent archives of most newsgroups or to post your own messages to
newsgroups.

6

You can search Google by typing a search word into the box which
appears on screen.
You can also use Google to browse through a list of newsgroups that
are available. Choose a subject from the list at the bottom of the
home page, or click on Browse complete list of groups. This will
enable you to browse through the hierarchies of groups that are
available.

The World Wide Web (WWW or W3)
Originally developed as a resource for physicists, the web today is fast
becoming the Main Street of cyberspace. You’ll find interesting
characters wandering around, museums and galleries to visit, schools
to teach you new skills, even restaurants (some of which will deliver
real food in response to email). You name it, chances are somebody’s
created a web server about it. Growing numbers of people have their
own personal web ‘pages’ where they let the world know what they’re
interested in.
The web has exploded in popularity for two reasons. One is that it is
fairly easy to use. But what really sets the web apart is hyperlinks.
To understand hyperlinks, think of an encyclopaedia. As you read an
article on, say, Africa, your eye is drawn to a picture of an elephant.
You want to learn more about the animal, so you get out the “E”
volume and look up “elephant” and start reading. The Windows help
system works in exactly this way, as do many CD-Rom
encyclopaedias.
Hyperlinks are the online equivalent of this browsing process. Tim
Berners-Lee, who developed the original web model, came up with a
simple language that lets somebody developing a web document
embed pointers to related resources. When you then call up that
document, you’ll see some words in a different colour or otherwise
highlighted. By moving your cursor to one of those words and then
hitting enter (or clicking on it with your mouse, depending on your
interface) you will call up the linked document.
These hyperlinks are easy to create so anybody can put together a
web resource that can become a central clearing house of information
on virtually any topic, linking documents that could be physically
stored in dozens of locations around the world. The language that
Tim Berners-Lee developed is a version of the markup language,
SGML (Standardised General Markup Language), which he called
HTML (HyperText Markup Language). HTML is a proper formatting
language but it is relatively easy to learn. What is even better,
though, is that most of the main Word Processing software companies
are now providing HTML converters so that you can create the
documents in, say, Microsoft Word and then save them as HTML to
put into your web server.

7

Clients and Servers
One of the concepts that you will have to get your brain around whilst
working on the Internet is the idea of client-server. Most software on
the Internet works on this principle, so it is worth taking some time to
explain it.
Server
Client
The client-server model of computing is a
common one in networking. It consists
essentially of two computers: the client and
the server. The client is intelligent, is the
one initiating the action and is where the
control lies. The server is less intelligent
but is there to provide a service on demand.
Typically the server is a very large computer
that can handle several clients all at once.

In terms of the Internet, you are almost always the client. You are
the one who wants to initiate the transfer of files, the sending of
messages, the querying of a database. Every other computer you
connect to will be a server. Now in some cases the roles can be
reversed, but those are rare and are too advanced for this document.
The thing about client-server is that it is software-specific. For
instance, if I wanted to copy a file from an Internet computer, I would
run a program called FTP (File Transfer Protocol). For it to work, I
must run the client ftp on my computer and the computer I wish to
copy the file from must be running the server ftp. That means that
when I ask my ftp software to transfer the file, the client ftp software
can then talk to the server ftp software and ask for the file. If I wasn’t
running the client ftp then I couldn’t do the asking (self-evidently),
and if the server computer wasn’t running server ftp then it wouldn’t
understand what the client ftp software was saying.
The reason this is important is because most software on the Internet
relies on this client-server model. All the following programs require
you to run the client part on your PC or Macintosh, but you will only
be able to use on computers running the server part.
•

ftp

•

email

•

newsgroups

• web
Consequently, you will hear people talking about mail clients (which
is the program you use to actually type your mail message), web
servers (the box that actually holds the HTML information and
services web requests) and web clients, or browsers (such as Internet
Explorer or Netscape).

8

How Do I Get On?
There are essentially two types of access to the Internet – direct
access or dial-in access. We will only look at direct access in this
document.
Direct access is available to people whose employers have connected
their own computers to the Internet. A good example is our own
academic community. Every University has its own local area
network. All the separate local area networks are connected together
by a Wide Area Network we call JANET. The JANET network is then
connected on to the Internet. Consequently anyone who has access
to their University network also has access directly out to JANET and
the Internet beyond. To connect you must have a computer with a
network card and software that allows your computer to ‘talk’ to your
local network.
For staff and students at the University of Leeds, access to the
Internet is provided through both our PC-based systems and through
various UNIX-based systems. Both systems have a variety of software
for using the Internet, including email software and web browsing
software.
In ISS clusters Internet Explorer is available to browse the web, and
students are provided with a webmail interface
(http://webmail.leeds.ac.uk) to access their email. The recommended
email client for staff is Microsoft Outlook, and an web front-end is
provided at http://outlook.leeds.ac.uk

9

Internet Jargon Terms
Like any community, the Net has developed its own language. What
follows is a glossary of some of the more common abbreviations,
words and phrases you are likely to encounter.
ASCII

Has two meanings. ASCII (American Standard Code for
Information Interchange) is a universal computer code for
English letters and characters. Computers store all
information as binary numbers. In ASCII, the letter “A” is
stored as 01000001, whether the computer is made by IBM,
Apple or Commodore. ASCII also refers to a method, or
protocol, for copying files from one computer to another over a
network, in which neither computer checks for any errors that
might have been caused by static or other problems.

Backbone

A high-speed network that connects several powerful
computers. In the U.S., the backbone of the Internet is often
considered the NSFNet (see entry), a government-funded link
between a handful of supercomputer sites across the country.

Baud

The speed at which modems transfer data. One baud is
roughly equal to one bit per second. It takes eight bits to
make up one letter or character. Modems rarely transfer data
at exactly the same speed as their listed baud rate because of
static or computer problems. More expensive modems use
systems, such as Microcom Network Protocol (MNP), which
can correct for these errors or which ‘compress’ data to speed
up transmission.

Bookmark

A web file that lets you quickly connect to a site.

Bounce

What your email does when it cannot get to its recipient – it
bounces back to you – unless it goes off into the ether, never
to be found again.

Browser

A client program that allows users to read hypertext
documents on the World Wide Web, and navigate between
them. Examples are Netscape Navigator, and Microsoft
Internet Explorer.

Bulletin board
A computerised version of the bulletin boards found in
shops and other public places, where people can leave
messages and advertise things they want to buy or sell.
Chat room

A real-time electronic forum; a virtual room where visitors can
meet others and share ideas on a particular subject.

Client

The computer that requests files or services. The computer
that provides services is called the server.

Daemon

An otherwise harmless UNIX program that normally works out
of sight of the user. On the Internet, you’ll most likely
encounter it only when your email is not delivered to your
recipient – you’ll get back your original message plus an ugly
message from a ‘mailer’ daemon.

Domain

An Internet address in alphabetic form. Domain names must
have at least 2 parts: the part on the left which names the
organization, and the part on the right which identifies the

10

highest subdomain, such as the country or the type of
organisation. “leeds.ac.uk” leeds is the organisation and ac.uk
identifies it as an eductional institution in the UK.
subdomain name

usual meaning

.ac

university etc in UK

.co

business in UK

.com

business in US or Canada

.edu

university etc in US

.gov

government site anywhere

.org

charity or similar

Down

When a public-access site runs into technical trouble, and you
can no longer gain access to it, it’s down.

Download

Copy a file from a host system to your computer. There are
several different methods, or protocols, for downloading files,
most of which periodically check the file as it is being copied
to ensure no information is inadvertently destroyed or
damaged during the process. Some, such as XMODEM, only
let you download one file at a time. Others, such as batchYMODEM and ZMODEM, let you type in the names of several
files at once, which are then automatically downloaded.

Email

Electronic mail – a way to send a private message to somebody
else on the Net. Used as both noun and verb.

Emoticon

A typed picture of a facial expression, used in email and when
communicating on the Internet, to indicate emotion. E.g., this
represents a smiling face :-) Often called a smiley.

FAQ

Frequently Asked Questions. A compilation of answers to
these. Many Usenet newsgroups have these files, which are
posted once a month or so for beginners.

Flame

An angry message on a newsgroup or mailing list, often a
personal attack instead of a remark relevant to the subject
under discussion. Also, to post such a message.

Flame war

A heated argument in a newsgroup or other public electronic
forum, often resulting in personal insults and other angry
remarks that are off the subject.

Finger

An Internet program that lets you get some bit of information
about another user, provided they have first created a .plan
file.

Freeware

Software that doesn’t cost anything.

FTP

File Transfer Protocol. A system for transferring files across
the Net.

GIF

Graphic Interchange Format. A format developed in the mid1980s by CompuServe for use in photo-quality graphics
images. Now commonly used everywhere online.

11

Hacker

On the Net, unlike among the general public, this is not a bad
person; it is simply somebody who enjoys stretching hardware
and software to their limits, seeing just what they can get their
computers to do. What many people call hackers,
net.denizens refer to as “crackers”.

Hostname

Also host name. The unique name that identifies a computer
on a network. On the Internet, the host name is in the form
"comp.xyz.net"; if there is only one Internet site the host name
is the same as the domain name. However, one computer can
have more than one host name if it hosts more than one
Internet site (for example, "home.xyz.net" and "comp.xyz.net");
in that case "comp" and "home" are host names and "xyz.net"
is the domain name.

Hotlink

For WWW surfers, the same as a hyperlink.

HTML

HyperText Markup Language. The language used to create
World Wide Web pages, with hyperlinks and markup for text
formatting (different heading styles, bold, italic, numbered
lists, insertion of images, etc.).

HTTP

HyperText Transfer Protocol. The protocol most often used to
transfer information from World Wide Web servers to
browsers, which is why web addresses begin with http://.
Also called Hypertext Transport Protocol.

Hyperlink

A link in an HTML document that leads to another site, or
another place within the same document. Hyperlinks are
usually underlined or shown in a different colour from the
surrounding text. Sometimes hyperlinks are pictures.

Internet

This worldwide information highway is comprised of
thousands of interconnected computer networks, and reaches
millions of people in many different countries. The Internet
was originally developed for the United States military, and
then became used for government, academic and commercial
research and communications. Now available to anyone with a
PC, ISP, modem and browser.

Internet Service Provider Often abbreviated to ISP. A company which
provides Internet access, nowadays often for free.
Log in/log on Connect to a host system or public-access site.
Log out/log off

Disconnect from a host system.

Lurk

Read messages in a Usenet newsgroup without ever saying
anything.

Modem

A device that connects computers to each other for sending
communications via the telephone lines. The modem
modulates the digital data of computers into analogue signals
to send over the telephone lines, then demodulates back into
digital signals to be read by the computer on the other end;
thus the name “modem” for modulator/demodulator. Modems
are used for sending and receiving email, connecting to
bulletin board systems, and surfing the Internet.

Mailing list

Essentially a conference in which messages are delivered right
to your mailbox, instead of to a Usenet newsgroup. You get on
these by sending a message to a specific email address, which
is often that of a computer that automates the process.

12

Net, the

Common shortening of Internet.

Netiquette

The rules of etiquette on the Internet.

Network

A communications system that links two or more computers.
It can be as simple as a cable strung between two computers a
few feet apart or as complex as hundreds of thousands of
computers around the world linked through fibre optic cables,
phone lines and satellites.

Newsgroup

A discussion group on the Internet which is focused on a
particular topic. Discussion takes place by posting messages
for everyone to read, having online conversations, and sending
email messages to individuals or the group. There are
thousands of newsgroups on different subjects.

Offline

When your computer is not connected to a host system or the
Net, you are offline.

Online

When your computer is connected to an online service,
bulletin-board system or public-access site.

Ping

A program that can trace the route a message takes.

Post

To compose a message for a Usenet newsgroup and then send
it out for others to see.

Postmaster

The person to contact at a particular site to ask for
information about the site or complain about one of his/her
user’s behaviour.

Prompt

When the host system asks you to do something and waits for
you to respond. For example, if you see “login:” it means type
your username.

Search engine
A program on the Internet that allows users to search
for files and information. For example, Google, AltaVista.
Server

The computer that supplies files or services. The computer
that requests services is called the client. The client may
request file transfer, remote logins, printing, or other available
services.

Shareware

Software that is freely available on the Net. If you like and use
the software, you should send in the fee requested by the
author, whose name and address will be found in a file
distributed with the software.

Snail mail

Mail that comes through a slot in your front door or a box
mounted outside your house.

Smiley

See emoticon.

Spamming

The practice of sending copies of a message to many different
newsgroups, with no regard to whether the subject matter is
appropriate; or sending the same message by email to large
numbers of people indiscriminately. Sometimes spams are
advertisements. Spamming is considered bad netiquette and
very unethical because it not only wastes everyone's time, but
also costs money. The sender of the messages does not pay
the cost; it is paid by the sites of the recipient and others on
the route.

13

The term is believed to originate from a “Monty Python’s Flying
Circus” sketch about a canteen which sold only dishes
consisting mostly of Spam.
Surfing

Used by analogy to describe the ease with which an expert
user can use the waves of information flowing around the
Internet to get where s/he wants. The term became popular in
the early 1990s as access to the Internet became more
widespread and tools such as browsers made its use simpler
and more pleasant.

Sysadmin

The system administrator; the person who runs a host system
or public-access site.

Sysop

A system operator. Somebody who runs a bulletin-board
system.

TCP/IP

Transmission Control Protocol/Internet Protocol. The
particular system for transferring information over a computer
network that is at the heart of the Internet.

Telnet

A program that lets you connect to other computers on the
Internet.

Upload

Copy a file from your computer to a host system.

URL

Uniform Resource Locator (formerly Universal Resource
Locator). An Internet address which tells a browser where to
find an Internet resource. For example, the URL for the ISS is
http://www.leeds.ac.uk/iss/
It is usually pronounced ‘ewe are ell’ rather than ‘erl’.

Usenet

Users’ Network. A giant public bulletin board system on the
Internet for news and electronic mail. Usenet was started in
1979 by students in the USA. It now has over 12,000
discussion areas which cover every imaginable topic are read
by millions of people all over the world.

User name

On most host systems, when you connect you are asked to
supply a one-word username. This can usually be any
combination of letters and numbers.

Website

Also Web site. Any computer on the Internet running a World
Wide Web server process. A particular website is identified by
the hostname part of a URL. Multiple hostnames may actually
map to the same computer

World Wide Web
A hypermedia-based system for browsing Internet sites.
It is named the web because it is made of many sites linked
together; users can travel from one site to another by clicking
on hyperlinks. Text, graphics, sound, and video can all be
accessed with browsers like Mosaic, Netscape, or Internet
Explorer.
An Englishman called Tim Berners-Lee invented the World
Wide Web in 1989 while working at CERN, the European
Particle Physics Laboratory.
WWW

The common written abbreviation for World Wide Web.

14

Appendix – More Information
ISS produces many documents to help you get started with
applications on the ISS desktop. These include a range of documents
on authoring HTML, using Outlook and webmail, and other topics
related to the Internet. For more information visit:
http://www.leeds.ac.uk/iss/documentation/www.html
http://www.leeds.ac.uk/iss/documentation/email.html
ISS also runs a number of training courses (for staff and research
postgraduate students only) including:
•

Introduction to the Internet

•

Outlook courses

•

Web authoring using Macromedia Dreamweaver

Any good bookshop will also have a wide range of Internet-related
books.

15

