177
© 2010 Universities Federation for Animal Welfare
The Old School, Brewhouse Hill, Wheathampstead,
Hertfordshire AL4 8AN, UK

Animal Welfare 2010, 19: 177-190
ISSN 0962-7286

Wildlife conservation and animal welfare: two sides of the same coin?
PC Paquet*†‡§ and CT Darimont§#
Box 150, Meacham, SK S0K 2V0, Canada
Faculty of Environmental Design, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta T2N 1N4, Canada
§
Raincoast Conservation Foundation, PO Box 77, Denny Island, British Columbia V0T 1B0, Canada
#
Environmental Studies Department, 405 ISB, 1156 High Street, University of California, Santa Cruz, California 95064, USA
* Contact for correspondence and requests for reprints: ppaquet@baudoux.ca
†
‡

Abstract
Human activities deprive wild animals of their life requisites by destroying or impoverishing their surroundings, causing suffering
of individuals. Yet, the notion that animal welfare applies to wildlife has escaped many animal welfarists and conservationists.
A well-accepted and applied ethical foundation for animal conservation that considers animal welfare is lacking. We address this
by examining how worldviews of conservationists and animal welfarists are related. The clear conceptual link is that individuals
within anthropogenically-disturbed populations often endure suffering caused by humans. Accordingly, our objectives are to
provide an overview of wildlife conservation, integrate ethical aspects of wildlife conservation and animal welfare, and encourage
a ‘wildlife welfare’ ethic among conservationists. We describe the relationship between contemporary socioeconomic and environmental conditions and the impoverished status of North American wildlife. We then describe the ecological plight of large
mammalian carnivores in North America. Finally, as a case study, we focus on the tenuous lives of grey wolves (Canis lupus)
living in the midst of human-dominated landscapes. We conclude that the suffering wildlife endures because of humans is a
collective responsibility that presents a moral imperative for animal welfarists and conservationists alike. Habitat destruction and
impoverishment deprives species of life requisites, causing trauma, prolonged suffering, and eventually death. We suggest that
a shared doctrine of animal welfare principles is needed, such as a modified version of the internationally-recognised Five
Freedoms. In essence, this would be an ethical affirmation for conservationists and animal welfarists.

Keywords: animal welfare, conservation biology, environmental ethics, large carnivores, stress, wolves

Introduction
“Ethics in our Western world has hitherto been largely
limited to the relations of man to man. But that is a limited
ethics. We need a boundless ethics which will include the
animals also.… the time is coming when people will be
amazed that the human race existed so long before it recognized that thoughtless injury to life is incompatible with real
ethics. Ethics is in its unqualified form extended responsibility to everything that has life” (Albert Schweitzer 1924).
Human influences, inadvertent and intended, continue to
threaten the survival of species and the maintenance of
natural ecological and evolutionary processes worldwide
(Parmesan 2006; Wilson 2006; Smith & Bernatchez 2008;
Darimont et al 2009). Human population growth and technological development have resulted in dramatic reductions
and alterations in quality and availability of wildlife habitat,
over-use of a number of wildlife species, greater human
dependence on domesticated animals, and changes in the
functioning of most ecosystems. The average annual rate of
loss for animal and plant populations and their habitats is
now estimated to be 1% (Balmford et al 2003). Two-thirds
Universities Federation for Animal Welfare

of the world’s terrestrial land area has been devoted directly
to supporting human populations through agriculture,
fisheries, urbanisation, or infrastructure (Millennium
Ecosystem Assessment 2005). Moreover, the adverse
influence of humans on the environment is intensifying,
causing an unprecedented destruction of biodiversity, and
raising vexing questions about the ethical foundation of
contemporary society (Wilson 2006; United Nations
Environment Programme 2007).
From an ecological perspective, civilisation is being
purchased by the subversion of nature for the sole benefit of
humans (Hardin 1968; Daly 1993; Daly & Townsend 1993;
Czech et al 2000; Bandura 2007). The most widespread
problem is that expanding human demands deprive native
species of life-sustaining habitats, or at the very least
diminish the effectiveness of these habitats to support these
species (Czech 2000; The Wildlife Society 2007). The rate of
environmental damage is now so fast that many indigenous
wildlife populations are responding to their changing environment with difficulty (Stockwell et al 2003; Parmesan
2006; Hendry et al 2008). Without question, the unrelenting
Science in the Service of Animal Welfare

178 Paquet and Darimont
increase in human activity is driving the loss or modification
of species and seriously impoverishing the lives of those that
survive (Ceballos & Ehrlich 2002; Bradshaw et al 2005;
Morrison et al 2007; Darimont et al 2009).
Most conservation scientists now agree that global ecological conditions are seriously impaired (Millennium
Ecosystem Assessment 2005) primarily because the human
enterprise has proceeded with inadequate scientific and
moral guidance, characterised by a blatant disregard for
non-human animals. In general, one set of ecological and
ethical principles has applied to humans and another to the
rest of nature. Consequently, most of the cost of human
hegemony is being borne by other species. Although rarely
considered, depriving animals of their life requisites by
destroying or impoverishing their surroundings causes
suffering of individuals through displacement, stress, starvation, and reduced security (Bekoff 2002; Goodall &
Bekoff 2002; Bradshaw et al 2005). The same human activities driving the current extinction crisis are also causing
suffering, fear, physical injury, psychological trauma, and
disease in wild animals (Bradshaw et al 2005). These
discomforts are well beyond and additive to what might
occur naturally (ie non-anthropomorphic).
Accordingly, human-caused environmental degradation and
the associated suffering of animals should be of concern for
conservationists and animal welfarists alike — a common
ground on which to coalesce. Overall, however, neither
group has unequivocally recognised that human-caused
suffering of wildlife is a welfare concern that deserves
serious consideration (see Ehrenfeld 1991; Glenn 1991;
Perry & Perry 2008). Perhaps, as Bandura (2007) suggests,
unintentional and selective moral disengagement has
allowed individuals and society to pursue practices harmful
to wildlife without the restraint of self-censure. We do this
by investing ecologically-harmful practices with worthy
purposes through social, national, and economic justifications. Accepting this discomforting possibility represents a
challenge that few people, including conservation and
animal welfare scientists, have been willing to confront.
These vexing ethical problems are further compounded
because the public and decision-makers fail to recognise the
difference between existence of a species and long-term
persistence of ecological systems upon which the species
depends, a relationship that also applies to humans. Simply,
intact ecological systems are characterised not only by the
species (components) that inhabit them but also by ecological functions and processes that link species with their
environment (eg migration, predator-prey relationships).
Although species may continue to exist long after natural
ecological relationships have been altered or destroyed,
most ecologists believe such impoverished systems are not
sustainable and do not typify healthy environments
(Millennium Ecosystem Assessment 2005; Wilson 2006).
Although the health and quality of all life is indisputably
dependent on natural systems, North America’s natural
lands are continually lost and converted to human uses
such as farming, urban development, resource extraction,
© 2010 Universities Federation for Animal Welfare

and industry. Therefore, the dominant ethic upon which
modern technological society is derived — progress
conceived as the continuous development and expansion
of the artificial environment necessarily at the expense of
the natural environment — can be looked upon from the
ecological and animal welfare perspectives as morally
insensitive. Although several of the assumptions of this
human-centric worldview have been questioned and criticised by philosophers, poets, religious spokespeople, and
others from different philosophical backgrounds for the
last 500 years, a shift to applied ‘ecological consciousness’ has been a slow process (Leopold 1949; Naess 1973;
Devall & Sessions 1985; Naess 2002).
Nevertheless, the ongoing destruction of the natural environment has precipitated a global response which, among
other goals, seeks to preserve wilderness and protect
wildlife populations. Many proponents of this conservation movement are motivated by an ethical concern for
the welfare of wildlife populations and individual
animals (Bekoff 2002; Goodall & Bekoff 2002; Jickling
& Paquet 2005; Vucetich & Nelson 2007; Brennan &
Yeuk-Sze 2008). In part, their efforts are intended to
alleviate the suffering of animals caused by humans. At
present, however, we lack a well-accepted and applied
ethical foundation for animal conservation that considers
animal welfare (cf Devall & Sessions 1985; Birch 1993;
Grey 1993; Jickling & Paquet 2005; Minteer & Collins
2005; Mathews et al 2010). We begin to address this
here, with a focus on wildlife.
Humans and wildlife often converge on and compete for the
same habitat because both require similar environmental
conditions for survival (Morrison et al 2007). Accordingly,
we have chosen North American wildlife as a model system
on which to expand the notion and application of animal
welfare. We view it as a fertile area for discussion because
relatively little has been written about the relationship of
animal conservation and animal welfare (Soulé 1985;
Goodall & Bekoff 2002; Mathews et al 2010). This is
disturbing because what has been written clearly indicates
that most conservation scientists understand neither the
relationship between ecological research and animal
welfare nor how they ought to be related (Song &
M’Gonigle 2001; Linklater 2003; Hutchins 2007).
Herein, drawing from our perspectives as advocates for
wildlife conservation and animal welfare, we examine how
these worldviews are closely related. We begin by briefly
describing the relationship between contemporary socioeconomic and environmental conditions and the status of North
American wildlife. Due to the profound influence large
carnivores exert on the persistence of other species and the
dynamics of ecosystems, as well as their iconic role as
flagships for nature and conservation worldwide, we then
describe the ecological plight of large North American
carnivores. Finally, as a case study, we focus on the lives of
grey wolves (Canis lupus) living in human-dominated landscapes. We believe wolves can help society come to terms
with the ethical questions regarding conservation and

Wildlife conservation and animal welfare 179
animal welfare because efforts to coexist with wolves cause
us to consider the comparative value of tangible and intangible aspects of our lives (Pimlott et al 1969; Haber 1996).
Ironically, the species once regarded as a threat to our
survival is turning out to be a test of how likely we are to
achieve sustainability and coexistence with the elements
that sustain us (Paquet & Carbyn 2003).

Objectives
For our purposes, ‘animal welfare’ consists of three
elements: the basic health and functioning of animals, their
affective states (eg pain, fear, suffering, etc), and their
ability to live in a manner to which they are adapted (Fraser
et al 1997). We also assume that any realistic praxis necessitates some killing, exploitation, and suppression (Naess
1973). In contrast, ‘animal rights’ focuses on deeper
political or philosophical claims about the status of animals.
Historically, animal welfare has applied primarily or exclusively to animals under human care, such as farm animals
and pets, whether used for food, work, companionship, or
research. In our view, the extension of this ethic to wild
animals (ie those not under our care) is conspicuously
missing. In part, this is because some environmental
discomforts affecting wild animals are recognised as natural
processes that are present even in pristine conditions (Fraser
2008). Therefore, our emphasis here is on welfare issues
associated with humans and their activities.
As we outline below, finding commonalities and unifying
concepts relevant to both conservationists and welfarists is
straightforward, although not without difficulties. Principal
among them is that animal conservationists and animal
welfarists apply their concern for animals at different scales.
Wildlife conservationists are primarily concerned with
populations and habitats, whereas animal welfarists are
principally concerned with individuals (Hutchins 2007).
Only recently has the ecology of individuals been recognised as an important and fertile area for research
programmes (for a review see Bolnick et al 2003). Bridging
this disconnect requires careful consideration and
education. Accordingly, our objectives are to: i) provide an
overview of wildlife conservation for those interested in
animal welfare; ii) integrate the two fields conceptually by
showing that the integrity of habitats and the populations
they contain are inextricably linked to the welfare of the
individual animals that constitute those populations and
occupy those habitats; and iii) encourage a ‘wildlife
welfare’ ethic among conservationists.

A wildlife conservation primer for animal
welfarists
Socio-economic problems
A number of conservation scientists, including ourselves,
propose that a general lack of ecological knowledge is not
the only limit on effective conservation (for a related
perspective Erlich 1995; Vucetich & Nelson 2007). Rather,
a combination of bad management, self-interest, and overpopulation is causing a degradation of the natural environment which, in turn, is causing the loss and impoverishment

of species. Although overkill, habitat destruction, and exotic
species are the proximate ecological causes of species
endangerment (Diamond 1989), the ultimate problem is
fundamentally sociological (Hardin 1968; Diamond 2005).
Over the last 200 years, the North American landscape has
been modified by an economy that ignores the environment,
or worse, views it as an obstacle to overcome. This attitude
continues to prevail because only monetary benefits and
costs associated with resource products are recognised in
conventional marketplace transactions (Costanza 1991;
Czech 2000). Whereas conservation and restoration efforts
are directed at improving current and future conditions for
animals (and especially wildlife), market interests usually
discount future benefits and costs in favour of present
consumption and sales. Since information about the future
is limited, and shareholders require quick returns on investment, a premium is placed on the present (Czech et al
2000). Accordingly, short-term profits are usually favoured
over the uncertain profits of the future (Paquet & Carbyn
2003; The Wildlife Society 2003).
Modern economic theory is an extreme reflection of this
human-centric worldview. In essence, by placing humans
above and outside the laws of nature it is a counterpoint and
refutation of elementary ecological and physical principles.
Claims to non-consumptive and sustainable economic
growth do not conform to our fundamental understanding of
trophic ecology (Czech 2000). Whilst ecology recognises
the interconnectedness of all things living or not, economics
is hierarchically focused and explicitly subsumes all lifeforms to the needs of humans. Neoclassical economists
view economic growth as a benchmark of societal progress
(Heilbroner 1992). Within this context, the decline of nature
has been considered a measure of the success of an enterprising economy. Thus, given the irrefutable association
between environmental destruction and the suffering of
individual animals as we explain below, contemporary
economics is in conflict with the goals of conservation and
animal welfare. Ethical questions are most often matters of
principle which need to be unmistakably distinguished from
matters of price (Sagoff 2004).

Ecological problems
Globally, wildlife must contend with an ominous future on
a planet where humanity’s economic appetite consumes
most resources (Smith & Bernatchez 2008). According to
recent scientific reports, humans now appropriate over 40%
of the net primary productivity (the green material)
produced on earth each year (Vitousek et al 1986, 1997;
Rojstaczer et al 2001). Humanity consumes 35% of the
productivity of the oceanic shelf (Pauly & Christensen
1995), and uses 60% of freshwater run-off (Postel et al
1996). Between one-third and one-half of the land surface
has been transformed by human action and this area
continues to expand (Vitousek et al 1997). Morrison et al
(2007) estimate “that less than 21% of the earth’s terrestrial
surface still contains all of the large (20 kg) mammals it
once held, with the proportion varying between 68% in
Australasia to only 1% in Indomalaya”. Although the
Animal Welfare 2010, 19: 177-190

180 Paquet and Darimont
presence of large mammals offers no guarantee of the
occurrence of other animals, their absence provides an
ecological measurement of the human influence on biodiversity. Based on fundamental ecological principles (eg
niche breadth and competitive exclusion), growth of the
human economy (the synthesis of population size and per
capita consumption) proceeds at the expense of nearly all
wildlife. Therefore, economic growth is the limiting factor
for sustainability of wildlife, and by extension the welfare
of all animals (Czech 2000).
Anthropogenic influences have severely reduced the
amount, availability, and effectiveness of habitat for indigenous wildlife (Kellert 1993; Jędrzejewska et al 2004;
Lalbierte & Ripple 2004; Morrison et al 2007). The consequent loss to land conversion of locally-adapted populations
within species, and of genetic material within populations,
is a human-caused change that reduces the resilience of
species and ecosystems. Although the scale and nature of
threats have changed over time, there is widespread concern
within the scientific community that adverse anthropogenic
effects could lead to permanent loss or modification of some
and perhaps most large mammalian and other sensitive
wildlife species (Ceballos & Ehrlich 2002; Cardillo et al
2006; Morrison et al 2007; Darimont et al 2009).
In North America, ecosystem health has declined precipitously ever since European settlement. Humans have
profoundly influenced the way wildlife use the natural
landscape (Laliberte & Ripple 2004). We are now documenting sudden leaps in aberrant ecosystem behaviour
long predicted by ecologists. Consequently, populations
of native species have crashed, disappeared, or as an
adaptation to novel anthropogenic stresses, modified their
behaviour to accommodate humans. At the same time,
many exotic and invasive species have irrupted causing
conflicts with native wildlife and humans. What were
once alien cultural practices, such as intense landscape
modification, massive impoundments of water, overgrazing, and fire suppression, have now become increasingly common. Concurrently, new infectious diseases,
crown fires, and destructive infestations of invasive
insects — once rare phenomena — have emerged as
dominant disturbance regimes. The rates, scales, kinds,
and combinations of changes occurring now are different
from those at any other time in history (Covington 2000).
Notably, we are changing the landscape more rapidly than
we understand it or species are able to adapt.
Habitat alienation, destruction and fragmentation
Animal use of a particular area varies in relation to cues in
the landscape that signal the availability of food, shelter, or
other resources favoured by the particular species. This use
often fluctuates seasonally and changes at different lifehistory stages. Individuals or groups of individuals are
drawn to food and suitable physical structures, and avoid
areas of lower quality. The term habitat, although often used
loosely as an indication of environmental quality, refers to
the combination of physical and biological features preferred
© 2010 Universities Federation for Animal Welfare

by a particular species. Different habitat preferences reflect
the evolution and adaptation of diverging species.
As noted, human population pressures and associated activities have physically supplanted large areas of natural habitat.
Moreover, habitat alienation (the abandonment of habitats
because of human presence) has converted extensive portions
of habitat from optimal to unsuitable for wildlife. The effects
are additive to those of habitat lost due to physical development. Alienation results from proximity of a habitat patch to
sensory disturbances (eg noise), direct human intrusion (eg
off-roading, snowmobiling, hiking), isolation from other
habitats, and other less obvious disruptions (eg inadequate
thermal or visual cover). The factors that influence alienation
vary among species, the size of the habitat patch, configuration of the habitat patch, the matrix between patches, the
nature of disturbance, frequency of the disturbance, and the
level of individual habituation. Unlike losses resulting from
removal of habitat, alienation can be temporary and does not
permanently foreclose mitigative options.
The ongoing degradation of habitat via physical destruction,
alienation, and occlusion of travel corridors is confining
wildlife populations into small, insular fragments of often
inhospitable land. This subdivision of habitat into many
detached and isolated patches is referred to as habitat fragmentation. As a result of their natural insularity, mountainous and coastal archipelago environments exacerbate
the problem. Many of these discontinuous habitat fragments
are being rendered ecologically marginal or ineffective by
small size, irregular shape, and isolation. Although the
severity of disturbance varies with the scale of disruption
and the species affected, small patches of habitat isolated in
a landscape are likely to have an impoverished biota. This
concern is based on convincing evidence that isolation and
constriction of natural communities reduce biodiversity and
the numbers of animals that occupy an area (Franklin 1980;
Gilpin & Soulé 1986; Newmark 1987, 1995; Soulé 1987).
Accordingly, the fragmentation of continuous, natural landscapes is one of the most important factors contributing to
the loss of biological diversity (Wilcox & Murphy 1985).
Conservation biologists agree that most species are
adversely affected by fragmentation of the natural
landscape. Recent information shows that natural populations of some species persist as a set of linked subpopulations each of which is prone to instability. Such persisting
‘metapopulations’ are sensitive to the number of subpopulations and ease of movements among them. Thus, any
reduction of habitat size or fragmentation of habitat runs the
risk of disrupting the whole system, either by reducing the
number of subpopulations below some critical level
required for the combined metapopulation to persist, or by
interfering with the dispersal required to link the locally
unstable subpopulations. Consequently, there is an
increased probability of random disturbance pushing many
populations toward extinction (see The extinction vortex
below). Overall, the implications are clear: anthropogenic
fragmentation of landscapes modifies the composition of
species, diversity of species, and density of populations.

Wildlife conservation and animal welfare 181
Corridors and landscape linkages
Habitats and landscapes can fragment when they become
partially subdivided by inhospitable travel corridors, especially as the intervening landscape matrix becomes increasingly dominated by humans. The occlusion of travel routes
that link critical habitats restricts essential daily, seasonal,
and dispersal movements of wildlife. Wildlife displaced to
suboptimal habitats and travel routes are exposed to higher
risks of mortality, increased stress from sensory disturbances, and energetically less efficient foraging behaviour.
In addition, ensured connectivity is important for wildlife
exposed to a high risk of mortality from humans or vehicles
when travelling across settled landscapes. Thus, maintaining connectivity between patches of quality wildlife
habitat and providing a means for dispersal is critical for
maintaining ecological integrity (Newmark 1987, 1995;
Noss 1987; Noss et al 1997; Woodroffe & Ginsberg 1998;
Ehrlich & Hanski 2004). In general, fragmented and
isolated habitats and regional reserves will not maintain
viable populations of all wildlife species in the long term.
Therefore, habitats and regions must be linked (interconnected) to allow for ongoing genetic exchange and longdistance dispersal among separated populations.
The extinction vortex
Advances in conservation biology have mapped likely
pathways to species extirpation (ie local or regional extinctions) and extinction (see Soulé 1985; Gilpin & Hanski
1991; Boyce 1992; Schonewald-Cox & Buechner 1992). In
theory, systematic disturbances involving excessive loss of
individuals or habitats lead to reductions in population size
and/or distribution. Subdivision and loss of suitable habitat
help push subpopulations into a size range where random
events are likely to terminate them, increasing the probability of regional extinction (Gilpin & Soulé 1986). As
losses mount and subpopulations become smaller, fewer,
and more isolated, the population becomes increasingly
susceptible to stochastic (ie random) genetic, demographic,
environmental, and catastrophic factors. These different
forces operate in synergistic and unanticipated fashion — in
different ways for different species — to plunge a population into an ‘extinction vortex’ (Lacy 1993).

Status of North American large mammalian
carnivores
Most mammalian carnivore populations in North America
are adversely affected by anthropogenic influences,
including habitat loss due to development, recreational
facilities, oil and gas exploration, and logging, as well as
injury and mortality due to highways, railways, depredation
control, novel diseases, and hunting (Nowak et al 2005).
Combined, these activities have generally degraded the
environment for predators and their prey species. In effect,
much of North America has become a ‘wilderness ghetto’
for large carnivores relegated to suboptimal living conditions (Hummel & Pettigrew 1992; Clark et al 1996). The
suite of large carnivores observed today once occurred over
a much greater extent of North America (Hummel &

Pettigrew 1992). However, as human activities spread,
carnivore distribution and abundance decreased dramatically (for a review of range contractions, see Laliberte &
Ripple 2004). Loss of habitat and deliberate extermination
of populations resulted in extirpation of large carnivores
across the continent. The retreating line of large carnivores
reflects a set of conditions in which human disturbances
have exceeded the resiliency of these species and/or the
habitats that support them (Weaver et al 1996).
But how did this happen? Large carnivores share an array of
ecological and life-history traits that make them particularly
sensitive to human influences and vulnerable to extinction
(Weaver et al 1996). Typically, large carnivores occur at low
population densities, range over large areas, and are
reclusive. If small populations are vulnerable to extirpation,
large carnivores are especially prone because their high
trophic or feeding position constrains them to living at low
population densities. Carnivore populations are also
commonly exposed to strong external pressures because their
biological requirements conflict with those of local people.
Where large carnivores survive outside protected areas, intentional or accidental killing by humans frequently limit their
numbers (Woodroffe & Ginsberg 1998; Carroll et al 2004).
Activities that fragment, dissect, and isolate habitat have
undesirable effects on large carnivores. The scale of fragmentation relevant to these animals is most frequently
caused by construction of roads, railways, agriculture, and
logging. The amount of habitat disruption that can be
tolerated is not known, but the negative effects appear
stronger for grizzly bear (Ursus arctos), wolf, and cougar
(Puma concolor) than wolverine (Gulo gulo), lynx (Lynx
canadensis), black bear (U. americanus), and coyote (C.
latrans). Equally important, preservation of habitat quality
requires maintenance of linkages, connectedness, and an
interspersion over geographic areas large enough to benefit
individuals and join individuals into populations (Carroll
et al 2001, 2004). Riparian areas appear to be important
elements in wolf, cougar, and grizzly bear home ranges and
may be dispersal avenues. This is probably also true for
other large carnivores. Therefore, protection of riparian
corridors is an important management concern.
Historically, large-scale extermination and loss of habitat
were the major threats to large carnivores. At present,
however, the most significant and pernicious ecological
threats to carnivore survival are related to loss, alienation,
and alteration of habitat resulting from exploitation of
natural resources, permanent facilities, and associated infrastructure (Paquet & Hackman 1995; Clark et al 1996).
These activities and structures are contributing to the fragmentation of landscapes, occluding essential regional
dispersal corridors, and creating linear impediments to
inter- and intra-territorial movements. Barriers, such as
highways and railways are exacerbating the landscaperelated problems because they are also direct and increasingly important causes of mortality (Beier 1993; Paquet
et al 1996; Paquet & Carbyn 2003). Moreover, the permanence of these facilities has largely foreclosed future opportunities for restoration of impaired landscapes.
Animal Welfare 2010, 19: 177-190

182 Paquet and Darimont
The combined deleterious effects could lead to permanent
loss of some and possibly all large carnivore populations in
most of North America. Loss of a keystone carnivore
species, such as the grizzly bear or wolf, can affect interspecific associations by disrupting mutualistic relationships or
food webs (Terborgh et al 1999; Hebblewhite et al 2005).
This, in turn, may cause secondary extinctions or unanticipated ripple effects in populations of other species (Wilcox
& Murphy 1985; Wilcove et al 1986; Hebblewhite et al
2005). For example, the loss of larger carnivores may precipitate the increase of smaller carnivores (mesopredators) that
are more tolerant of humans but in turn cause the decline of
smaller prey like songbirds (Crooks & Soulé 1999).

The grey wolf as a case study
The grey wolf originally occupied all habitats in North
America north of about 20°N latitude. On the mainland,
wolves were found everywhere except the southeastern
United States, California west of the Sierra Nevada, and the
tropical and subtropical parts of Mexico. The species also
occurred on large continental islands, such as Newfoundland,
Vancouver Island, the islands off the coast of southeast
Alaska, and throughout the Arctic archipelago and
Greenland, but was absent from Prince Edward Island,
Anticosti, and the Queen Charlotte Islands. An increase in the
human population in North America, a relentless expansion
of agriculture, overhunting of ungulate prey by people, and
intensive predator control aimed at the complete eradication
of wolves initiated a general decline in the distribution and
abundance of the species in the conterminous United States
and adjoining parts of Canada (Paquet & Carbyn 2003).
Now wolves are confined primarily to the northern half the
continent (ie Alaska and Canada). In the conterminous
United States, small populations exist in the Great Lakes
region and parts of the Pacific Northwest. A successful
programme to reintroduce wolves from Canada to
Yellowstone National Park and Idaho was carried out in 1995
and 1996, respectively. In the Southwest US and Mexico, the
Mexican wolf (C. l. baileyi) is effectively extinct in the wild,
although reintroductions were begun in Arizona in 1998.
Since humans have disturbed or destroyed much of the North
American landscape favoured by wolves (Paquet &
Hackman 1995; Paquet & Carbyn 2003), the species is now
found mostly in remote and undeveloped areas with sparse
human populations (Paquet & Carbyn 2003).
Wolves in human-dominated landscapes
Wolves continue to suffer from exposure to high levels of
human activity resulting in physical loss of habitat, degradation of habitat quality, disease (Mech & Goyal 1993;
Carmichael 2005), and mortality on roads and the railway
(Paquet et al 1996; Paquet & Carbyn 2003). Disturbances
include resource extraction (eg gravel, forestry), hydroelectric development, road corridors, utility corridors, air
pollution, water pollution, noise pollution, light pollution,
and recreational development. The resultant habitat use by
humans results in deaths of wolves, as well as usurpation,
fragmentation, alienation of natural habitat, and loss of
genetic diversity (Paquet & Carbyn 2003; Musiani &
© 2010 Universities Federation for Animal Welfare

Paquet 2004; Leonard et al 2005). Consequently, much of
the remaining wolf habitat now exists as widely scattered
patches. Overall, transformation of the natural landscape
and displacement of wolves by humans has resulted in
altered ecosystems throughout North America, thereby
affecting all of the species inhabiting them.
The specific conditions in which wolves are ‘disturbed’ (ie
that their distribution, movements, survival, or fecundity are
impaired) are believed to be highly variable. The extent and
intensity of disturbance appear to vary with environmental
and social context, and the individual animal (Paquet &
Carbyn 2003). Although wolves are sensitive to human
predation and harassment (Thiel 1985; Jensen et al 1986;
Fuller 1989; Mech 1989; Fuller et al 1992; Thurber et al
1994; Mladenoff et al 1995, 1999), we have very limited
empirical information on tolerance to indirect human disturbance (Heilhecker et al 2007). Previous studies suggest the
main factor that limits wolves, where they are present and
tolerated by humans, is adequate prey density (Fuller et al
1992). Although human activities have been shown to
influence the distribution (Thiel 1985; Fuller et al 1992;
Mladenoff et al 1995; Paquet et al 1996; Jędrzejewski et al
2004, 2005) and survival of wolves (Mech et al 1995;
Mladenoff et al 1997, 1999), human-caused mortality is
consistently cited as the major cause of extirpation (eg
Fuller et al 1992; Mech & Goyal 1993).
Avoidance of humans by wolves is temporal (Boitani 1982)
and spatial (Mladenoff et al 1997; Jędrzejewski et al 2004,
2005). The selection or avoidance of particular habitat
types is directly related to human use levels and habitat
potential (Paquet et al 1996; Hebblewhite et al 2005).
Wolves use disturbed habitats less than expected, which
suggests the presence of humans alters their behaviour at a
cost to their fitness (Paquet et al 1996). Very low intensity
disturbance does not have a significant influence on
wolves, nor does it seriously affect the ecological relationships between wolves and their prey. At low-to-intermediate levels of human activity, wolves are dislocated from
suboptimal habitats. Higher levels of activity result in
partial displacement but not complete abandonment of
preferred habitats. As disturbance increases, wolves avoid
using some of the most favourable habitats.
This pattern of displacement suggests that the presence of
humans repulses wolves, although a strong attraction to
highly-preferred habitats increases a wolf’s tolerance for
disturbance (Paquet et al 1996). As conditions become less
favourable, preferred habitats probably take on greater
importance. For example, we know that wolves select
reproductive areas near intense human activity when
suitable denning areas are limited, or where innocuous
human activity occurs (Chapman 1977). The presence of
artificial food sources (eg carrion pits, garbage dumps) also
attracts wolves and reduces avoidance of human activity
(Chapman 1977; Paquet et al 1996).
The tension between attraction and repulsion is probably
expressed differently by different individuals, packs, and
populations (Paquet et al 1996; Paquet & Carbyn 2003;

Wildlife conservation and animal welfare 183
Heilhecker et al 2007). Attraction to an area is a complex
sum of physiography, security from harassment, positive
reinforcement (eg easily obtained food), population density,
and available choice. Moreover, the response to a particular
disturbance seems to depend on disturbance-history, a
critical concept in understanding the behaviour of longlived animals that learn through social transmission
(Curatolo & Murphy 1986).
Several studies that used road densities as an index of
human influence concluded that human activities associated
with roads affect the survival and behaviour of wolves
(Paquet & Carbyn 2003). Interpretation, however, was
confounded because many human activities associated with
roads result in the death of wolves. Thus, absence of wolves
in an area may not be the result of behavioural avoidance
per se. Data from Ontario, Wisconsin, Michigan, and
Minnesota suggest that population persistence is usually
assured at road densities below 0.58 and 0.70 km per km2
(Thiel 1985; Jensen et al 1986; Mech et al 1988; Fuller
1989; Mech 1989; Fuller et al 1992, but see Merrill 2000 for
exception). A study in Alaska concluded that wolves avoid
heavily-used roads and areas inhabited by humans, despite
low human-caused wolf mortality (Thurber et al 1994).
Landscape level analysis in Wisconsin found mean road
density was much lower in pack territories (0.23 km per km2
in 80% use area) than in random non-pack areas (0.74) or
the region overall (0.71). Few areas of use exceeded a road
density of > 0.45 km per km2 (Mladenoff et al 1995).
Recent reports suggest wolves in Minnesota tolerate
higher levels of disturbance than previously thought
possible. Wolves, for example, are now occupying ranges
formerly assumed marginal because of prohibitive road
densities and high human populations (Mech 1993, 1995).
Legal protection and changing human attitudes are cited as
the critical factors in the wolf’s ability to use areas they
abandoned decades ago. If wolves are not killed, they
seem able to occupy areas of greater human activity than
previously assumed (Fuller et al 1992; Mech 1993). Based
on these observations, Mech (1995) comments that
misconceptions about the wolf’s inherent ability to
tolerate human activity encourage unwarranted protectionism. Nonetheless, wolves in Minnesota continue to
avoid populated areas, occurring primarily where road
density and human population are low (Fuller et al 1992).
Several North American studies (Fuller et al 1992;
Mladenoff et al 1995, 1999) have examined systematically
and explicitly human population density and wolf distribution (cf Jędrzejewski et al 2004, 2005 for Europe). All were
conducted at a landscape scale and assessed populationlevel responses of wolves to humans. In Wisconsin, human
population density was much lower in pack territories than
in non-pack areas. Wolf pack territories also had a higher
proportion of public land, and lower proportions of agricultural land. Notably, no difference was detected in the
densities of deer (primary prey) between pack territories
and non-pack areas. Overall, wolves selected those areas
that were most remote from human influence (Mladenoff

et al 1995, 1999). Most wolves in Minnesota (88%) were in
townships with < 0.70 km roads per km2 and < 4 humans per
km2 or with < 0.50 km2 and < 8 humans per km2. High
human or road densities likely precluded the presence of
wolf packs in several localities within contiguous, occupied
wolf range (Fuller et al 1992). In Italy, wolf absence was
related to human density, road density, urban areas, cultivated areas, and cattle and pig density. However, because
human density, road density, and urbanised areas were
highly intercorrelated, no specific human effect was established (Corsi et al 1999). In all studies, the absence of
wolves in human-dominated areas may have reflected high
levels of human-caused mortality, displacement resulting
from behavioural avoidance, or some combination of both.
In most parts of North America where wolves persist,
human disturbance has already, or is now, displacing wolves
from favourable habitat. Additional disturbances, additive
to current background disruption, may surpass the level of
habituation or innate behavioural plasticity that allows
wolves to cope with human encroachment. Multiple smallscale disturbances resulting in displacement of wolves from
habitats that provide limited nutritional or sanctuary
requirements can have an influence disproportionate with
the landscape area. This is particularly true in mountainous
and island environments that have limited amounts of useful
habitat (Darimont & Paquet 2002).
Given a choice, wolves prefer to avoid humans. However,
extensive and growing convergence of human activity and
wolf habitat has seriously compromised the availability and
effectiveness of wolf habitat worldwide, reducing the distribution of wolves to a fraction of their original geographic
range. Accordingly, disruptions resulting from human
influence combined with unrelenting and lethal antipathy
have created an impoverished environment that may not
sustain surviving wolf populations into the future. Fuller
et al (2002) summarise all the various means by which
humans purposely cause harm and (typically, but not
always) death to wolves. These include but are not limited
to aerial hunting, deadfall traps, large fishhooks, guns,
poisoning, snares, and traps. If wolves do persist, we
wonder what diminished quality of life must be endured to
survive in a human-dominated landscape.

Discussion
Conservation biology and animal welfare science are
conspicuous and distinctive among scientific disciplines for
explicitly embracing ethics (Soulé 1985). Conservation
biology is specifically founded on an appreciation for nonhuman life. The implicit moral premise is that protection of
non-human life and ecological processes that depend on
such life are good and right (Soulé 1985; Vucetich & Nelson
2007). This is an ethical claim and the principle that
underlies and motivates the scientific discipline of conservation biology (Groom et al 2005). In striking contrast with
other academic fields (eg medicine), however, the ethical
dimensions of conservation science are infrequently
discussed (Kellert 1993; Vucetich & Nelson 2007).
Animal Welfare 2010, 19: 177-190

184 Paquet and Darimont
We believe all animal scientists, including those interested
in wildlife, should critically evaluate both the ethical implications of human activities that degrade the environment
and the effects of conservation efforts to combat these
destructions. Assuming that the goal of conservation is to
maintain free-ranging and self-sustaining wildlife populations, then conservation efforts must focus on sustaining the
natural environment while meeting human needs. Similarly,
if the goal of animal welfare is to sustain a quality of life for
all species, such that the activities of humans are not a cause
of stress and suffering, then welfare efforts must focus on
stopping humans from seriously encroaching upon other
species. Since current circumstances demand that we
conserve wildlife in human-dominated landscapes,
achieving both of these goals is a considerable problem.
The problem is not easily resolved given that one of the
major cornerstones of the modern social paradigm is an allpervasive anthropocentricity compounded by competing
and often conflicting social perspectives, inflexible legislative constraints, and shifting political agendas. Specifically,
the pending social question is: what probability of species’
persistence and environmental quality is acceptable to
society and compatible with economic goals? The answer
varies depending on which sector of the public is queried.
To date, however, the prevailing human attitude has been to
show little consideration for other species, as evidenced by
the condition of the environment and number of species on
the brink of extinction. Proponents of this established
worldview implicitly accept or openly invoke the idea of
‘human exceptionalism’ as a justification for ignoring
fundamental ecological principles and the plight of other
species (cf Taylor 1981, 1986; Varner 1998).
Human exceptionalism refers to a belief that humans have
special status in nature based on their unique capacities.
This special status conveys special rights, such as the right
to life, even at the expense and suffering of other nonhuman life. This form of anthropocentrism, or humancenteredness, has been posited by some environmental
philosophers as the underlying if unstated reason why
humanity dominates and sees the need to ‘develop’ most of
the earth (Naess 1973; Kellert 1993; Brennan & Yeuk-Sze
2008). Anthropocentrism has been identified by these
writers and others as a root cause of the ecological crisis,
human overpopulation, and extinctions of many non-human
species, and it is used to draw attention to a systematic bias
in traditional Western attitudes to the non-human world
(Naess 1973; Brennan & Yeuk-Sze 2008). Similarly, the
animal liberation movement claims that it is the ability to
feel pain, rather than humanhood, which bestows equal
moral value. The unresolved philosophical question is
whether we will remove humans from the pedestal of moral
exceptionalism and extend the ancient principle of ethical
consistency (Gensler 1996) to all species: ‘‘treat others only
as you would consent to be treated in the same situation”.
Clearly, ethical consistency calls for a science that serves
humans and other animals alike without making one suffer
at the expense of the other (Bradshaw & Marino 2007).
© 2010 Universities Federation for Animal Welfare

Ultimately, the seriousness of human disturbance is a
human judgement and, as such, some may even consider the
destruction of the natural environment and wildlife to be
desirable. In addition, government agencies and other
decision-makers are confronted with the difficult problem
of achieving often-conflicting ecological, social, and
economic objectives within the constraints of legislation
and the lobbying of special interests. Unmistakably, the
impoverished condition of the environment provides strong
evidence that most decisions represent disproportionally the
interests of humans at the expense of wildlife. Since most
decision-making is based on social/political rather than
ecological periods, environmental concerns are often
subsumed to commercial needs, and future options largely
foreclosed by irreversible decisions. Further, politicians
must appeal to a divided public and powerful commercial
interests without jeopardising re-election.
Even in conservation science, the interests of individuals
are, on occasion, traded off against perceived benefits that
accrue to higher levels of organisation: populations, species,
and ecosystems. Although many contemporary biologists
and conservationists value both the welfare of individual
animals and the well-being of populations, species, and
ecosystems, the conservation of species and populations
often trumps all other values, including the welfare of individuals (Soulé 1985). The contention is that animal welfare
and conservation are largely incompatible, because what is
good for conservation is not always in the best interest of
individual animals and vice versa. In other words, the end
justifies the means. Hutchins (2007), for example, asserts
that “focusing too narrowly on the rights of individual
animals may be taking us down a path that will ultimately
prove detrimental to the conservation of species, populations, and ecosystems”. Although seldom recognised or
addressed, this trade-off is an ethical choice that subsumes
the welfare of individual animals to a supposedly higher
value of population viability. Nevertheless, sentience is
commonly assumed an ethically important quality (Regan
1983; Singer 1990; Rawles 2004). As such, the belief that
sentient individuals have value beyond their contribution to
the viability of a population is widely held and not limited
to animal-rights advocates (Kellert 1996; Manning 2003) as
implied by many conservationists (Hutchins 2007).
Undoubtedly, independent consideration of the needs of
individuals and populations can lead to very different
decisions when converted into wildlife management or
conservation policy. Animal protection advocates who
promote the welfare of individual animals are often marginalised by environmental scientists because their perspectives are perceived as obstacles to conservation efforts.
Rawles (2004), however, clearly demonstrates that
forsaking sentient non-human organisms in the name of
protecting biodiversity is not obviously justified. Although
no precise definition of ‘sentience’ has universal acceptance
among ethicists, there is little controversy that sentience and
suffering are morally-relevant qualities. Moreover,
sentience may be usefully equated with the capacity to

Wildlife conservation and animal welfare 185
suffer (Singer 1990; Chandroo et al 2004a,b). Therefore,
ignoring the cost to individuals, or asserting that concern for
individuals is misplaced, runs the serious risk of transforming conservation research and management into what
some environmental philosophers have referred to as ‘environmental fascism’ (see Nelson 1996). The essential point is
that judging the ethical appropriateness of sacrificing
sentient individuals in the name of conservation is very
difficult precisely because populations and individuals are
both valuable (Leopold 1949).
Estes (1998) eloquently and succinctly gets to the substance of
the matter in his discussion of whether to rehabilitate oiled
wildlife, specifically California sea otters (Enhydra lutris):
“The differing views between those who value the welfare
of individuals and those who value the welfare of populations should be a real concern to conservation biology
because they are taking people with an ostensibly common
goal in different directions. Can these views be reconciled
for the common good of nature? I’m not sure, although I
believe the populationists have it wrong in trying to
convince the individualists to see the errors of their ways.
The challenge is not so much for individualists to build a
program that is compatible with conservation — to date
they haven’t had to — but for conservationists to somehow
build a program that embraces the goals and values of individualists because the majority of our society has such a
deep emotional attachment to the welfare of individual
animals. As much as many populationists may be offended
by this argument, it is surely an issue that must be dealt with
if we are to build an effective conservation program”.
Estes’ admonition highlights an unresolved philosophical
breach between wildlife ‘populationists’ and ‘individualists’. We believe advocates of animal conservation and
animal welfare have failed to coalesce on common ground
because the history and practise of animal welfare stems
from the use of domesticated animals by humanity, and the
unique responsibility that such use dictates. Consequently,
welfarists have focused attention largely on animals used
for production of food and clothing, draught power,
companionship, recreation, scientific research, and
education. Similarly, conservation has largely focused on
managing the utilitarian relationship of wild animals and
humans (eg hunting, trapping). Even though the founders of
the North American conservation movement emphasised
our moral association with individual wild animals (Meffe
& Carroll 1997; Brennan & Yeuk-Sze 2008), the biological
importance of populations now trumps the fate of individuals (Soulé 1985; Hutchins 2007). In general, the notion
that animal welfare actually applies to wildlife has escaped
most welfarists and conservationists.
Yet, our overwhelming use and abuse of the planet’s
resources means that humanity does use wildlife, regardless
of whether the use is for food, sport hunting, or destruction
of habitat. As such, the human-caused suffering that wildlife
endures is our responsibility, and presents an additional
moral imperative for welfarists and conservationists to
consider carefully. Habitat destruction, for example,

deprives species of essential life requisites, likely causing
pain, prolonged suffering, and eventually death.
Discussions of how to incorporate ethical considerations into
animal conservation are on the rise (for example, see Goodall
& Bekoff 2002; Jickling & Paquet 2005; Vucetich & Nelson
2007; Mathews et al 2010). In recent years, welfarists have
raised concerns about wild animals that suffer because of
human-induced harm caused by trapping, hunting, and
landscape transformation. The Universities Federation for
Animal Welfare (UFAW) recently announced ‘wild animal
welfare’ awards for 2008 that included recognition of innovations to alleviate or prevent human-induced harm to animals
in the wild. In turn, many conservationists have embraced
these concerns, particularly those influenced by the writings
of Aldo Leopold (1949) and America’s early environmental
philosophers (Meffe & Carroll 1997; Vucetich & Nelson
2007). However, the ethical dimensions of conservation as
they relate to animal welfare have not been codified (cf
Goodall & Bekoff 2002) in a manner endorsed by conservation practitioners (Hutchins 2007, see however Guidelines
for Wildlife Research 2008). The resulting lack of awareness
is an impediment to the implementation of comprehensive
welfare policies for wild animals.

Recommendations
We believe our goal as conservationists is to accommodate
human activity and occupancy while protecting native
diversity (individuals, species, populations, ecosystems)
and the ecological functions and processes that maintain
that diversity. Therefore, our primary objective is to
develop measures that avoid and ameliorate the negative
effects of human activities on the natural environment.
Accordingly, we think thoughtful practices and careful
planning can help mitigate the human influence on species
and ecosystems. For example, we can work to reduce the
rate at which we alter natural environments. Ecosystems
and the species they support may cope more effectively
with the changes we impose, if those changes are slow. Our
footprint might then be stabilised at a point where enough
space and resources remain to sustain most of the other
species, for their sake and our own. Another approach is to
determine which human behaviours enable coexistence.
Accordingly, human disturbances that mimic or simulate
natural disturbances are less likely to threaten ecological
integrity than disturbances radically different from the
natural regime. From an evolutionary perspective, species
and biological systems are robust and fragile to different
perturbations, being particularly robust to perturbations
that are common to their niche or environment.
An elementary principle of animal conservation has always
been the retention, protection, and restoration of key
habitats. Recently, this has been expanded to include the
securing of safe travel opportunities between critical
habitats and provision for latitudinal or elevational
movements in response to seasonal and long-term climate
change. Thus, conservation efforts should now focus on
maintaining and restoring ecosystems, as well as reconnecting habitat fragments in landscapes cumulatively influAnimal Welfare 2010, 19: 177-190

186 Paquet and Darimont
enced by roads, human land uses, and high human population density. This approach benefits individual wild animals
by improving and preserving their environment.
We also believe a shared doctrine of animal welfare principles is needed, such as a modified version of the internationally-recognised Five Freedoms of Animal Welfare (see
below). Working from a premise of universal consideration,
and minding the ethical basis of knowledge claims, enables
richer conceptions of environmental ethics and creates new
possibilities for animal welfare and managing for wildlife
(Jickling & Paquet 2005). In essence, this would be an
ethical affirmation for conservationists and welfarists.
Welfare ethics need to be rooted in the life and mind of
involved people to be successful in the long run. The clear
conceptual link to conservation is that individuals within
anthropogenically-disturbed populations often endure
suffering caused by humans, which is beyond the suffering
that occurs naturally. Thus, the Five Freedoms might be
adapted as follows to specifically reflect the suffering borne
by wildlife for which humans are responsible:
• Freedom from thirst, hunger, and malnutrition caused by
humans;
• Freedom from discomfort due to environmental disruption
caused by humans;
• Freedom from fear and distress caused by humans;
• Freedom from pain, injury, and disease caused by humans;
• Freedom to express normal behaviour for the species.
In addition, the international research community has encouraged for many years the development of guidelines to
improve harmonisation of the care and use of animals in
research. Most of these guidelines are directed towards
animal experiments in the laboratory. However, increased
efforts are now being made to produce and disseminate
guidelines for the care and use of animals in wildlife research
(Guidelines for Wildlife Research 2008). In Norway, the
participants at an international meeting (Harmonisation of the
Care and Use of Animals in Field Research 2008) recently
issued a consensus statement summarising their view of the
current state of knowledge, including recommendations for
implementing the 3Rs of Russell and Burch (1959):
Replacement, Reduction and Refinement.
Finally, we list below several principles of conservation
biology which apply to preserving, restoring, and improving
the natural environment (Meffe & Carroll 1997). Some of
these principles are established generalisations, some are
testable hypotheses, and others are practical guides that we
assessed as important for the maintenance of ecosystem
health, ecological integrity, and the welfare of individual
animals. Although not cast specifically in terms of animal
welfare, adherence to these principles will help protect and
enhance the lives of wild animals. In short, these can be
‘scaled down’ and are useful in preventing the suffering of
individual animals:
• Animal conservation must be concerned with multiple
levels of biological organisations and with many different
spatial and temporal scales;
© 2010 Universities Federation for Animal Welfare

• Species well distributed across their native range are less
susceptible to extinction than species confined to small
portions of their range;
• Large blocks of habitat containing large populations of a
target species are superior to small blocks containing small
populations;
• The welfare of individuals, the integrity of populations,
and the preservation of species depends on the maintenance
of ecological processes;
• Dispersal and population exchanges can help counteract
the isolating effects of habitat fragmentation;
• Reducing adverse human effects on the environment
demands the slowing and reversing of human population
growth and using resources efficiently;
• Animal conservation and welfare advocates must
emphasise a vision of nature that emphasises the ethical,
aesthetic, and spiritual motives for conservation as opposed
to one in which countable, measurable, and monetary
aspects dominate.

Animal welfare implications and conclusion
The adverse environmental consequences of unrestrained
human population growth and industrial development are
not something we face in the future. They are with us now.
In North America, human alteration of the natural environment is substantial and growing. The loss of species and
suffering of individuals parallel an increase in human
activity. In many areas, prevailing conditions will not sustain
wildlife or the ecosystems upon which they depend. Most of
these changes are ongoing and accelerating, though many
were entrained long before we recognised their importance.
Although ecological literacy and awareness have improved
in recent years, we have yet to heed the persistent warnings
of the conservation biologists. As a society, we still lack a
fundamental understanding of the functions and processes
that underpin natural systems, which is a prerequisite for
appreciating the issues and links to our actions. Moreover, no
established approach or field within professional or practical
ethics is devoted to identifying and reasoning through the
complex ethical and philosophical dilemma of sustaining
diverse populations of wild species without sacrificing individual animals (Minteer & Collins 2005). Accordingly, there
is a conspicuous absence of scholarship regarding the ethical
relationship of conservation and the welfare of individual
animals (Vucetich & Nelson 2007). Is it even possible to
design economically-viable societies that protect the welfare
of animals and are ecologically sustainable?
We believe the primary cause of environmental destruction
is deeply rooted in anthropocentrism, whereby natural laws
are easily disregarded because there are no imminent
adverse consequences for people. From an ecological
perspective, human dominance of nature manifests as an
extreme case of competitive exclusion, where wild animals
have no voice and human priorities always prevail.
Although there is an undeniable association between
human-caused ecological degradation and the distress of
wildlife, the suffering of wild animals is largely an unin-

Wildlife conservation and animal welfare 187
tended and ignored outcome of anthropocentrism. That is,
most people do not intend for animals to suffer at the
expense of humans, but are unwilling to make the changes
necessary to prevent degradation of the environment.
Recognising these troublesome consequences of the human
enterprise requires a re-examination and possible reformation of what is often considered the self-evident truth of
human exceptionalism. Rather than using exceptionalism as
a license to exploit the environment for our benefit at the
expense of other species, we should assume the responsibility to protect all life from human-caused suffering (cf
Passmore 1974; Birch 1993; Goodall & Bekoff 2002).
In a manner similar to those who invoke human exceptionalism to justify their behaviour, conservation scientists
sometimes rationalise suffering of individual animals as
being necessary to achieve more important ecological
goals of population or species preservation, or even their
own research goals (Darimont et al 2008). In other words,
the means (sacrificing individual animals) is used to
justify the end (for the good of a population or species).
From an ethical perspective, this is usually an unacceptable and indefensible justification.
Obviously, human-caused suffering of animals is a
contentious subject with religious and moral overtones that
many would prefer to ignore. Nevertheless, despite different
conceptual underpinnings, advocates of animal conservation
and animal welfare need to work toward a consistent and
coherent ethical framework, with a willingness to recognise
that no single value always or automatically trumps all other
values (Vucetich & Nelson 2007). Individual animals,
including humans, have value. Conservation has value. How
we reconcile these values equitably is the ethical conundrum
for all of us (Vucetich & Nelson 2007).

Acknowledgements
We thank the host, David Fraser, and participants of the
workshop on Interdisciplinary Approaches to Managing
Human-Wildlife Interactions at the University of British
Columbia in November 2007, which was funded by a grant
from the Peter Wall Institute for Advanced Studies. We are
grateful to the Raincoast Conservation Foundation for
primary funding. We also thank the Vancouver Foundation,
National Geographic Society, Patagonia, and the following
foundations for support: Bullitt, McCaw, Summerlee, and
Wilburforce. CTD was supported by NSERC Postdoctoral
Fellowship, and PCP by WWF Canada. Finally, we are especially grateful to J Vucetich and MP Nelson for generously
sharing many of the novel ideas discussed in this manuscript.

References
Balmford AR, Green E and Jenkins M 2003 Measuring the
changing state of nature. Trends in Ecology & Evolution 18: 326-330
Bandura A 2007 Impeding ecological sustainability through
selective moral disengagement. International Journal of Innovation
and Sustainable Development 2: 8-35
Beier P 1993 Determining minimum habitat areas and habitat
corridors for cougars. Conservation Biology 7: 94-108
Bekoff M 2002 Minding Animals: Awareness, Emotions, and Heart.
Oxford University Press: New York, USA

Birch TH 1993 Moral considerability and universal consideration. Environmental Ethics 15: 313-332
Boitani L 1982 Wolf management in intensively used areas of
Italy. In: Harrington FH and Paquet PC (eds) Wolves of the World
pp 158-172. Noyes Publisher: Park Ridge, NJ, USA
Bolnick DI, Svanbäck R, Fordyce JA, Yang LH, Davis JM,
Hulsey CD and Forister ML 2003 The ecology of individuals:
incidence and implications of individual specialization. American
Naturalist 161: 1-28
Boyce MS 1992 Population viability analysis. Annual Review of
Ecology and Systematics 23: 481-506
Bradshaw GA and Marino L 2007 Minds of their own: the
exciting new field of trans species psychology. Best Friends
Magazine, November-December: 24-26
Bradshaw GA, Schore AN, Brown JL, Poole JH and Moss
CJ 2005 Elephant breakdown: social trauma: early disruption of
attachment can affect the physiology, behaviour and culture of
animals and humans over generations. Nature 433: 807
Brennan A and Yeuk-Sze L 2008 Environmental ethics. In: Zalta EN
(ed) The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy Fall Edition. http://plato.stanford.edu/archives/fall2008/entries/ethics-environmental/
Cardillo M, Mace GM, Gittleman JL and Purvis A 2006
Latent extinction risk and the future battlegrounds of mammal
conservation. Proceeding of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America 103: 4157-4161
Carmichael LE 2005 An annotated historical account of canine
parvovirus. Journal of Veterinary Medicine, Series B52: 303-311
Carroll C, Noss RF and Paquet PC 2001 Carnivores as focal
species for conservation planning in the Rocky Mountain Region.
Ecological Applications 11: 961-980
Carroll C, Noss RF, Paquet PC and Schumaker NH 2004
Extinction debt of protected areas in developing landscapes.
Conservation Biology 18: 1110-1120
Ceballos G and Ehrlich PR 2002 Mammal population losses
and the extinction crisis. Science 296: 904-907
Chandroo KP, Duncan IJH and Moccia RD 2004a Can fish
suffer? Perspectives on sentience, pain, fear and suffering. Applied
Animal Behaviour Science 86: 225-250
Chandroo KP, Yue S and Moccia RD 2004b An evaluation of
current perspectives on consciousness and pain in fishes. Fish and
Fisheries 5: 281-295
Chapman RC 1977 The Effects of Human Disturbance on Wolves
(Canis lupus). MS Thesis, University of Alaska, Fairbanks, USA
Clark TW, Paquet PC and Purlee P 1996 Large carnivore
conservation in the Rocky Mountains of the United States and
Canada, Special Section. Conservation Biology 10: 936-1055
Corsi F, Duprè E and Boitani L 1999 A large-scale model of
wolf distribution in Italy for conservation planning. Conservation
Biology 13: 150-159
Costanza R 1991 Ecological Economics: The Science and
Management of Sustainability. Columbia University Press: New
York, USA
Covington WW 2000 Helping western forests heal. Nature
408: 135-136
Crooks KR and Soulé ME 1999 Mesopredator release and avifaunal extinctions in a fragmented system. Nature 400: 563-566
Curatolo JA and Murphy SM 1986 The effects of pipelines,
roads, and traffic on the movements of caribou, Rangifer tarandus.
Canadian Field-Naturalist 100: 218-224
Czech B 2000 Economic growth as the limiting factor for wildlife
conservation. Wildlife Society Bulletin 28: 4-15
Czech B, Krausman PR and Devers PK 2000 Economic associations among causes of species endangerment in the United
States. Bioscience 50: 593-601

Animal Welfare 2010, 19: 177-190

188 Paquet and Darimont
Daly HE 1993 Introduction to essays toward a steady-state
economy. In: Daly HE and Townsend KN (eds) Valuing the Earth:
Economics, Ecology, Ethics pp 11–50. Massachusetts Institute of
Technology Press: Cambridge, MA, USA
Daly HE and Townsend KN 1993 Valuing the Earth: Economics,
Ecology, Ethics. Massachusetts Institute of Technology Press:
Cambridge, MA,USA
Darimont CT and Paquet PC 2002 The gray wolves, Canis
lupus, of British Columbia’s central and north coast: distribution and
conservation assessment. Canadian Field-Naturalist 116: 416-422
Darimont CT, Reimchen TE, Bryan HM and Paquet PC
2008 Faecal-centric approaches to wildlife ecology and conservation; methods, data and ethics. Wildlife Biology in Practice 4: 73-87
Darimont CT, Carlson SM, Kinnison MT, Paquet PC,
Reimchen TE and Wilmers CC 2009 Human predators outpace other agents of trait change. Proceedings of the National
Academy of Sciences 106: 952-954
Devall B and Sessions G 1985 Deep Ecology: Living as if Nature
Mattered. Peregrine Smith Books: Salt Lake City, Utah, USA
Diamond J 1989 Overview of recent extinctions. In: Pearl M and
Western D (eds) Conservation for the Twenty-First Century pp 37-41.
Oxford University Press: New York, USA
Diamond JM 2005 Collapse: How Societies Choose to Fall or
Succeed. Viking Press: New York, USA
Ehrenfeld, D 1991 Conservation and the rights of animals.
Conservation Biology 5: 1-3
Ehrlich PR 1995 The scale of human enterprise and biodiversity
loss. In: Lawton JH and May RH (eds) Extinction Rates pp 214-224.
Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK
Ehrlich PR and Hanski I 2004 On the Wings of Checkerspots: A
Model System for Population Biology. Oxford University of Press:
New York, USA
Estes JA 1998 Concerns about rehabilitation of oiled wildlife.
Conservation Biology 12: 1156-1157
Franklin IR 1980 Evolutionary change in small populations. In:
Soulé ME and Wilcox BA (eds) Conservation Biology: An
Evolutionary-Ecological Perspective pp 135-149. Sinauer Associates:
Sunderland, MA, USA
Fraser D, Weary DM, Pajor EA and Milligan BN 1997 A
scientific conception of animal welfare that reflects ethical concerns. Animal Welfare 6: 187-205
Fraser D 2008 Understanding Animal Welfare: The Science in its
Cultural Context. Wiley-Blackwell: Oxford, UK
Fuller TK 1989 Population dynamics of wolves in north-central
Minnesota. Wildlife Monographs 105: 1-41
Fuller TK, Berg WE, Radde GL, Lenarz MS and Joselyn
GB 1992 A history and current estimate of wolf distribution and
numbers in Minnesota. Wildlife Society Bulletin 20: 42-55
Fuller TK, Mech LD and Cochrane JF 2002 Wolf population
dynamics. In: Mech LD and Boitani L (eds) Wolves: Behavior,
Ecology, and Conservation. The University of Chicago Press:
Chicago, USA
Gensler HJ 1996 Formal Ethics. Routledge: London, UK
Gilpin ME and Soulé ME 1986 Minimum viable populations:
processes of species extinction. In: Soulé ME (ed) Conservation
Biology: The Science of Scarcity and Diversity. Cambridge University
Press: Cambridge, UK
Gilpin ME and Hanski I 1991 Metapopulation Dynamics:
Empirical and Theoretical Investigations pp 19-34. Academic Press:
San Diego, USA
Glenn TC 1991 Animal rights/animal welfare. Conservation Biology
5: 436-437
Goodall J and Bekoff M 2002 The Ten Trusts: What We Must Do
to Care for the Animals We Love. Harper Collins: San Francisco, USA

© 2010 Universities Federation for Animal Welfare

Grey W 1993 Anthropocentrism and deep ecology. Australasian
Journal of Philosophy 71: 463-475
Groom MJ, Meffe GK and Carroll CR 2005 Principles of
Conservation Biology, Third Edition. Sinauer Associates: Sunderland,
MA, USA
Guidelines for Wildlife Research 2008 A collection of existing
guidelines presented at the meeting: Harmonisation of the Care and
Use of Animals in Field Research. 21-22 May 2008, Gardermoen,
Norway. http://www.norecopa.no/sider/tekst.asp?side=25
Haber GC 1996 Biological, conservation and ethical implications of
exploiting and controlling wolves. Conservation Biology 10: 1068-1081
Hardin G 1968 The tragedy of the commons. Science 162: 1243-1248
Harmonisation of the Care and Use of Animals in Field
Research 2008 A consensus document issued by the participants. http://www.norecopa.no/sider/tekst.asp?side=8
Hebblewhite M, White C, Nietvelt C, McKenzie J, Hurd T,
Fryxell J, Bayley S and Paquet PC 2005 Human activity mediates a trophic cascade caused by wolves. Ecology 86: 1320-1330
Heilbroner RL 1992 The Worldly Philosophers: The Lives, Times
and Ideas of the Great Economic Thinkers, Sixth Edition. Simon and
Schuster: New York, USA
Heilhecker E, Thiel RP and Hall W Jr 2007 Wolf, Canis lupus,
behavior in areas of frequent human activity. Canadian Field
Naturalist 121: 256-260
Hendry AP, Farrugia TJ and Kinnison MT 2008 Human
influences on the rate of phenotypic change in wild animal populations. Molecular Ecology 17: 20-29
Hummel M and Pettigrew S 1992 Wild Hunters: Predators in
Peril. Key Porter Books: Toronto, Canada
Hutchins M 2007 The limits of compassion. The Wildlife
Professional, Summer 1: 42-44
Jędrzejewska B, Okarma H, Jedrzejewski W and
Milkowski L 1994 Effects of exploitation and protection on forest structure, ungulate density and wolf predation in Bialowieza
Primeval Forest, Poland. Journal of Applied Ecology 31: 664-676
Jędrzejewski W, Niedzialkowska M, Nowak S and
Jędrzejewska B 2004 Habitat variables associated with wolf
(Canis lupus) distribution and abundance in northern Poland.
Diversity and Distributions 10: 225-233
Jędrzejewski W, Niedzialkowska M, Myslajek RW, Nowak
S and Jędrzejewska B 2005 Habitat selection by wolves Canis
lupus in the uplands and mountains of southern Poland. Acta
Theriologica 50: 417-428
Jensen WF, Fuller TK and Robinson, WL 1986 Wolf, Canis
lupus, distribution on the Ontario–Michigan border near Sault Ste
Marie. Canadian Field-Naturalist 100: 363-366
Jickling R and Paquet PC 2005 Wolf stories: reflections on science, ethics, and epistemology. Environmental Ethics 27: 115-134
Kellert SR 1993 The biological basis for human values of nature.
In: Kellert SR and Wilson EO (eds) The Biophilia Hypothesis pp 4269. Island Press: Washington, DC, USA
Kellert SR 1996 The Value of Life: Biological Diversity and Human
Society. Island Press: Washington, DC, USA
Lacy RC 1993 VORTEX: a computer simulation model for population viability analysis. Wildlife Research 20: 45-65
Laliberte AS and Ripple WJ 2004 Range contractions of
North American carnivores and ungulates. BioScience 54: 123-158
Leonard JA, Vilà C and Wayne RK 2005 Legacy lost: genetic
variability and population size of extirpated US gray wolves (Canis
lupus). Molecular Ecology 14: 9-17
Leopold A 1949 A Sand County Almanac. Oxford University
Press: New York, USA
Linklater WL 2003 Science and management in a conservation crisis: a case study with rhinoceros. Conservation Biology 17: 968-975

Wildlife conservation and animal welfare 189
Manning RE 2003 Social climate change: a sociology of environmental philosophy. In: Minteer BA and Manning RE (eds)
Reconstructing Conservation: Finding Common Ground pp 207-222.
Island Press: Washington, DC, USA
Mathews F, Blumstein DT, Darimont CT, Chan K, Dill L,
Fraser D, Kirkwood JK, Littin K, Lusseau D and Paquet
PC 2010 Uniting wild animal welfare and conservation: guiding
principles. Animal Conservation, in press
Mech LD 1989 Wolf population survival in an area of high road
density. American Midland Naturalist 121: 387-389
Mech LD 1993 Updating our Thinking on the Role of Human Activity
in Wolf Recovery (Research Information Bulletin 57). US Fish and
Wildlife Service: St Paul, Minnesota, USA
Mech LD 1995 The challenge and opportunity of recovering wolf
populations. Conservation Biology 9: 270-278
Mech LD, Fritts SH, Radde GL and Paul WJ 1988 Wolf distribution and road density in Minnesota. Wildlife Society Bulletin 16: 85-87
Mech LD and Goyal SM 1993 Canine parvovirus effect on
wolf population change and pup survival. Journal of Wildlife
Diseases 29: 330-333
Mech LD, Fritts SH and Wagner D 1995 Minnesota wolf dispersal to Wisconsin and Michigan. American Midland Naturalist
133: 368-370
Meffe GK, Carroll CR and Contributors 1997 Principles of
Conservation Biology. Sinauer Associates: Sunderland, MA, USA
Merrill SB 2000 Road densities and wolf, Canis lupus, habitat suitability: An exception. Canadian Field-Naturalist 114: 312-314
Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MEA) 2005 Ecosystem
and Human Well-being: Biodiversity Synthesis. World Resources
Institute: Washington, DC, USA
Minteer BA and Collins JP 2005 Why we need an ‘ecological
ethics’. Frontiers in Ecology and the Environment 3: 332-337
Mladenoff DJ, Sickley TA, Haight RG and Wydeven AP
1995 A regional landscape analysis and prediction of favorable
gray wolf habitat in the northern Great Lakes region. Conservation
Biology 9: 279-294
Mladenoff DJ, Haight RG, Sickley TA and Wydeven AP
1997 Causes and implications of species restoration in altered
ecosystems: A spatial landscape projection of wolf population
recovery. Bioscience 47: 21-31
Mladenoff DJ, Sickley TA and Wydeven AP 1999 Predicting
gray wolf landscape recolonization: Logistic regression models vs
new field data. Ecological Applications 9: 37-44
Morrison JC, Sechrest W, Dinerstein E, Wilcove DS and
Lamoreux JF 2007 Persistence of large mammal faunas as indicators of global human impacts. Journal of Mammalogy 88: 1363-1380
Musiani M and Paquet PC 2004 Wolf persecution, protection,
and restoration in Canada and the United States. Bioscience 54: 50-60
Naess A 1973 The shallow and the deep, long-range ecology
movement. Inquiry 16: 95-100
Naess A 2002 Life’s Philosophy: Reason and Feeling in a Deeper
World. The University of Georgia Press: Athens, USA
Nelson MP 1996 Holists and fascists and paper tigers . . . oh my.
Ethics and the Environment 1: 103-117
Newmark WD 1987 A land-bridge island perspective on
mammalian extinctions in western North American parks.
Nature 325: 430-432
Newmark WD 1995 Extinction of mammal populations in western North American national parks. Conservation Biology 9: 512-526
Nowak RM, Walker EP, MacDonald DW and Kays RW
2005 Walker‘s Carnivores of the World. John Hopkins University
Press: Baltimore, MD, USA
Noss RF 1987 Corridors in real landscapes: a reply to Simberloff
and Cox. Conservation Biology 1: 159-164

Noss RF, O’Connel MA and Murphy DD 1997 The Science of
Conservation Planning: Habitat Conservation under the Endangered
Species Act. Island Press: Washington, DC, USA
Paquet PC and Carbyn LN 2003 Wolf, Canis lupus and allies.
In: Feldhamer GA, Thompson BC and Chapman JA (eds) Wild
Mammals of North America: Biology, Management, and Conservation
pp 482-510. Johns Hopkins University Press: Baltimore, MD, USA
Paquet PC and Hackman A 1995 A Large Carnivore
Conservation Strategy for the Rocky Mountains. World Wildlife Fund
(Canada) and World Wildlife Fund (USA): Toronto, Canada
Paquet PC, Wierzchowski J and Callaghan C 1996
Summary report on the effects of human activity on gray wolves
in the Bow River Valley, Banff National Park, Alberta. In: Green J,
Pacas C, Bayley S and Cornwell L (eds) A Cumulative Effects
Assessment and Futures Outlook for the Banff Bow Valley, Chapter 7.
Department of Canadian Heritage: Ottawa, Canada
Parmesan C 2006 Ecological and evolutionary responses to
recent climate change. Annual Review of Ecology Evolution and
Systematics 37: 637-669
Passmore J 1974 Man’s Responsibility for Nature, Second Edition.
Gerald Duckworth & Co: London, UK
Pauly D and Christensen V 1995 Primary production required
to sustain global fisheries. Nature 374: 255-257
Perry D and Perry G 2008 Improving interactions between animal rights groups and conservation biologists. Conservation Biology
22: 27-35
Pimlott DH, Shannon JA and Kolenosky GB 1969 The
Ecology of the Timber Wolf in Algonquin Provincial Park (Research
Report, Wildlife No 87). Ontario Department of Lands and
Forests: Toronto, Canada
Postel SL, Daily GC and Ehrlich PR 1996 Human appropriation of renewable freshwater. Science 271: 785-788
Rawles KE 2004 Biological diversity and conservation policy. In:
Oksanen M and Pietarinen J (eds) Philosophy and Biodiversity pp
199-216. Cambridge University Press: Cambridge, UK
Regan T 1983 The Case for Animal Rights. University of California
Press: Berkeley, USA
Rojstaczer S, Sterling SM and Moore NJ 2001 Human
appropriation of photosynthesis products. Science 294: 2549-2552
Routley R and Routley V 1980 Human chauvinism and environmental ethics. In: Mannison DS, McRobbie MA and Routley R
(eds) Environmental Philosophy pp 96-189. Australian National
University Research School of Social Sciences: Canberra, Australia
Russell WMS and Burch RL 1959 The Principles of Humane
Experimental Technique. http://altweb.jhsph.edu/publications/
humane_exp/het-toc.htm
Sagoff M 2004 Price, Principle, and the Environment. Cambridge
University Press: New York, USA
Schonewald-Cox CM and Buechner M 1992 Park protection
and public roads. In: Fiedler PL and Jain SK (eds) Conservation
Biology: The Theory and Practice of Nature Conservation, Preservation
and Management pp 373-396. Chapman and Hall: New York, USA
Schweitzer A 1946 Civilization and Ethics: the Philosophy of
Civilization II, Third Edition. Adam and Charles Black: London, UK
Singer P 1990 Animal Liberation, Second Edition. The New York
Review of Books (Distributed by Random House): New York, USA
Smith TB and Bernatchez L 2008 Evolutionary change in
human-altered environments. Molecular Ecology 17: 1-8
Song SJ and M’Gonigle RM 2001 Science, power, and system
dynamics: the political economy of conservation biology.
Conservation Biology 15: 980-989
Soulé ME 1985 What is conservation biology? BioScience
35: 727-734

Animal Welfare 2010, 19: 177-190

190 Paquet and Darimont
Soulé ME 1987 Viable Populations for Conservation. Cambridge
University Press: New York, USA
Stockwell CA, Hendry AP and Kinnison MT 2003
Contemporary evolution meets conservation biology. Trends in
Ecology & Evolution 18: 94-101
United Nations Environmental Programme 2007 Global
Environment Outlook: Environment for Development Assessment Report.
United Nations: Washington DC, USA. http://www.unep.org
Taylor P 1981 The ethics of respect for nature. Environmental
Ethics 3: 197-218
Taylor P 1986 Respect for Nature. Princeton University Press:
Princeton, USA
Terborgh J, Estes JA, Paquet PC, Ralls K, Boyd-Heger D,
Miller BJ and Noss RF 1999 The role of top carnivores in regulating terrestrial ecosystems. In: ME Soulé and Terborgh J (eds)
Continental Conservation pp 39-64. Island Press: Washington, DC, USA
The Wildlife Society 2003 The Relationship of Economic Growth
to Wildlife Conservation. (Wildlife Society Technical Review 03-1).
The Wildlife Society: Bethesda, MD, USA
Thiel RP 1985 Relationship between road densities and wolf habitat suitability in Wisconsin. American Midland Naturalist 113: 404-407
Thurber JM, Peterson RO, Drummer TD and Thomasma
SA 1994 Gray wolf response to refuge boundaries and roads in
Alaska. Wildlife Society Bulletin 22: 61-67

© 2010 Universities Federation for Animal Welfare

Varner GE 1998 In Nature’s Interests? Interests, Animal Rights, and
Environmental Ethics. Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK
Vitousek PM, Mooney HA, Lubchenco J and Melillo
JM 1997 Human domination of earth’s ecosystems. Science
277: 494-499
Vitousek PM, Ehrlich PR, Ehrlich AH and Matson PA 1986
Human appropriation of the products of photosynthesis.
BioScience 36: 368-373
Vucetich J and Nelson MP 2007 What are 60 warblers worth?
Killing in the name conservation? Oikos 116: 1267-1278
Weaver JL, Paquet PC and LF Ruggiero 1996 Resilience and
conservation of large carnivores in the Rocky Mountains.
Conservation Biology 10: 1013-1025
Wilcove DS, McLellan CH and Dobson AP 1986 Habitat
fragmentation in the temperate zone. In: Soulé ME (ed)
Conservation Biology: The Science of Scarcity and Diversity pp 237256. Sinauer Associates: Sunderland, MA, USA
Wilcox BA and Murphy DD 1985 The effects of fragmentation
on extinction. American Naturalist 125: 879-887
Wilson EO 2006 The Creation: An Appeal to Save Life on Earth.
Norton: New York, USA
Woodroffe R and Ginsburg JR 1998 Edge effects and the
extinction of populations inside protected areas. Science 280:
2126-2128

