About 1 in 500 infants is born with or develops hearing loss 
during early childhood. Hearing loss has many causes: some are 
genetic (that is, caused by a babys genes) or non-genetic (such 
as certain infections the mother has during pregnancy, or infections 
the newborn baby has). A combination of genetic and non-genetic 
factors also can cause hearing loss. For many babies, the cause 
of hearing loss is unknown.

This booklet answers many of the questions that families have about 
the causes of hearing loss, including genetic causes. For some of 
the topics, more extensive details are given in the shaded boxes.

1

About The Causes of Hearing Loss
What are the types of hearing loss? There are many different ways 
to talk about the different types of hearing loss.

o  One way is based on whether or not a baby is born with hearing 
loss. If the baby is born with hearing loss it is called congenital. 
If the hearing loss occurs after the baby is born it is called acquired.

o  Another way depends on whether or not the hearing loss gets 

worse over time. Hearing loss that gets worse over time is called 
progressive. Hearing loss that does not change is called 
non-progressive.

o  A third way depends on whether or not other symptoms are 

present; that is, is it syndromic or non-syndromic.

o  A fourth way depends on whether or not hearing loss runs 

in the family. If it does, it is called familial; if it does not it is sporadic

o  A fifth way is based on where in the ear the hearing loss occurs. 
If the loss occurs in the outer or middle ear it is conductive. If it 
occurs in the inner ear it is sensorineural. If the loss occurs in both 
areas it is mixed.

A Diagram of the External (E), 
Middle (M), and Inner (I) Ear

Drawing by: S. Blatrix
 Centre Regional dImagerie Cellulaire. Used with persmission.
www.iurc.montp.inserm.fr/cric/audition/english/ear/fear.htm 

2

One way to describe hearing loss is as congenital or acquired. 
Congenital means that a person was born with the hearing loss. Babies 
born with hearing loss can be identified through a newborn hearing 
screening test. The test often is done before a baby leaves the hospital 
in which he or she was born. The screening test does not tell the cause 
of the babys hearing loss. It can tell only whether the baby might have 
a hearing loss. Acquired hearing loss means that a person could hear 
when he or she was born, but developed hearing loss later in life. 
Acquired hearing loss also can be described by the age at which it starts. 
If hearing loss starts before the age when children usually begin talking, 
it is called prelingual, which means before speaking. If hearing loss 
starts after the age when children begin talking, it is called postlingual, 
which means after speaking.

If the hearing loss gets worse over time, it is called progressive. If the 
hearing loss does not change over time, it is nonprogressive or stable.

Syndromic means that a person has other symptoms besides hearing 
loss. For example, some people with hearing loss also are blind. There 
are many different syndromes that have hearing loss as one of the 
symptoms. Nonsyndromic means that the person does not have any 
other symptoms.

If more than one person in a family has hearing loss, it is said to be 
familial. That is, it runs in the family. If only one person in the family has 
hearing loss, it is called sporadic. That is, it does not run in the family.

The middle ear contains small bones that help send sound from the air 
to the inner ear. The inner ear changes these sounds into nerve signals 
that go to the brain. Conductive hearing loss is caused by problems 
in the outer or middle ear. Sensorineural hearing loss is caused by 
problems in the inner ear or in the hearing nerve, or both. Mixed hearing 
loss is a result of both kinds of problems.

3

What Causes Hearing Loss?
Hearing loss can be caused by changes in genes or by outside 
factors (like injuries, illness or certain medications), or both. 
For many children with hearing loss, the cause is unknown.

Genes are passed from parents to children and cause things to run in 
families. There are many genes that are involved in hearing. Sometimes, 
a gene does not form in the way it should. When this happens, it is called 
a mutation. Some mutations cause syndromic hearing loss and others 
cause nonsyndromic hearing loss. Even among some families with 
genetic hearing loss, a loss is not due to mutations in any of the known 
genes. Scientists are working to find all of the genes involved in hearing 
loss. Genes are described in more detail in the next section.

There are also a number of things that are not genetic that can cause 
hearing loss. For example, babies who are born too early and babies 
who need help breathing (for example, using a ventilator) are more likely 
to develop hearing loss than are other babies. Some infections (such 
as cytomegalovirus) the mother has during her pregnancy can cause the 
baby to have hearing loss. Also, some infections (such as meningitis) that 
babies and children have can cause hearing loss.

Sometimes, both genes and environment work together to cause hearing 
loss. For example, there are some medicines that can cause hearing 
loss, but only among people who have certain mutations in their genes.

4

How Do Doctors Figure Out What 
Caused a Persons Hearing Loss?
Doctors begin by looking at a persons physical features, 
medical history, and family history. Based on this, they 
classify the hearing loss in the ways described earlier 
(congenital or acquired, prelingual or postlingual, progressive 
or nonprogressive, conductive or sensorineural, syndromic 
or nonsyndromic, and familial or sporadic). The classifications 
often point to certain causes. The doctors might ask for more 
medical tests to look for signs of syndromic hearing loss, and 
they might ask for genetic tests.

5

About Genes & Mutations
What Are Genes?
Genes tell the cells of peoples bodies how to grow and work. 
For example, the instructions in certain genes control what color 
a persons eyes will be. Each person gets half of his or her genes 
from each parent, and that is why a person tends to look like his 
or her parents.

Genes are stored in a chemical called deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). DNA 
is a chemical chain made up of bases. There are four bases: A, C, T 
and G. The specific order, or sequence, of these bases determines the 
exact information carried in each gene, like the way that a specific pattern 
of letters makes up the words in a sentence.

The DNA is packaged into small units called chromosomes. Each cell 
in a persons body contains a set of chromosomes, and thus a set of 
genetic instructions. Every person should have 23 pairs of chromosomes. 
One chromosome from each pair is from the persons mother and one 
chromosome of each pair is from the father.

The first 22 pairs of chromosomes are a matching pair in everybody. 
The 23rd pair is called the sex chromosomes, and they help determine 
if a person is male or female. A female has two X chromosomes, and 
a male has one X and one Y chromosome. A mother will give one of her 
two X chromosomes to each of her children. A father will give either his 
X or his Y chromosome. A child who gets the fathers Y chromosome will 
be a boy. A child who gets the fathers X chromosome will be a girl.

6

Figure 2

The Relationship Between 
Cells, Chromosomes, DNA, 

Bases, and Genes

7

Figure 3

An Example of How Chromosomes Are 

Passed From Parents To Children

Figure 3 shows how children get their chromosomes and, therefore, 
their genes from their parents. In this figure, three pairs of chromosomes 
are shown: pair #1 (green), pair #2 (yellow), and the sex chromosomes 
(pink and blue). The fathers chromosomes are shown in solid color, 
and the mothers are striped. Children randomly get one of each pair 
of chromosomes from their mother (striped) and one of each pair from 
their father (solid). Each daughter gets an X from her mother (striped) and 
an X from her father (solid). Each son gets an X from his mother (striped) 
and a Y from his father (solid).

8

What are Mutations?
A mutation is any change in a gene that makes it different from what 
it should be; that is, a usual copy (the copy that most people have). 
If the change causes a difference in the way that the gene works, 
the person with the mutation might have a particular condition (such 
as hearing loss) that can run in the family. Different changes run 
in families in different ways. These different changes, or mutations, 
are described on the next few pages.

A mutation is any change in the usual DNA sequence. For example, 
suppose part of a gene usually has the sequence GTAC. A mutation can 
change the sequence to GTTC in some people. This change in sequence 
can change the way that the gene works so that people with this mutation 
can have a particular condition. Not all mutations affect the person who 
has them.

Genetic conditions often are described in terms of the chromosome 
that contains the gene. If the gene is on one of the first 22 pairs of 
chromosomes, called autosomes, the genetic condition is called an 
autosomal condition. If the gene is on the X chromosome, the condition 
is called X-linked, or sex-linked.

Genetic conditions also are grouped by how they run in families. Different 
mutations cause conditions to run in families in different patterns. 
Mutations are called dominant or recessive depending on how they 
cause conditions and how they run in families.

9

Autosomal Dominant Conditions
Autosomal conditions affect both males and females equally. 
In dominant conditions, the condition is passed from parent to child. 
If one parent has the condition, each child has a 50% (1 in 2) chance 
of having it as well.

Autosomal genes are genes that are found on one of the first 22 pairs 
of chromosomes, the pairs that are the same for both males and females. 
In the case of dominant conditions, a child will have the condition if he 
or she has one copy of the gene with the dominant mutation. It takes only 
one copy of a dominant mutation to cause the condition.

. When one parent has the 

) and a copy with the 
). He or she will give each child one or the other. 

Figure 4 shows how children get dominant conditions from their parents. 
In this example shown, the usual copy is symbolized by  and the copy 
with the dominant mutation is symbolized by 
dominant condition, he or she has a usual copy (
dominant mutation (
Therefore each child has a 50% (1 in 2) chance of getting the gene with 
the dominant mutation and of having the condition. If the other parent 
has two usual copies, and therefore does not have the condition, he or 
she will give each child one of the two usual copies (
). Even though a 
child gets one of the usual copies from the parent who does not have 
the condition, if he or she gets a dominant copy from the parent with the 
condition, the child also will have the condition.

10

Figure 4

An Example of Autosomal 

Dominant Inheritance

Deaf
Father

Hearing
Mother

Deaf

Daughter

Hearing

Son

Deaf
Son

Hearing
Daughter

copy with a dominant mutation.

11

Figure 5

An Example of Autosomal 

Recessive Inheritance

Hearing
Father-
Carrier

Hearing
Mother-
Carrier

Hearing
Child-

Noncarrier

Hearing
Child-
Carrier

Hearing
Child-
Carrier

Deaf
Child-
Carrier

copy with a recessive mutation

12

Autosomal Recessive Conditions
Autosomal conditions affect males and females equally. 
Recessive conditions also are due to changes in genes, but they 
run in families in a different way than dominant conditions. This is 
because people who have one copy of a recessive mutation do not 
have the condition. They are called carriers. If two carriers have 
a child together, there is a 25% (1 in 4) chance that the child will get 
two copies of the mutation and, therefore, have the condition.

Autosomal genes are genes that are found on one of the first 22 pairs 
of chromosomes, the pairs that are the same for both males and females. 
In the case of recessive conditions, a child will have the condition only 
if he or she does not have a usual copy of the gene.

). Each has a 50% (1 in 2) chance of happening. If the child 

) from one parent and one copy with the recessive 

) or the copy with the recessive 

Figure 5 shows how recessive conditions run in families. In this example, 
each parent is a carrier and has one usual copy (symbolized by ) and 
one copy with a recessive mutation (symbolized by ). Each parent will 
give the child either the usual copy (
mutation (
gets one usual copy (
mutation (
parents. If the child gets the copy with the recessive mutation (
both parents, and therefore doesnt have a usual copy, the child will have 
the condition. When both parents are carriers, there is a 25% (1 in 4) 
chance that each child will get a copy with a recessive mutation from both 
parents and, therefore, have the condition.

) from the other parent, the child will be a carrier like both 
) from 

13

X-Linked Recessive Conditions

X-linked conditions usually affect only males. In such instances, 
a mutation is passed in the family through female carriers who do 
not have the condition. However, each son of a female carrier has 
a 50% chance of inheriting the mutation and, therefore, of having 
the condition.

X-linked genes are genes that are found on the X chromosome. 
Recessive means that a person has the condition only if he or she 
does not have at least one usual copy of the gene.

A female has two X chromosomes and, therefore, two copies of each 
X-linked gene. A woman who has one usual copy and one copy with 
a recessive mutation is called a carrier. A carrier does not have the 
condition, but can pass the copy with the recessive mutation on to her 
children.

A male has only one copy of the X chromosome, which he has gotten 
from his mother. His other chromosome is a Y chromosome that he has 
gotten from his father. Therefore, a male has only one copy of each 
X-linked gene. If the male gets his mothers X chromosome that has the 
recessive mutation, he will have the condition. If he gets his mothers 
X chromosome that has the usual copy of the gene, he will not have 
the condition. Therefore, a son of a carrier mother has a 50% chance of 
having the condition. Because a male has only one X chromosome and, 
therefore, must pass that X chromosome to each of his daughters, each 
daughter will be a carrier. Because a male has only one Y chromosome, 
he will pass that Y chromosome (and not the X chromosome) to each 
of his sons, so none of his sons will have the condition or be carriers.

14

Figure 6

An Example of X-linked 
Recessive Inheritance

Hearing
Father

Hearing
Mother-
Carrier

Hearing
Daughter-
Noncarrier

Hearing

Son

Hearing
Daughter-

Carrier

Deaf
Son

usual copy of the gene, and     is an X 

chromosome with a copy with a recessive

mutation.      is a Y chromosome.

15

What are GJB2 and Connexin 26?
The GJB2 gene contains the instructions for a protein called Connexin 
26; this protein plays an important role in the functioning of a part of the 
ear called the cochlea. The cochlea is a very complex and specialized 
part of the body that needs many instructions to guide its development 
and functioning. These instructions come from genes such as the GJB2, 
GJB3, and GJB6. Changes in any one of these genes can result in 
hearing loss.

Among some populations, about 40% of newborns with a genetic hearing 
loss who do not have a syndrome have a mutation in the GJB2 gene. 
There are many different mutations in this gene that can cause hearing 
loss. Most of these mutations are recessive, meaning that a person can 
have one usual copy of the gene and one copy of the mutation and will 
have full hearing function. (Everyone has two copies of the GJB2 gene, 
one from each parent). However, a person who has two copies of a 
gene with a mutation, one mutation inherited from each parent, will have 
hearing loss. This means that if both parents have a copy of the gene 
with a mutation, they can have a child with hearing loss, even though 
both parents can hear. In fact, most babies with hearing loss are born 
to parents who can hear.

16

Multifactorial Conditions
Sometimes conditions such as hearing loss are caused by a 
combination of genetic mutations and non-genetic factors. These 
conditions are said to be multifactorial. If their first child has a 
multifactorial condition, the parents chance of having a second child 
with the condition depends on the specific condition, and is usually 
about 3% to 5%.

People who have multifactorial conditions often are born into 
families with no other affected members. Parents of a child with 
any such condition have a greater chance of having another child 
with the same condition than parents who do not have a child with 
the condition.

Figure 7

The Relationship Between Chromosomes, 

Mitochondria, and Mitochondrial DNA

17

Mitochondrial Conditions
Mitochondrial conditions are different from most other genetic 
conditions because only the mother can pass them to her children. 
If a woman has a mitochondrial condition, the chance that she will 
pass it on to her children depends on the particular condition and 
on how severely she is affected. Fathers with a mitocondrial 
condition do not pass it on to their children.

Not all of a persons genes can be found on their chromosomes. A few 
genes are found on small, circular pieces of DNA in the mitochondria, tiny 
parts of cells that make energy. These genes are called mitochondrial 
genes. Each cell has many mitochondria and, therefore, many copies 
of each mitochondrial gene. The chance that a person will have a 
mitochodrial condition depends on the number of his or her mitochondria 
that carry a mutation. Mitochondrial genes are passed on to children 
differently from the way that genes on chromosomes are passed on 
because each person gets his or her mitochondrial genes only from his 
or her mother. Therefore, if a woman carries a variation in one of her 
mitochondrial genes, each child has a chance of having the condition 
or of being an unaffected carrier. The exact chance depends on the 
number of copies with mutations that the mother is carrying. A male 
with a mitochondrial condition will not pass the condition to his children, 
because males do not pass their mitochondrial genes to their children.

Figure 8 shows how a fertilized egg (which will grow into a baby) gets 
chromosomes from the mothers egg and the fathers sperm (shown 
as red and blue chromosomes), but gets mitochondrial DNA only from 
the mothers egg.

18

About Genetic Testing
What Is Genetic Testing?
A genetic test involves looking at a persons 
DNA to see if certain mutations are present. 
A persons DNA sample usually is gotten from 
one of two different sources: (1) a small sample 
of a persons blood, or (2) cheek cells from a 
persons mouth. To get the cheek cells, a small, 
toothbrush-like swab is rubbed inside a persons 
mouth. The cheek swab is easy and painless, 
but the DNA obtained from this method is 
sometimes unstable and might not be usable.

Once a persons DNA sample is obtained, there are 
two different ways to look for mutations. The first 
way looks only for certain mutations. This mutation-
specific testing will detect that one type of mutation 
if it is present, but it will not detect other mutations that also might be 
present. This type of testing is used when most of the people who have 
a genetic condition have the same mutation.

The other type of genetic testing is called sequencing. In this method, 
the DNA sequence is determined for the entire gene or for a certain part 
of it. This method will detect any mutation that is present in the part of the 
gene looked at. This type of testing is harder and costs more. It usually 
is used when any one of several mutations in a gene could cause 
a condition.

19

What Are the Benefits of Genetic Testing?
If a mutation is found, it might explain why the person has a 
condition such as hearing loss. In some cases, knowing what 
mutation a person has will allow doctors to predict how severe the 
condition might become and what other symptoms can be expected. 
Then, the person can get any other medical care that might be 
needed. Also, knowing the cause of a persons condition will let him 
or her know what the chances are of passing the condition on to his 
or her children. It also lets other family members know the chances 
that they might have a child with the same condition.

What Are the Limits of Genetic Testing?

o  Not all of the genes that cause conditions are known. 

So, even if a condition runs in a family, it might not 
be possible to find the mutation that causes it.

o  Some tests are hard to do. For example, the bigger 

a gene is, the harder it is to study the whole gene.

o  Sometimes, it is not possible to tell if a mutation is the 

cause of a condition, or just a coincidence.

Some mutations cause conditions among most people, but not among 
all people who carry them. For each such mutation, a positive result (that 
is, a result showing that a person has one or more copies of a mutation) 
might not mean that the person will get the associated condition. 
Likewise, a negative result (that is, a result showing that a person does 
not carry a copy with that mutation) does not guarantee that the person 
will not get the associated condition. This is because the person might 
have a different mutation that was not detectable by the test used, or the 
person might have a mutation in a different gene that also causes the 
same condition.

20

What Are the Risks of Genetic Testing?
Some people have strong feelings when they get the results of a 
genetic test. Some people feel angry, sad, or guilty if they find out 
that they or their child has a mutation. It is important to remember 
that everyone carries mutations of some kind, and that a persons 
genes are no ones fault.

Genetic tests are different from other medical tests in that the results 
provide information about other members of the family, and not just 
the person being tested. Some family members do not want to know 
that a mutation runs in their family. Also, because children get their 
genes from their parents, genetic tests that involve several family 
members can reveal personal information, such as a child having 
been adopted or having a different biological father.

Sometimes, people are concerned about keeping the results of their 
genetic tests private. For example, they do not want their friends, 
relatives, or coworkers to find out. Companies that offer genetic 
testing are very careful to make sure that test results are kept 
private. Test results cannot be seen by anyone who is not involved 
in the testing, unless the person tested or his or her parents 
or guardians give permission. 

21

Where Can I Find More Information?
For more information about genes related to hearing loss and about 
genetic testing, contact a genetic counselor in your area.

For more information about hearing and hearing loss, see the 
National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders 
at http://www.nidcd.nih.gov/health/hearing/

The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services has a guide 
that explains about genes and genetic testing at 
http://www.accessexcellence.org/AE/AEPC/NIH/index.html

The Genetic Science Learning Center has some information about 
basic genetics, genetic conditions and genetic counseling at 
http://learn.genetics.utah.edu/

Cold Spring Harbor Labs has a tutorial about genetics that is a little 
more in-depth than those at some of the other sites. It can be found 
at http://www.dnaftb.org/dnaftb/

This GeneTest site has a clinic directory to help find a genetics 
center in your area. This site can be found at http://www.ncbi.nlm.
nih.gov/sites/GeneTests/?db=GeneTests

The Hereditary Hearing loss Homepage gives an up-to-date 
overview of the genetics of hereditary hearing loss for researchers 
and clinicians working in the field. This site can be found at: 
http://hereditaryhearingloss.org/

For more information on Early Hearing Detection and Intervention, 
see http://www.cdc.gov/ncbddd/hearingloss/index.html

22

DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

1600 Clifton Road
Atlanta, GA 30333

National Center on Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities

Division of Human Development and Disability

Early Hearing Detection and Intervention

CS217481-A

