THE  NATURAL  HISTORY  OF  NETWORKS* 

GoRDON  PASK 

Systems Research Ltd., London,  England 

INTRODUCTORY  REMARKS 

IN TillS paper I shall put forward a pair of contentions, and examine 
some of their consequences.  The first of these concerns any netv<.;ork 
which  is  given  in  nature or  which  appears  as  part  of a  ",Black 
Box "<1> problem.  The  contention is  that if an observer wishes  to 
use  any  self-organizincr  potentialities  the  network  may  have,  then 
he must look at the ne~work as though he were a natural historian. 
I am using the term " network "  in a  general sense, to imply any 
set  of  interconnected  and  measurably  active  physical  entities. 
Naturally occurring networks,  of interest because they have a, self(cid:173)
organizing character, are, for example, a marsh, a  colony of micro-
organisms, a research team, and a man. 
 It is  not  so  easy  to  say  what  I  mean  by  a  natural  histonan., 
Emphatically  he  is  not  a  meticulous  and  classifying  perso~.  In 
choosing the name  I  had the interactive aspects  of natural history 
in mind, the art of knowing about a rabbit run, almost by living !he 
part of a rabbit, the $kill of animal training-disciplined enough to 
permit  its  discussion-the  search for  similarities  which  are  coge~t 
within the network itself. 

. 

. 

 

The idea  of necessity  also  needs  comment.  We  can,  of course, 
look  at a  system in any way we  choose,  regardless  of whether  or 
not it is  self-organizing.  Thus,  we  can  look  at  a  man  from  the 
anatomical point of view and see a creature with two legs, bounded 
by its skin.  Again, we might examine man like the sociologists ahd;] 
see  a  badly  defined  game  player.  The  contention is  that  in  orde1(\ 
to use the self-organizing character of a man we must become natur~. 
* The  author  wishes  to  acknowledge  his  association  as  Assistant  Research 
Professor  with  Professor  H.  von  Foerster  (Electrical  Engine.ering  Resear~h  
Laboratory) of the University of Illinois, during the writing of his p~per.  While 
at the University of Illinois the work was supported by the InformatiOn Systems 
Branch of the Office of Naval Research under Contract Nonr .. '!l834(21). 

232 

The Natural History of Networks 

233 

historians, which means,  for the human system,  that we  must talk 
to  it.  In conversation  the  system  appears  to  be  bounded  at  one 
moment by the  anatomist's  skin,  and  at the  next  moment,  by its 
region of influence upon other men in society.  Typically a  natural 
historian must change his viewpoint to suit a  changeful system. 

cDIFFERENT  METHODS  OF  OBSERVATION 

In order to express these notions precisely we must examine more 
\familiar  ways  of observing  networks  and  compare these with the 

1atural historian's strategy. 

Any pattern of activity in a  network,  regarded as  consistent by 
some observer, is a  system,  Certain groups of observers, who share 
a  common  body  of  knowledge,  and  subscribe  to  a  particular 
disciplirie,  like  "  physics "  or  "  biology "  (in  terms  of which  they 
~  pose hypotheses about the network), will pick out substantially the 
same systems.  On the other hand, observers belonging to different 
groups will not agree about the activity which is a system. 

1 
I 

I shall call a body of knowledge, in which statements are related in 
a  common  language,  a  reference  frame. <2>  For the  observer  who 
adopts it, a reference frame determines the kind of enquiry which is 
relevant (and thus, the set of physical attributes,  of the activity in a 
network which it is pertinent to observe). 

Ultimately,  observations and experiments are conducted in order 
to  control the  activity  in a  network.  Some  observers,  a  category 
which will  be defined  as  specialized observers,  wish  to control this 
activity  by  discovering  the  "  truth "  about  how  it  occurs.  They 
experiment,  on  the  assumption  that  a  sufficiently  complicated 
"truth"  is  invariant,  by  trying  to  identify  observable  behavior 
with a hypothetical system.  Now any real observer is limited by the 
number  of  states  he  can  usefully  distinguish  in  an  experiment, 
and in general he will not be able to identify a sufficiently complicated 
hypothetical  system  in  any  direct  fashion  with  the  measurable 
activity.  Rather,  he will assimilate results from many experiments, 
each  of which  validates  only  a  sub-system  of  the  hypothetical 
system he assumes  to exist.  But assimilation is  only possible if the 
experimental. observations  can be compared and transformed  with 
a well-defined composition rule.  It is no accident that the measurable 
attributes  deemed  relevant  in  different  reference  frames  prove 
incomparable,  which  implies  that  results  from  experiments  ,in 

234 

GoRDON  PASK 

different  reference  frames  are  not  assimilable.  Because  of this  a 
specialized observer necessarily elects  to  experiment  within  a  single 
reference  frame.  Thus,  any  specialized  observer who  examines  a 
network will  discern only those systems which are manifest: 

(1)  By  changes  in  a  set  of relevant variables,  or equivalently 
(2)  Which are  composed  of the  unit  elements  or components 
which  may  be  defined  if the  functional  equations  of the  activity, 
appropriate  for  the  particular  reference  frame,  are  reduced  to 
canonical form. <3> 

.  J 

Systems  may  also  be  controlled  by  interacting  with  them,  and 
this technique is used by a natural historian.  In general, he assumes 
that the  " truth "  about the  system  is  not invariant  (otherwise  he 
would have examined it like a  specialized observer), and his experi(cid:173)
ments aim either to maximize future interaction or to achieve some 
more specialized  objective (like making a system called an elephant, 
get up on its hind legs).  The natural historian, since he is not seeking 
the absolute, adopts whatever relevance criteria allow him to achieve 
interaction.< 4>  A  specialized  observer  sees  him skipping illogically 
from one frame to another;  for example,  at different stages in the 
training process he may "  feed "  and "  entice "  the elephant, which 
are procedures  appropriate  to  strictly incomparable models  of the 
system.  As  a  result  of his  experiments  the  natural historian  may 
be able to make assertions about how to interact-like "  Give it a 
bun if its trunk is drooping," or " Pat the creature on the head each 
day "-but these must not be confused with truths about the system 
in the previous and rigorous sense.  Giving a bun to and patting an 
elephant, both of which induce it to stand upright, are not procedures 
comparable  with  changing  the  pressure  and the temperature  of a 
gas,  both  of which make it change  volume.  The laws  of gaseous . 
behavior  are  expressed  in  a  single  reference  frame.  The  laws  of 
elephant  behavior  are  not.  Thus,  a  natural  historian  cannot  say 
anything  precise  about the  way that  elephants  (or other systems) 
work.  He makes comments only about his interaction. 

. 

While admitting this limitation, I believe that a natural historian 
can answer  all  of the  enquiries  it is  either  legitimate  or useful!:'to 
make  about  a  self-organizing  system.  The  natural  historian's 
language  is  appropriate  for  discussing  behavioral  characteristics 
some  of  which  are  vague,  some  of which  (like  the  redundancies 
and  stabilities  described  by  McCulloch< 5 6>  and  the  habituation 

( 
cf' 

The Natural History of Networks 

235 
described by Ashby<1>),  are firmly related to topological parameters. 
of the  network,  and  a  few  of which  like  "  differentiation "  and 
" memory "  will be examined in this paper.  The natural historian is 
unable  to  say  where these  behavioral characteristics  reside  in the 
network  or how they  are manifest,  but questions  of this  kind  are 
probably meaningl,ess in the self-orga~g context. 

Mathematic a! Representation 

It would  be inappropriate,  in this  paper,  to  discuss  the  mathe(cid:173)

matical work which is being done by A. Mullin at the University of 
Illinois  and  which  will  elaborate  these  ideas.  However,  I  shall 
present a  few  descriptive structures with the provision that a  more 
elegant  formulation  will  emerge when  the  optimum  mathematical 
technique for  dealing  with the  observer and network problem has 
been determined. 

Specialized Observation 

~model or hypothetical system Ji =(Up) is a  set  U~ of points 
U m a phase space Gf.,C  together with a finite group G. of transforma-
. 
ttons 

c  Gi. 

F 

J 

Clearly the models Ji with (j =  1, 2,  .... ) are consistent  due to 
their  group  character,  and  are  elements  of  an  hierarchy,  the 
coherence  of which  depends  upon the  adoption,  by  a  number  of 
specialized  observers,  of a  certain  "Composition  Law."  In  the 
present discussion  we  shall  assume  that this  "  Composition Law " 
is matrix multiplication and that the groups G. have thus the usual 
connotation. 

1 

In this hierarchy the lowest hypothetical models will be determined 
by cyclic groups generated as the powers of a  single transformation 
such as G;  =  F;F ~ .... Fi-1 with F~ = Ithe identity transformation 
and (i =  1, 2, .... ). 
The model f;  . (U~G ;) is.thus a model of a stable system, for any 
state  U  c  U;  will  be  repeated  in  c  units  of activity,  in  general, 
inc observational intervals. 

In any models Jan observer is able to describe, in a way which is 
unambiguous to other observers adopting his composition law, those 
features which are kept invariant by F  c  G.  However, in order to say 
that this description is the " truth," the model to which it refers  and 
in the simplest case a model like J; must be experimentally test~d. 

236 

GORDON  PASK 

Before examining the experimental procedure, let us note that as a 
result of this testing there will be two disjoint subsets of hypothetical 
systems  in  the  hierarchy,  and  thus  two  disjoint  hierarchies;  one 
being  built up from  experiments  which  yielded  results  confirming 
the  existence  of hypothetical  systems,  the  description  of which  is 
"  true,"  and  the  other  including  plausible  but  experimentally 
unconfirmed models. 

An experiment is an attempt to make an identification .QY between 

the points  U in a  hypothetical system and the states  of a  real net(cid:173)
work.  As a  result of this  an observer may also  relate the ab~tract 
transformations F to real mechanisms in a network or alternatively 
to  real  stimulus  procedures  which  he  can use  to modify  the  state 
of the network.  If identification is possible for any J;, the system J; 
is said to exist in th~ network. 

~ 

Because  of his  limitations  an  observer  is  unable  to  make  any 
experiment he pleases.  The restrictions  are  of two kinds.  First of 
all,  if we  regard  .QY  as  a  mapping  between  a  vector  of observed 
values  of measurable  attributes  of a  network  and  a  state  of the 
hypothetical model, the mapping is  not isomorphic, but is m,any to 
one.  However, in order to satisfy the requirements of identification 
it must preserve  the  Composition Law  of the  observer.  Thus,  .QY 
is  a  homomorphism.  Secondly,  ideJ?.tification implies  a  qualitativ~ 
decision to regard only certain attributes  of a  network as  relevant. 
These chosen relevant attributes  determine the observer's reference 
frame.  Thus, in the  reference frame  ~ a  set  of real attributes_,  say 
x1,  x 2   xn  are examined,  so that ~bservations of states .of net-IJ 
works  are  vectors  X 1,  X 1+1   at mstants  t,  t + 1,  ..... ,  andD 
the real mechanisms  are transformations A1,  A 2          Similarly,  in 
the reference frame fJ  a  set of attributes JI, Y2  . y m  is  regarded 
as  relevant  and  observations  are  the  vectors  Y1,  Y 1+I ... .. and 
real mechanisms are B1,  B2 .... 

If ~ and fJ  are distinct it is  clear that the set  of all  experiments 
performed  in  ~ which  affirmed  the  existence  of  a  hypothetical 
system  will  determine  a  sub-hierarchy  a:.* 
included  within  the~ 
previously  defined  "true" hierarchy.  We  define  reference  frames 
a:  and fJ  so that the variables Xg  and Yx  are incomparable for g =  1, 
2 ..... nand for X= 1, 2 ..... m, in the domain of the observer's 
composition law.  Because of this a:.*  and {J*  are disjoint. 

Two points must be mentioned.  First, it is likely that observ~rs 

' J 

The Natural History of Networks 

237 

have selected relevant attributes, merely because affirmative results 
derived from measuring relevant vectors were self consistent, being 
in  a  sub-hierarchy  a:.*,  but  were  discovered  inconsistent  with,  or 
unrelated to, those derived from measuring different relevant vectors 
which would be in a  disjoint sub-hierarchy {J*.  Secondly, it is dear 
that reference  frames  a:.,  fJ  .... sub-hierarchies  a:.*  {J*    .   and 
even the" true" sub-hierarchy are defined with reference to know-
'  ledge at the moment. The concepts  are useful, since we  are limited 
observers.  However,  it  is  always  possible  that  reference  frames 
will  be  rendered  indistinct, that we shall adopt a  new composition 
law  which  relates  previousiy  incomparable  quantities and that the 
region of" truth" will extend.  In particular,  the distinction  which 
will  be  made  in  a  moment  between  specialized  observers  and 
natural historians  would  disappear  if observers were able to know 
everything about a network. 

We  can  represent  the  simplest  experiments  of  a  specialized 
observer as shown in Fig.  1.  In the particular structure of Fig.  1 a 

U. 0 -tJ;b___,._U.

ti  1. 

.--+- U.b___,.. U.~aintsinabstract 
ti  1  fFi.  1  ti  l  fFj  ~~~~~;a:ace.  . 

0

1 
.!l;a.  1 
l 

1 
X, 1~ X"t+l--t-+'  X.t+2~ X.t+3--r-- X.t+4~Vector~ of values 

1 
.!?a  l 
1 
A;  1  Ai.  1  Al  l  1
1 

I 
!?a  i 
I 
1 

....J.----.._ 
.t?a- l 
I 

A;  1  1

 

1 
.f?a~ I 
l 
  1 

transformations . 
........____Identification in 

  1 

reference  frame.a. 

1 

S  ___,..  S 

t 

,..--.?- s 

--o- s  ~ c::. 

t+3: 

'1+2. 

t+l. 

 

J. i  =  (U~ i  G i  ) 

u: i  =U.Q  and u.t> 
G.; .=(F. i  F3; =  I.) 

A " - ;  .  relevant  in reference 

of vanables. 
frame.a. 
Reo!  physical 
transformations  of 
-
these vectors  or 
real  stimulus 
-r+4. 
'--_proceedures. 
Complete  and 
unknown 
specification  of 
the  state of the 
network. 

Fl:G.l. 

hypothetical  model  is  identified  in  a  reference  frame  ~ since  the 
abstract  state  Ua  is  identified  with  X,  the  abstract  state  Ub  with 
the Xt+ 1  and F; with the mechanism A;. 

The actual states of the network, namely, S 1,  St+ 1   and so on 
are accessible only to an observer able to know everything, and that 
is, for the present discussion at least, "unreal."  The mapping from 

238 

GoRDON  PASK 

any S i  into the relevant variable  space  of a  reference frame  is  not 
necessarily unique.  The general case of one sequence S 1,  S 1+1   
and several distinct reference frames ct.,  {3,  y, o is illustrated in Fig. 2. 
Further,  as  indicated in Fig.  2,  it is  possible  that either  there  are 

FIG. 2. 

j 

two  or more  observers  in two  or more  different  reference  fram(}~ 
who all identify the activity in a network with different hypothetiYai 
models  and who thus  assert that different systems  exist in the net(cid:173)
work,  or alternatively  that  only  some  of these  observers  are  able 
to identify the activity with hypotheticalw.odels, or finally that none 
of them can. 

It will be possible to identify the activity with a hypothetical model 
only  if the mechanism involved  in producing the  activity  may  be 
discussed  in  terms  of the  composition  law  of the  observer.  AJl 
stationary  stochastic  processes  are,  for  example,  identifiable  with 
stochastic  models<8>  and  the  derived  binary  matrices  with  binary 
permutation matrices. <9>  However,  there  are  some  non-stationary 
syste~s,  those  which  are  often  encountered  in  sociology  and 
psychology, such that however long a sequence is observed m a giyen 

The Natural History of Networks 

239 
reference frame,  ut is nqt equal to ut-h for any finite 7:,  any identifi(cid:173)
cation,  and  any :rp.odel J.  Ashby<10>  calls  them systems  where  the 
" truth " is changeful.  It is no longer meaningful to make enquiries, 
as we tacitly do when adopting a reference frame, on the assumption 
that some descriptive " truth "  remains invariant. 

Natural Historians 

Non-stationary activity in a network may be quite tractable for a 
natural historian because he is at liberty to relate entities which are 
incomparable to a  specialized  observer and to run back and forth 
through the dividing pla.nes of the illustration.  So far as the natural 
historian has a  reference  frame,  it is  simply the context  of his  own 
interaction  with the  network.  Unlike  the  specialized  observer,  the 
natural historian has few  preconceptions about a  composition rule 
or about what entities or situations are equivalent. 

Indeed, in the simplest case, when the natural historian is merely 
trying  to  "interact"  and  "make  conversation "(11)  with  some 
system in the network; his strategy is to discover a set of composition 
rules and equivalence relations such that if he assumes them inter(cid:173)
action will be favored. 

We  thus suppose the existence  of composition rules E11  E2   
which the natural historian is able to distinguish and to understand, 
but  is  ndt necessarily  able  to  describe  and  equivalence  relations 
R1,  R 2    '~.of the  same  calibre:  Initially,  he  chooses  some  E; 
according  to  his  view  about  the  character  of  the  network  as  a 
conversation  partner_::::_not  according  to  his  knowledge  of  its 
structure;  and he also  chooses  some  R;,  such that two  R; related 
situations  have- the  same  significance  with  reference  to  his  inter(cid:173)
action,  He now seeks  to modify these  assumptions,  as  a  result  of 
interaction, so that interaction is favored. 

Let VP.,  V11,  be the names given to any state of the network which 
the  natural  historian  is  able  to  recognize.  Let P 1, P n'   be  the 
names given to any procedures which the natural historian can use 
to  modify  the  activity  in  the  network.  According  to  the  analogy 
of a  conversation  Pz(RjPn  are  a  pair  of equivalent  gambits  and 
V /R;) V11  are a pair of replies With the same meaning,  so far as  the 
second partner is  concerned.  The process of searching, which gives 
rise to a  sequence R1 --7 R 2   ->- Rp  and (because alterations in R 
induce alterations in E) a sequence E1 -:+ E 2   --7 Ep is intuitively 

240 

GORDON  PASK 

familiar.  The object of the search is to  discover R* and E* such that 

where 

when 

J7~(E*)JD"(R*)J7~ 

Pz(R*)JDn 

Call  the  above  consistency  or  predictability  condition  "  &  "  and 
note  that  many  pairs  E* R*  will permit  satisfaction  of "  &  "  for 
different.  J7  and P 1  Let bY  equal the number of names  J7"  and P 1 
for  which ~ particular  pair R; E;  permit  satisfaction  of "  &."  In 
general the pair 

 

E:R; 

is preferred to the pair 

only if b5  > bY. 
The searching sequence, which represents the interaction, will ideally 
approach an E; R; such that bg is greater than any of the previously 
obtained values. 

If the  search  process  is  one-sided  so  that  the  natural  histbrian 
changes  his  viewpoint  a  great  deal  but  has  little  effect  uppn  the 
network,  convergence  toward  a  high  valued  bg  is  unreliable  and 
inefficient.  We  shall later examine  conditions  (which always  apply 
if the network is  self-organizing rather than merely intr3:ctable)  in 
which (because the network is  modified  by  a  " reward "  under ~he 
natural  historian's  control)  an  appropriate  "rewarding strategy " 
will achieve rapid and efficient convergence. 

Second Contention 

) 

The second contention refers to networks which are not given  in 

nature,  but which  are  deliberately  built,  so  as  to  foste( any  self(cid:173)
organizing  systems  which  appear.  Oddly  enough,  there  are con(cid:173)
ceptual difficulties which force us to look even at these constr_ucte_d 
models  in the manner  of the  natural historian.  The  contentiOn  lS 
that these  difficulties  are not apparent in the abstract fo  ta:~o: 

but appear  when  it is  embodied in any  physical m  el  sue L: 

network. 

 c 

The Natural History of Networks 

241 

It will be convenient to discuss -the issue by formulating  such an 
abstract  model  and  then  con,s;tructing  one  of the  many  physical 
realizations. 

AN  ABSTRACT  MODEL 

OF  A  SELF-ORGANIZING  SYSTEM 

Wecrequire a number of concepts for building an abstract model. 
(1) A space of arbitrary dimension in which a network is defined 
by asserting connectivity between pairs  of points.  Let us  envisage 
this  space  filled  with  an  initially  homogeneous  but  malleable 
material M. 

(2)  A  currency,  which  may  be  identified  with  energy,  which  is 
conserved  on  the  average.  The  conservation  conditions  make 
measurement possible and will be secured if we have a definite rate e 
at which currency or energy flows through the space. 

(3)  A  set of currency seeking servomechanisms.  We can identify 

these  elements  with  von  Foerster's  Maxwell  Demon  servo(cid:173)
mechanisms, <12> or equally with the catalysts which Prigogine  and 
others<13,14> describe as inducing open reaction systems in a  station(cid:173)
ary state network.  They are, thus, non-linear amplifiers or oscillators 
with a  local energy  or currency  store.  Let us  assume  these  servo(cid:173)
mechanisms  exist  at  uniformly  distributed  points  in  the  space. 
The  only  sense  in  which  any  one  of these  servomechanisms  can 
increase the currency it has  available is  by influencing  the activity 
of the  others.  This  it  may  do  by  transmitting  a  trial  or  signal, 
which  other  elements  sense,  and  the  servomechanism  in  question 
is  informed  of the  state  of  the  network  by  receiving  the  effect 
exerted  by  the  trials  of other  elements  at its  own  input location. 
However,  in  making  a  trial  or  sending  a  signal,  each  servo(cid:173)
mechanism  loses  currency-in  other  words-there  is  a  definite 
cost per trial. 

( 4)  A  set of rules determining the change in signal and currency 

connectivity  induced  by  .activity  in  the  space.  These  are  con(cid:173)
veniently  expressed  by  the  signal  impedance  characteristics  of the 
malleable material M. 

(a)  Consider a pair of points ij in M  and a path mii connecting 
ij in M.  Suppose a  signal traverses  the path mii at t,  the signal 
impedance of mii at t + 1,  say  P(ii)  t+l  is less  than the previous 
signal impedance  P(ij)  1,  the decrease  being  due  to passage  of a 

242 

GoRDON  PASK 

signal at t.  In the absence of further signals along this pathway, 
the signal impedance will increase and reach its original value fn 
some  finite  interval  -c,  then  P(ij)  1  >  P(ij)  t+l  only  if  a  signal 
passed along m;i in some preceding interval less than -c.  A pathway 
may thus be defined simply as an m;i connective in M  where the 
signal impedance is  greater than the average impedance in the  ij 
neighborhood.  Clearly,  pathways,  structures  of  signal  con(cid:173)
nectivity,  or  networks  arise  necessarily  if the  servomechanisms 
are active and continue to exist only if they are used. 

(b) When a servomechanism is active it uses currency.  Let some 
servomechanism at a point i be active so that a more than average 
flow of currency must occur in M  along pathway mii  when sucli 
a  flow  of currency  occurs  the  currency impedance  of m  . "  say 
"< ij) will mcrease.  If the flow of currency is  greatly decreased, due 
to a  suppression in the  activity  of the  servomechanism at i,  the 
currency impedance x(ij) decays over a finite interval. 
It may be argued: 

('J'' 

' 

. 

. 

(i)  that activity must occur, for the currency available must be 

(ii)  that this activity will give rise to some kind of co~ectivity 

used. 

inM. 

(iii)  that  an  active  set  of  connections  imply  local  activity. 
Since  local  activity  engenders  local  currency  depletio:g,  1 a  new 
currency distribution and thus a new activity distribution is induced 
by the existence of the original connectivity. 

It is  clear that uniform connectivity in M  together with uniform 
activity of the servomechanism elements is,  in general  an unstable 
equilibrium,  because  in  these  conditions  the  system' is -searching 
for and is maximally sensitive to, any disturbance which will interrupt 
the uniformity.  However,  such a  uniform state,  which I  shall call 
a A state, may be shown to be the only stable state if the system is 
closed  (except  with reference  to  currency),  so  that no  disturbance 
can occur.  We may obtain this result by applying von Foerster's(l5) 
Multiservo  Convergence Theorem to the servomechanism 'elements 
when,  assuming  uniform  connectivity,  the  representative points -of 
the  ensemble  of servomechanisms  must  converge  to  a  fiXed  point. 
But,  if this  tendency  should  occur,  then whatever  the  initial  con(cid:173)
nectivity  of a  closed  system  of this kind,  the terminal connectivity 
will approach a  uniform  pattern.  In such  a  variable  connectivity 

The Natural History of Networks 

243 

system there are indeed many different connectivities  equivalent in 
that they are all uniform;  thus the system will approach one  of a 
set  of A states.  The limit case  of a  system,  such as  Dr.  McKay's(cid:173)
trial making servomechanism, <16> which  has fixed  connectivity and 
approaches a unique A state is, however, included by the formulation. 

Currency  limitolion for 
o  finite  learning 
. machine 

Network space 

Network space 

& 

It is  assumed  that the solid angles shown above ore filled up 
with o material which has a use  dependent currency 
impedance. If currency is elect~ical current a structure 
of  this kind is an 'acceptable  analogue 

FIG.  3. 

Clearly, if the state of the system is coupled to parameters of an 
environment and the  state  of the  enviro~ent is made  to  modify 
parameters  of the  system,  a  learning  process  will occur.  Such an 
arrangement will be called a Finite Learning Machine,  since it has a 
de~te capacity.  It is,  of course,  an  active  learning  mechanism 
which trades with its  surroundings.  Indeed it is the limit case of a 

,, 
I 
!,i 

GoRDON  PASK 

244 
~elf-organizing  system  which  will  appear  in  the  network  if  the 
currency supply is generalized. 
. 
Suppose that the network space is indefinitely extensive and that 
instead of limiting currency flow  to e per network space we restrict 
the  flow  to  ()  per unit volume  of the  network  space.  In this  case 
there is an advantage to be gained in terms  of the competitio~ for 
currency  between  the  servomechanism  elements,  if these  elements 
co-operate.  In  other  words,  a  set  of  servomechanisms  is  at  an 
advantage if its activity extends the connected region in the network 
space.  The extension will  only be limited by the gain of the servo(cid:173)
mechanisms  and  the  currency  available.  In reatifable  systems  an 
active connected region moves around the network space capturing 
uninvolved  servomechanisms.  Such  a  system  will  be  called  an 
ab~tract self-organizing  system. <17>  Since  we  cannot  satisfactorily 
demark the active system, the inactive region in the network, and the 
environment;  closure  cannot  be  applied.  However,  if it  could, 
there  would  be  an indefinitely large  number  of .A  states  and these 
are approached as closure is approximated. 

, 

When related to a specific environment, this is a learning machine 
but  not  a  finite  learning  machine,  since  the  extent  of the  actiye 
system depends upon the external conditions.  The relation of such 
a  self-organizing  system to the finite  learning machine  is  indicated 
in Fig. 3. 

'Y 

 

Physical Construction of the  Model 

When any physical model is  constructed, its maker has to accept 
certain essential constraints inherent in the medium.  The existence 1 
of non-linearity in any real amplifier, the thermal coefficients of any 
real  resistor  are,  for  example,  essential  constraints.  However,. in 
building most models it is possible to select only one set of restrictions 
as being relevant to the action of the physical artefacts.  Thus, when 
 an electrical  analogue  computer is used  to  embody  some  abstract 
mechanism we  say  that an electrical  model  has  been  constructed, 
meaning  that in realizing  this  abstraction  we  take  accourft  of the 
electrical  model,  but that we  disregard,  as not being relevant,  the 
mechanical  and  thermal  constraints  inherent  in  the  computer. 
Indeed,  the  computer  is  designed  with  this  object  in view,  and  a 
different computer might have been designed to embody abstractions 
in a mechanical model, electrical effects being discounted. 

The Ndtural History  of Networks 

245 

In terms  of our  convention,  a  computer  analogue  is  a  physical 
model so designed that its activity is explicable in a  single reference 
frame,  in the  case  I  have  cited,  an  electrical  reference  frame.  In 
terms  of  engineering,  such  a  mechanism  is  designed  with  com(cid:173)
ponents,  like  valves  and  resistances,  which  have  a  well  specified 
function.  A  valve,  for example,  accepts  only a  electrical input and 
provides  ari  amplified  electrical  output.  If it  also  responds  to 
temperature or vibration, it is to this extent a bad valve.  The logical 
simplicity of the computer model is a consequence of being able to 
put  one's  finger  upon  a  component  which  performs  a  known 
function and to reject the imperfections as irrelevant. 

When trying to construct the physical model of an abstract self(cid:173)

organizing system we  are beset with a peculiar difficulty.  Not only 
are  there  many  possible  mechanisms  which  embody  the  abstract 
concept, but any mechanism we choose will embody it in an ambigu(cid:173)
ous manner.  The logical requirements  force  us  to use media such 
that,  when  a  physical  model  is  constructed,  we  cannot  specify 
components  which  hav~ a  well  defined  function,  and  we  cannot 
separate inputs and outputs into a  set which are relevant and a  set 
which may be discounted. 

It is inherent in the logical character of the abstract self-organizing 
system that all available methods of organization are used, and that 
it cannot be realized in a  single reference  frame.  Thus,  any  of the 
tricks which the physical model can perform,  such as  learning and 
remembering,  may  be  performed  by  one  or  all  of a  variety  of 
mechanisms, chemical or electrical or mechanical. 

Thus,  however  much  we  tfy,  we  cannot  achieve  an  electrical 

model  or  a  mechanical  model  or  a  chemical  model  of  a  self(cid:173)
organizing  system.  Any physical  model necessarily  includes  them 
all in varying degrees, and to a specialized observer they will appear 
distinct and incomparable, although a natural historian will be able 
to see them as  equivalent. 

To emphasize this point let us consider the process of differentia(cid:173)

tion.  Suppose that at an early stage in its development the system 
has  learned  the advantage  of having  " individuality "  in the  sense 
that  it  has  developed  a  primitive  mechanism  using  specific  sub-
. stances,  for  example-proteins-to  tag  each  "individual  entity." 
Later  the  system  learns  about  the  existing  primitive  mechanism 
and evolves a more efficient device whereby "individual entities" are 

GORDON  PASK 

246 
spatially separated regions connected, distinctively, with fibers ~sin 
a  nervous  system.  The primitive and the  efficient  mechanisms  are 
to  a  natural  historian  who  r~gards 
functionally  equivalent 
"individuality" as a" behavioral characteristic" but incomparable 
to a specialized observer for whom " individuality " is unmeasurable. 
(In  the  network  I  shall  describe,  it  happens  that  regional  con(cid:173)
nectivity  is  given,  but  it  is  possible  to  distinguish  at  least  two 
equivalent mechanisms  which are developed for mutual inhibition, 
one  acting by  energy  depletion  and  one  which  involves  a  specific 
connectivity.) 

These  ideas  can  be  placed  on  a  firm  theoretical  foundation  by 
considering the  system as it approaches  a  A.  state.  In this  limiting 
condition  a  specialized  observer  sees  a  meaningless  activity  from 
which he can only infer the existence of a chance machine.  A natural 
historian,  on  the  other hand,  sees  a  system  which  is  maximally 
sensitive to any disturbance and liable to develop any one:,of many 
equivalent  structures  according  to  the  disturbance  it  happens  to 
appreciate.  However,  I  shall not pursue this theoretical argument. 
Having made the point that we must view constructed 'networks as 
though we were natural historians, just as we have to view th~ self(cid:173)
organizing networks  given in nature,  it will  be more instructive. to 
examine the behavior of a real mechanism. 

A  Particular Physical Model 

I shall describe a model <18> in which the" currency " of the abstract 
system  becomes  electrical  energy  and _signals  may  be  thought  of, 
initially, as electrical impulses.  It will be convenient to describe the 
physical representation  of servomechanism  elements  and of malle(cid:173)
able material separately. 

(1)  In the  model  a  "Maxwell Demon 'J  servomechanism  is an 
energy  dependent  trial  making  amplifier.  Due  to  .a  mechanism 
which  involves  a  refractory  interval,  it  may  distinguish  its  own 
output from the  output of other elements,  or the delayed effect  of 
its  own output acting as an input.*  The element produces electrical 
output  impulses  called  trials,  because  in  the  first  place  sufficient 
electrical  energy  is  dissipated  to  modify  the  state  and  thus  the 
connectivity  of the  surrounding  material,  and  secondly,. because 

* In this respect the model is  similar to the scheme discussed in ref.' 19. 

The Natural History of Networks 

247 

the  impulse,  transmitted  through  any  existing  connections  may 
affect the trial making activity of other elements. 

Each  element  has  an  electrical  reservoir  in  which  trial  making 
energy is accumulated.  Occasionally, the stored energy is dissipated 
by autonomous trial.  In general,  however, the sequence of trials is 
modified by inputs received, at a much lower energy level, from other 
elements  in the  sense  that an input stimulates  the occurrence  of a 
trial.  The gain of the element,  as  an amplifier, is  a function of the 
average difference between input and trial energy,  and in practice, 
we  may  look  upon  any  element  as  a  servomechanism  which  is 
seeking to maximize interaction, subject both to energetic constraints 
and those  imposed  by the connectivity built up as  a  result  of the 
previous activity. 

(2)  To clarify the presentation I have separated the energy supply 

network from the connectivity or signal network. 

As  shown in Fig.  4  the trial making amplifiers  receive  energy(cid:173)

in this case electrical current-from a resistance-capacitance network 
into which a  current e. passes at one  or more points  of symmetry. 

Amplifying/ A 
servomechanism 
elements 

Thread  structures  forming  in malleable  material 

Note:  A= Amp 

FIG. 4. 

R 

248 

GORDON  PASK 

The  resistance-capacitance  network may be  loaded  as  a  result  of 
excessive trial making activity on the part of a particular amplifier. 
If so, a local depletion will occur thus reducing the effective source., 
potential and the effective gain of the amplifier concerned. 

" 

The  signal  network  is  built up as  a  result  of current passed  by 
these amplifiers through a  solution of ferrous sulphate, whi~h is the 
malleable  material  M.  As  shown  in  Fig.  4,  the  current  path  is 
completed via a  set of electrodes. 

 

-

The  electrode associated with each amplifier may act either as  a 
source or a sink of d.c.  current, according to whether a trial is  or is 
not being made.  If a trial is being made the amplifier also produces 
an a.c. signal at its electrode, which may be received by any electrode 
which is acting as a sink for d.c.  current. 
- The solution itself is moderately conductive to the a.c. and the d.c. 
signals.  However, if a d.c. current is passed between a  source and a 
sink,  a  very low-resistance  metallic  thread  develops frQm? the  sink 
along the line of maximum current, and gradually an entire network 
of threads is  built up.  The line of maximum current, where a par(cid:173)
ticular thread develops,  will  depend  upon the  electrodes which are 
energized and also upon the existing network of threads since, these, 
being  of low  resistance,  act  as  extensions  of the  point  electrodes. 
Thus,  the  network  of threads  not  only  distributes  the  a.c.  signals 
which deliver inputs to the  elements,  but  determines  the  further 
development of the network itself. 

Once a thread is formed, there is a tendency for it to dissolve, due 
to a local acidity.  A stable thread is thus in a dynamic eq-cimbrilpll 
determined  by the  competition  of a  building  up and  a  dissolving 
back process.  A  thread exists as a  stable entity only if it is passing 
sufficient current to keep it intact and if the current is appropriately 
distributed.  Clearly the  distribution  which  is  appropriate depends 
upon the entire network and its activity.  In general, the network of 
threads  determines  the  enVironmental  parameters  in  which  any 
particular  thread  develops  and  any  particular  thread  determines 
the  environmental parameters  in which a small  segment  develops. 
Thus,  the  natural  history  of  this  network  presents  an  over-all 
appearance  akin to the natural history  of a  developing embryo  or 
that of certain ecological systems. 

Some  of the  mechanisms used in development are illustrated in 

Fig. 5. 

The Natural History  of Networks 

249 

(I)  Shows  a  thread  developing  between  electrodes  d  and  e.  -It 
develops  by  a  process  of successive  trial,  nearly  all  the  terminal 
trial threads being abortive. 

-

(2)  Shows  h 

t  e introduction of a further electrod~ 

as a result of 

which the thr ead may bifurcate. 

-

/ 

2 

3 

4 

+  e 

-~ 
Ia 

d 

+ 

+  e 

,. 

----K-" 
------1\  F 
-----

r- +e 
...., 

a 

f--:b.~ 
a  h I'"' 

f-d-~ f-

-r 

-,.-/ 
:d 
! 

-~ 'f f 

j_(J__ 

-----

'f f-

FIG.  5. 

(3)  Shows  the  development  of the  thread  after  bifurcation,  but 
with  oniy  d  and  e  energized.  The  effect  of  having  previously 
energized f  is apparent. 

( 4)  Shows  what  will  happen  if,  either  due  to  instability  or 
mechanical injury, the thread is  split.  The point g,  being relatively 
negative,  builds  up new  thread  whilst the point h,  being relatively 
positive,  suffers  dissolution.  The process  gives  rise  to regeneration 
of the thread as a  whole  which  occurs up the  branches  de  and dj, 
even though only d andj are switched on.  The existence ofthe thread 
has  transformed  the  field  which  would  have  induced  regenerative 

250 
development along df only into a  field  which induces  development 
of de  and df 

GoRDON  PASK 

If a  subset of the electrodes  are associated with the output con-:(cid:173)

nections  of sensory devices  which in tum receive  an input frorp.  an 
environment, and if a further subset of these electrodes are associated 
with devices able to effect the environment the network will interact 
and  change  state,  seeking  dynamic  equilibrium  with  reference  to 
the environment.  The  extent  of the active region,  produced in the 
network as a result of this search, will depend upon the informational 
variety of the environment and the value of e (Fig.  6). 

Rewqrd  signal 

r 
Energy  -I 

source 

/I  \: ""'- Energetic  linkage 

I 

Amplifying 

,!servomechanisms 

. 

Signal  network 
' 

I  Input 

mechonism 

I  r  output  J 

mechanism 

The environment 

Sensory  device  appreciating 

state of the environment 

)_ 

i - -

"E!:! 
0 "  3'0. 
<>E 
O::o 
u 
"-----

.I 

FIG. 6. 

The adaptive process will lead to some system which can interact, 
in a  stable fashion,  with the environment.  However,  suppose that 
an  observer  tags  a  subset  of the  possible  stable  relationships  as 

The Natural History of Networks 

251 

desirable;  in particular,  supposeohe  wishes  the  system to act as  a 
control  mechanism,  which  achieves  some  state  of  affairs  in  the 
environment.  He can train the-system to adapt specifically in this 
. way by controlling e.  Even a procedure such as increasing the value 
of e only if the desired state is achieved will lead by natural selection 
to  a  structure  which  is  a  control  mechanism  aiming  to  achieve 
this state. 
The over-all energy, or over-all currency, variable e is  here being 
used  as  a  reward  variable.  This  use  of the  term  "  reward "  is, 
perhaps,  unusual,  and is  certainly distinct from  " rewards "  which 
imply  that  a  certain  rewarded  action  becomes  more  probable. 
In the present case, when the network is rewarded, we mean that it 
is  given  permission  to  develop,  that  more  of the  constructional 
material may be used for making threads, and that more amplifiers 
may  be  included in the signal  network  and as part of the  system. 
However,  no  restriction  is  placed  upon  the  kind  of development, 
which depends upon the existing structure. 

A  specialized observer would find  this an unsatisfactory learning 
machine,  because although it will learn what he wishes,  he  cannot 
tell  how  it  learns,  how  to  reward  it,  or  how  large  it  is.  Before 
considering  how  a  natural  historian  might  administer  a  reward 
(according  to  the  present  contentions,  with  greater  success),  I 
should  like  to  exhibit  a  few  more  characteristics  of this  model. 
(a)  We  have  already  seen  that  given  appropriate  surroundings 
(namely  a  world  of  ferro11s  sulphate  liberally  bespattered  with 
amplifiers) the system could extend wherever there is  energy.  Such 
a world is unlikely, so we enquire what will happen when a develop(cid:173)
ing  system reaches  a  boundary such that there is  no more ferrous 
sulphate.  This  is  the  most  primitive  possible  demarcation  of an 
environment.  Equally,  of course,  a  boundary  can  be  imposed  as 
shown in Fig. 6. 

(b)  Keeping to the  primitive  case,  the  answer is  that the system 
will endeavour to trade with the environment in the sense that some 
way of effecting the environment or some change of state in response 
to changes in the environment will elicit the reward of more energy. 
(c)  It will  simplify the discussion to suppose that the system has 
its state changes coupled in some determinate manner to parameters 
of the environment and that the problem of getting a reward is thus 
a problem of sensing those changes in the environment which require 

252 

GORDON  PASK 

a particular response in order to achieve a reward.  How, then, does 
the system appreciate its surroundings? 

(d) It does so by developing specific sensory receptors.  Note, first 

of all,  that a  thread structure is  slightly  sensitive  to many disturb(cid:173)
ances, mechanical, chemical and electricaL  Such disturbances, which 
will  be  encountered  at the .boundary,  elicit  some  change  of state. 
If this  state change is unrewarded the disturbance in question will, 
however,  be taken as  irrelevant and will  have little effect upon the 
system.  But suppose that a disturbance, for example, a vibration or 
a  change  of acidity  induces  a  state  change  which  is  rewarded  (in 
other words suppose the environment is  such that when part of the 
boupdary  is  acid  or  vibrates  some  particular  modificatioP,  of. the 
environment parameters makes more energy available to the system) 
then  the  system  will  adapt  so  that  the  boundary  region b.ecomes 
specifically  sensitive  to  acidity  or  vibration.  No  te1eological 
arguments are required to describe this process of building a sensory 
receptor  for  those  variables  which  are  sensed  with  advantage. 
Reward  means  permission  to  build  more  structures  out  of basic 
material.  Thus  a  sensory  receptor  (which  appears  because  the 
particular region  of the boundary which  did minimally respond to 
the environmental stimulus is duplicated and enlarged) will form as a 
logical consequence  of specifically rewarding a  system in which the r 
elementary units  have  no  well  specified  function  and  may'-not  be 
regarded  as  components.  Thread structures  are just as  good parts 
for  pH  meters  and  microphones  as  they  are  parts  of memory 
registers and connections. 

(e)  From this  it appears  that the  system  can  act  like  a  natural 
historian and develop-its  own criteria of relevance and bring about 
any relation with respect to its environment. 

(f) Although the input of such a  system is badly specified, so far 
as a  specialized  observer is concerned this  does  not mean tHat  the 
system  is  unable  to  distinguish  input  variables  preCisely.  On the 
contrary,  a  system  may  discriminate  variables  by  elaborating  its 
receptor mechanisms  to an arbitrary extent, if reward is  contingent 
upon sensing the variables in question.  However,  it is  possible  to 
show by a recursive argument, that a specialized observer will nearly 
always be ignorant of the variables which are, at any moment, being 
sensed by the system. 

(g)  Even if the world  of ferrous  sulphate is finite the system can 

The Natural History of Networks 

253 

trade in an indefinite number of ways  with its surroundings and in 
this sense the environment boundary is a fiction.  Using this assertion 
we can mark imaginary boundaries at arbitrary points in the system 
and examine the trade which takes place across them.  This technique 
was  tacitly  adopted  when  discussing  the  different  " mechanisms " 
for  achieving  " individuality."  In  other  words  different  kinds  of 
trading-different  sensory  receptors-are  a  special  and  dramatic 
case  of the  different  mechanisms  which  exist  as  a  commonplace 
feature  of the system's actiVity. 

(h)  Again, these mechanisms evolve one from another.  When we 
were  discussing  " individuality "  the  system  " learned "  about  a 
primitive mechanism in order to evolve a less  primitive and (to the 
natural  historian)  equivalent  mechanism.  At  any  stage  in  its 
development  (when  the  system  is  observed  over  a  short  interval) 
there  will  exist  an  heirarchy  of  mechanisms,  corresponding  to 
different  stages  in its  evolution.*  Most  of these  will be  vestigial, 
bui: the stability of the system derives  from their existence and the 
possibility of their reactivation in adverse conditions.t 

Rewarding Strategies 
Returning to the  strategy  of a natural historian,  it will  be  con(cid:173)
venient  to  use  some  descriptive  mathematics,  again  with  the 
provision that the approach is tentative and will probably be replaced 
by more  elegant and tractable techniques.  In the first  place let us 
recall: 

(a)  That a" behavioral characteristic" is, for example, possession 

of" memory" or" docility" or" habituation." 

(b)  The  predictability  condition  "  & "  required  by  a  natural 

historian. 

(c)  The idea of a reference frame. 
(d)  The assertion that a  reference frame determines  either: 

(i)  a  set of relevant variables,  or 
(ii)  a  set  of components which have  some function-such as 

being neurones  or something even more specific. 

by Professor Bishop.(20) 

* This  evolutionary structure is  typical  of biological systems,  as  pointed  out  
t If, in the course  of interaction with a  system,  we  define  certain regions  as 
unit elements  [Professor  McCulloch's  (Ref.  21)]  reliability calcUlus  is immedi(cid:173)
ately applicable. 

I 

'I II i 

254 

GoRDoN  PASK 

It will now be more convenient to adopt the latter restriction and 
to suppose that an observer in ex  sees components (the things which 
he calls  neurones)  as  entities,  al> a2,    in a network.  Similarly, 
an observer in fJ  sees  b1,  b2,   (as  the different  entities  he calls 
neurones).  On the  other hand,  a  natural  historian  takes  different 
entities  as  being  his  basic  elements  on  different  occasions.  He 
chooses the entities which allow him to make sense  of and interact 
with the system. 

We may now argue: 
(1)  If!ft1 lf2 .... lfe are the behavioral characteristics discussed by 
a  natural historian in terms  of the names  V ~"  V~ of recogniZed 
states and the  names P 1Pm  of stimulus  procedures,  there  will 
be  sets  of names,  some  empty,  such  that  all  v,  and  all  P 1 
included in ~Prefer to the pth-characteristic. 

(2)  A  Behavioral Characteristic may, at an instant t imply several 
distinct mechanisms.  Thus,  the pth-characteristic may i:inply 
any of gP  mechanisms. 

 

P1  Pz       Pgp 

(3)  In a Reference Frame ex  we may assert, at t the existence of nrx 1 
active  elements  b.  In 
; 

active  elements  a  and  in  fJ  assert  nfJ
general: 

1 

nrxt =I=  nfJ, 

( 4)  There is a  relation  A  which  maps  the  m 1 <  ~g mechanisms 
act1ve  at t  mto the  set  of elements  defined in  ex.  Considering 
only the pth-characteristic this relation Arx  may be: 

p 

 

-

"}2  

A.,, 

If the mechanismp is  in a self-organizing  system then A  is,  as 
shown, a many to many relation.  Further A is  different for all 
cxfJ. 

The Natural History of Networks 

255 

(5)  Sufficiently  microscopic  observation  would  discern  elements 
s1 S2   Snor  with  n01  >  nrx1, n01  >  nfJ1, for  all  ex  and  fJ  such 
that mapping A0  is many to one like: 

However, if the  system  is  self-organizing,  the  elements  s  are 
inaccessible to a real observer. 

(6)  Let <I>(pd)t equal the number of mapping arrows which converge 

upon P<Pd) in the mapping A0  specified at t. 

(7)  Let  a(pd)t  be a  variable  which is  equal  to  1 if and only if Ppdis 
active at  t  namely if and  only if at least  one mapping  arrow 
converges upon  P{Pd) in the mapping A0  specified at 't. 

(8)  When  a  natural  historian  rewards  a  system  he  increases  the 

value of a variable e so that if a  system is rewarded: 

et+ 1  >  et 

(9)  We have argued that the effect of increasing e is to allow those 

mechanisms active at t to develop. 
Thus <I>(pd)t+I  >  <I>(pd)tifandonlyife 1+1  >  et  and a(pd)t  =  1. 
In general this implies: 

not+!  >not 

The effect of a reward upon Arx and A fJ is, or course, unspecified. 
(10)  Thus if a natural historian knows, or is able to determine that; 
the  variable  apd  =  1  he  can  reward  the  system,  so  that  Ppd 
becomes a dominant mechanism, for mediating the behavioral 
characteristic if p  This  will  be the  case  only  if the  condition 
" & "  is satisfied.  Visually represented: 

-'1 Of  m,.,A 

s 

n0 ,  +I  Elements 

i 

I  i 
! 

256 

GORDON  PASK 

(11)  Consider only the behavioral characteristic lfp  and thus assume 

that all VJ.L  and P 1 are included in gp 

(12)  Assume  that  each  mechanism  Ppi  embodies  a  Composition 
Rule  Ei in the  sense  that  operations  ViEi)P 1  correspond  to 
the operations of tbis mechanism~ 

(13)  If so the pair EiRi will permit satisfaction of" &  "  and_con(cid:173)
sequently,  we  write  Ei = E;.  Equally,  all  Composition Rules 
E~ are embodied in some mechanism. 

{14)  From (9)  and (10)  if the natural historian rewards  the system 

only  if the  condition  "  & "  is  satisfied  for  his  choice  of E: 

the  mechanism  Pp;  will  become  dominant,  the  Composition 
Rule E~ will become more widely applicable, and b; will increase. 
(15)  The  process  is  symmetrical  for  we  can  regard  the  natural 

.  historian as rewarded by achieving "  &. " 

. 

. 

(16)  More  specific  strategies  are  needed  if the  system  is  being 
trained as a  specific control  mechanism.  A  single~case will  be 
suggested. 

(17)  Let us apply these arguments to each p. 
, 
(18)  In this  case it is  possible  to conceive  a  convergence  of inter(cid:173)
action by reward such that .6.0  is  so modified that for at least 
one  oc  the mapping .6.a  is a many to one projection. 

" 

"~.-~ ~ ~ 

Elements 

In this  case,  in  its  terminal  condition,  the  system  may  be 
described in a  single reference frame  oc  which is not,  however, 
determined  at the  outset of interaction.  Thus the  system will 
have  been trained  not to be a  self-organizing  system.  It is a 
finite learning machine. 

At the moment it is  impossible to provide a  general  description 
of the way in which any specified objective should modify the process 
of interaction.  One  might  avoid  the  problem  by  thinking  of the 
natural  historian  as  always  a  real  person  and  the  objective  as 

The  Natural History  of Networks 

257 

something he keeps in mind.  This would, however, seriously restrict 
the admissible training procedures. 

Moreover, a theoretical solution is almost certainly possible, since 
any arbitrary partitioning of a self-organizing system should produce 
two sub-systems,  one of which is being trained by the other.  As an 
Empirical Confirmation of this, it is possible to train a self-organizing 
system using  an adaptive  teaching  machine<22 
23l  (which  is  itself a 
finite  learning  machine)  as  a  natural  historian  in  place  of  the 
human being. 

THE  CHARACTER  AND  UTILITY  OF 

SELF-ORGANIZING  SYSTEMS 

In conclusion let  us  review  a  number of self-organizing  systems 
and consider how our knowledge oftheir natural history can be used. 
By  restricting  the  energy  supply  of an  initially  undifferentiated 
system  (according  to an appropriate  rewarding  strategy)  it can be 
trained  to  act  as  a  Control  Mechanism.  Clearly,  however,  this 
Control  Mechanism  has  little  in  common  with  a  programmed 
computer connected to a  process by well defined input devices  and 
output devices. 

Take, for  example,  a  chemical process.  The control mechanism, 
in the present sense, is something which exists, perhaps on a catalytic 
surface, within the reaction vessel.  It is  sold by the cubic foot.  Its 
inputs are sensory receptors,  developed in the same manner as the 
rest of the network,  and thus,  although a variable such as pH may 
be  sensed,  we  should not be able to indicate what part of the net(cid:173)
work sensed  it,  or to say that any part sensed it exclusively.  The 
outputs  of the control mechanisms might,  in this  case,  be regional 
activations  of the catalytic surface suppoiting the network. 

Although  metallic  thread  structures  are  conceptually  useful, 
the  particular  model  has  a  limited  field  of practical  application. 
However, many building materials are available, and it seems likely 
that the optimum choice  of materials will be different for  different 
applications.  Thus,  in  chemical  control  mechanism,  the  self(cid:173)
organizing  system  can  sometimes  be  built  up  from  the  actual 
reactants. 

There  are  two  lines  of thought,  one  leading  us  closer  to  con(cid:173)
ventional  control  mechanisms  and  one  leading  us  further  away. 
Pursuing the first,  it is always possible to replace the process which 

258 

GORDON  PASK 

creates elements in a self-organizing system by an equivalent process 
which  activates  elements  that  already  exist  in  large  numbers. 
Similarly  a  network  in  which  connectivity  is  built  up  is  always 
equivalent  to  some  network  which  has  been derived  from  a Jarge 
and fully connected plexus by removing connection. 

i) 

Applying  one  or  both  of those  equivalences  we  arrive  at  self(cid:173)
organizing  systems  either  specially  constructed,  like  some  of the 
networks  of the lllinois project, <24l  or, when feasible,  programmed 
on to a  computer,  like  Selfridge~s Pandemonium. <25l  In the  latter 
case, currency appears as an abstract cost function, but it is important 
to notice  that reward  must  still  mean permission  to develop;  for 
example,  permission  to  take  over  more  storage  capacity  in  the 
computer or to replicate  a  demon.  This  connotation of reward is 
typical  of  a  self-organizing  system  and distinguishes  it  from  a 
superficially comparable structure. 

 

Programmed systems of this kind are useful as,research tools,  as 
functional models  of the brain,  or when associated  with a  process 
by  conventional  input  and  output  devices  as  control  mechacisms 
which can deal with a non-stationary process. (26) 

' 

Pursuing  the  second  line  of thought  it  occurs  that  nature  has 
provided us with excellent physical models of self-organizing systems 
m~de out of protein.  Beer<27l  has discussed the possibility of using 
umcellulars, the colonial behavior of which is taken as organization, 
as the amplifying elements in a machine.  He and I  have examined 
mo~els, where  ~urrency is  food  supply  and unicellulars  like  para(cid:173)
mecmm, are act1veelements, sufficiently to show that such colonial 
organization may be coupled to a real process. 

S:lf-organizing  systems  lie  around us.  There are quagmires,  the 
fish m the sea, or intractable systems like clouds.  Surely we can make 
these  work  things  out for  us,  act  as  our  control  mechanisms  or 
perhaps  most  important  of all,  we  can  couple  these  seemi~gly 
uncontrollable  entities  together  so  that  they  control  each  other. 
Why  not,  for  example,  couple  the traffic  chaos  in Chicago  to the 
traffic_ ~haos of New  York  in  order  to  obtain  an  acceptably self(cid:173)
orgamzmg whole?  Why not associate  individual  brains  to  achieve 
a group intelligence ?<2S) 

These  will  remain  intriguing  ideas  and  no  more  until  definite 
procedures are specified.  There is a great deal of work to be done 
but even at the present stage it is possible to envisage the form thes~ 

' '  
'I 

,,' 

! ' 

! ,' 

I 

The  Natural  History  of Networks 

259 

procedures must take.  According to the present contentions  there 
exist at least two sets of rules.  The first set are rules,  of a somewhat 
ephemeral character, which help a natural historian (or an adaptive 
machine)  to interact  efficiently  with  a  self-organizing system (or in 
some cases determine the interaction of two self-organizing systems). 
As a result of the interaction some continually changing descriptive 
model is built up.  Knowing this model, and in particular knowing 
the  entities  which  are  regarded  at  any  moment  as  "  elements " 
of the self-organizing system a  second set of rules  (which refer, for 
example, to reliability and habituation) come into play.  The second 
set of rules are, in themselves determinate but they are applied to a 
"  model" (the natural historian's model) which continually changes 
its relation to the real world. 

REFERENCES 

1.  R. AsHBY,  Introduction to  Cybernetics,  Chapman &  Hall (1956). 
2.  G. PASK, Physical analogues for the growth of a concept, Proc.  Symposium, 

Mechanisation  Thinking Process, N.P.L. Teddington, 1958. 

3.  M. KoCHEN,  Organised systems with discrete information transfer,  General 

Systems Society  Yearbook,  1957. 

4.  G. P ASK,  Organic control and the cybernetic method,  Cybernetica 3 (1958). 
5.  W.  McCuLLoCH, Agathe Tyche, Proc.  Symposium,  Mechanisation  Thinking 

Process, N.P.L. Teddington, 1958. 

6.  W.  McCULLOCH,  Reliability  of biological  systems.  This  volume,  p.  264. 
7.  R. AsHBY,  The mechanism of habituation, Proc. Symposium, Mechanisation 

Thinking Process, N.P.L. Teddington,  1958. 

8.  BusH,  MoSTELLER  and THoMPSON,  A  Formal Structure for  Multiple  Choice 

Situations,  Decision Processes,  John Wiley,  New York, 1954. 

9.  D. RosENBLATT,  On linear models  and the graphs  of Minkowski Leontief 

matrices, Econometrica, No.2, 25  (1957). 

10.  R. AsHBY,  Cybernetica, No. 2, Namur (1958). 
11.  G.  PASK,  Teaching machines,  Proc.  2nd Gong.  Intern.  Assoc.  Cybernetics, 

Namur, 1958. 

12.  H.  von FoERSTER,  Aspects  in  the  design  of  biological  computers,  2nd 

Gong.  Intern.  Assoc.  Cybernetics, Namur, 1958. 

13.  (For a recent discussion and full references to Prigogine's work.)  C. FosTER, 
A.  RAPPORT  and  E.  TRUCO,  Some unsolved  problems  in the  theory  of 
non-isolated systems, General Systems Society  Yearbook,  1957. 

14.  (Eor  cellular  catalysis.)  J.  PoLONSKY,  Quelques  relexions  sur  l'aspect 
physique  de  la  vie,  2nd  Gong.  Intern.  Assoc.  Cybernetics,  Namur, 
1958, 

15.  H. von FoERSTER,  Basic concepts of homeostasis, homeostatic mechanisms, 

Brookhaven Symposia in Biology, No. 10 (1957). 

16.  D.  M.  McKAY,  The  epistemological  problem  for  automata,  Automata 

Studies, .Princetown (1956). 

17.  Quarterly Report, Contract Nonr 1834(21), Electrical Engineering Research 

Laboratory, University of Illinois, Urbana (1959). 

260 
18. 

.  j 

i  i 

I 
I 
I 
I 

i 

19. 

20. 

21. 

22. 

23. 
24. 

25. 

26. 

27. 
28. 

GORDON  PASK 

G.  PASK,  The growth process, Proc.  2nd Cong.  Intern.  Assoc.  Cybernetics, 

Namur, 1958. 

 J. PLATT,  Amplification aspects of biological response and mental activity, 

Amer. Scientist, Vol. 44, No.2, Apri11956. 

G. H. BISHOP,  The importance of feedback through the enviroi:nnent,fu the 

determination of motor activity.  This volume, p. 122. 

W.  McCuLLOCH,  Agathe Tyche, Proc.  Symposium, Mechanisation  Thinking 

Process, N.P.L. Teddington, 1958. 

. 

~ 

G.  PASK,  Electronic  teaching  techniques,  British  Communications  and 

Electronics,  Vol.  4, No.4, April1957. 

G. PAsK,  The teaching machine, Overseas Engineer, February 1955. 
Reports  of  Contract  Nonr  1834(21),  Electrical  Engineering  Research 

Laboratory, University of lllinois, Urbana. 

0. G. SELFRIDGE,  Pandemonium, a paradigm of learning, Proc.  Symposium, 

Mechanisation Thinking Process, N.P.L. Teddington, 1958. 

S.  BEER,  The  irrelevance  of automation,  Proc.  2nd  Cong.  Intern.  Assoc. 

Cybernetics,  Namur, 1958. 

S.  BEER,  Cybernetics and Industry,  English Universities  Press (in print). 
0. D. WELLS,  Artorg Publications. 

DISCUSSION 

. NEWELL:  I  am not quite sure  that I  understand this  notion of the polnt of 
VIew on the natural historian.  Let me ask you a question by proposing an examvle 
and seeing how this fits  with your notion. 

P ASK:  Very good. 
NEWELL:  If we  wish  to  describe  a  human  behaving,  solving  problems  in 
logic,  and  we  wish  to  build  a  program that describes  him,  then empirically it 
turns out about the only way any of us ever found  out how to do it is to start 
from the beginning and proceed to build the program forward.  We thus proceed 
for  the  first  little  bit  of his  behavior  until  that  goes  fonl  and  then  go  back 
and  proceed  to  reconstruct  the  program  and  again  start  out  from  the 
beginning until we run into the next little bit of behavior where it doesn't work 
and  so  on,  until  in  some  sense  we  proceed  through  the  entire  structure  of 
behavior. 

Whenever  you  tell  this  to  people  they  always  ask  why  you  don't in  some 
sense first characterize what he does roughly and then specify this a  little more 
and the empirical answer is,  every time we try it this way we can't do it and the 
only time we  ever seem  to  make progress is  in some  sense  where  we proceed 
almost at full  detail_atleast the full  details we can tolerate-and simply cruise 
~n and follow,  if I  may now impose the word,  the natural history,  and follow 
m the footsteps of the person himself building the program as we go along. 

Can you juxtapose this with your notion of a natural historian in some way? 
. P ASK:  If you will permit me, I will invert the example because the distinction 
I  am making is only made for a finite observer.  In other words, this distinction 
of a uatural historian from a specialized observer is one that exiSts simply because 
observers are not almighty.  If indeed they were,  of course, they could get at a 
rock bot~om, unambiguous, state description of the system.  Equally well,  they 
could split the system up into parts, each of which would have a definite function. 
However,  we  are imperfect  observers  but still find  scattered  around us in the 
reai wor~d, systems like dogs and elephants and such like things, which it would 
be too difficult, perhaps, too costly, for us to split down analytically iri this way. 

The  Natural  History  of Networks 

261 
The  question  arises  whether  we  can usefully  observe  these  without  trying  to 
describe them in any "  absolute "  and " true "  sense.  Because although we are 
simply incapable of reaching the whole truth we can still usefully employ these 
admirable self-organizing systems. 

The approach  of a  natural historian  is  a  comprmnise,  but I  believe  a  very 
valid comprmnise.  It is a way of dealing with systems that are not accessible to 
us and it is a method of doing it in much the manner which we use when we are 
trying to control another human being. 

For example, you and I  at the moment are having a conversation and you are 
putting an idea over and I am putting an idea over and we are using a procedure 
which relies  in the first  place upon inferring similarity between  ourselves.  We 
agree we are similar human beings.  We understand each other's language and 
we  suppose  that  certain  similarity  relations  exist  within  the  system  as  a 
whole. 

I  subinit we infer all this  on the basis  of properties  such as habituation,  or 
such  as  having  the  kind  of redundancy  which  Dr.  McCulloch,  I  think,  will 
describe this afternoon (that is the redundancy of potential command).  Some of 
these properties, like the particular ones I have cited, may be expressed in rather 
exact terms.  You can give a very good topological interpretation of the network 
structures that will evidence these properties. 

On  the  other  hand,  some  of  them  are  vague.  There  are  properties  like 
"  attitudes "  and  " mental  set,"  and in such cases,  we simply can't operate in 
terms that will allow us to  express  the concepts  with which we infer similarity 
in mathematical language.  The natural historian's approach is  an endeavor to 
get a  calculus which allows us to  deal with situations like this and to  interact 
with systems  of this  sort.  A  Natural Historian,  as  defined,  has nothing to  do 
with the best way of finding out how a system works.  He is concerned actively to 
trade with the system.  Given that he can, I further suggest it is possible to state, 
with precision, how we may interact with a system, even though we are unable to 
Say  how the system works .. Does  this  answer you,  sir,  or have I  Inissed your 
point? 

NEWELL:  That is  a  partial answer.  I  would  like elucidation  on this  point. 
Is it fair to say that the human reacts by having a  functional description rather 
than a human?  Is it the kind of terms they use that work? 

PASK:  It is  a  functional  description,  sir,  but in a  changing language.  You 
change your sample space and relevance criteria as you go along.  At one stage 
of the conversation you talk about things which are logically speaking incompar(cid:173)
able with other things introduced later.  Yet you, yourself, and those in conversa(cid:173)
tion with you, are able to tie these logically incomparable entities together. 

CHAIRMAN McCARTHY:  Have you tried yet any of these other forms of stimuli 

such as pH? 

PASK:  We have made an ear and we  have made a  magnetic receptor.  The 
ear can discriininate two frequencies, one ofthe order of fifty cycles per second and 
the other of the order of one hundred cycles per second.  The "training" procedure 
takes  approximately  half a  day  and  once  having  got the  ability  to  recognize 
sound at all,  the ability to recognize and discriininate two sounds coines more 
rapidly.  I  can't  give  anything  more  detailed  than  this  qualitative  assertion. 
The ear, incidentally, looks rather like an ear.  It is a  gap in the thread structure 
in which you have fibrils which resonate with the excitation frequency. 

BASTIN  (King's  College,  Cambridge):  Concerning the production  of a  sense 
organ  in  a  mechanical  assembly,  is this  an illustrative  model?  If it is  more 
can you tell us how it can help us discover things that we have not known before? 

The  Natur-al  History  of Networks 

263 

of the systet11's development we should be able to observe both mechanisms more 
or less  active.  One is inclined to say it is crazy, that this machine has two ways 
of doing the  same thing.  But on second  thought it is natural for  a  system  to 
Jearn from its past attempts and make improvements. 

262 

GoRDON  PASK 

PASK:  Yes, I think it is more than an illustrative model.  The development of 
a  sense organ is a  dramatic way of showing what we mean by relevance criteria 
in connection with a machine. 

Let us  distinguish between that sort of machine that is  made  out of known 
bits and pieces, such as a  computer (in terms of which we can make models  of 
most  physical  assemblages,  those  normally  studied  in  physics,  and  pe4taps 
some of those we normally study in biology), and a machine which consists of a 
possibly unlimited number of components such that the function of these com(cid:173)
ponents is  not defined  beforehand.  In other words,  these  " components "  are 
simply  "  building material "  which  can  be  assembled  in  a  variety  of ways  to 
make  different  entities.  In particular the designer need  not specify  the  set  of 
possible entities. 

Now,  to  say that this  sort of machine will make sense organs is  illustrative, 
because a  sense  organ is  a  rather special component construction in the sense 
that it specifies  the boundary between the machine and its  environment, and if 
the machine constructs  its  own  sense  organs  out of the building material this 
boundary is apt to change continually.  Further, it helps us to understand why 
we find it is  difficult to  observe these self-organizing systems,  namely,  because, 
looking at them in a single reference frame, in the capacity of scientific observers 
we cannot lay down definitions which allow us to compartmentalize the functional 
components of the machine or even the machine itself. 

To  see  that  this  illustrative  model  is  non-trivial  you  must  recall  that  we 
reward the system without specifying,  for example,  that it will be rewarded for 
assembling component A  and component B.  We  simply say  it will  get  more 
reward-(meaning that it will be allowed to use more components) if a structUre 
that acts  as  a  sense  organ is  constructed.  Clearly,  unless  you are prepared to 
take  into  account  a  variety  of different  ways  of describing  this  machine  (m 
different reference frames) you can't make sense of it, and that is what I  meant 
by saying we must look at a  self-organizing system as many coexisting models,' 
mechanical, electrical and so  on-rather than a  single model-such as we have 
in a computer simulation. 

Of course you can always transform the physical mechanism into an equivalent 
"  single "  model if you are landed with components such as those in a computer 
which have well defined functions, for example, a  collection of storage devices. 
But you can do this only if you are prepared to have an indefinitely large number 
of these  well  defined  components  because  you  are led  to  construct  a  growing 
model which, if left on its own, will expand indefinitely.  Of course, in the case 
of a  computer model the idea  of rewarding by a  supply  of energy  or food  is 
inappropriate.  You have instead a value function so defined that it costs some(cid:173)
thing to take over more bits of store. 

This  is  certainly  equivalent,  but in fact,  when  we  are  thinking  of real  live 
systems which we are going to use, for e:x:ample, in controlling chemical processes, 
we  are really  much  more  interested  in the finite  systems  which  are rendered 
non-bounded by the interesting condition that they can alter their own relevance 
criteria, and in particular, by the expedient of building sense  organs,  can alter 
their relationship to the environ.nlent according to whether or not a trial relation(cid:173)
ship is rewarded. 

'I 
I, 

If I  can have  a  minute to  connent here,  it is  interesting that in any such 
system  you  will  find  a  hierarchy  of "  vestigial "  mechanisms  of just the  sort 
Professor  Bishop  connented  upon  yesterday.  In  other  words,  a  primitive 
mechanism will  evolve  for  sensing a  variable and  the niachine  will  then learn 
about this mechanism and it will evolve a more sophisticated one.  At any stage 

s 

.... ____..-

.-~ 

internatlo!13R Tra~t i" C:ompMt<Or $deUllco a11<il  'i"ee!"uoloiify an<il  thaor Bi>ii>Ucation 
VOI.IIME  2 

Co-sponsored by 
Information Systems Bram:ill 
of Office of Naval li!.eseardll 
arrnd 
Armour li!.eseardu  Fowndation 
of lliirrnois  Institute of Tecillrrnology 

Editors 

.., 

II 

--

"@ 
:=:1 
c 
0 
m 
m 
c 
X 
! 
it~ 

c 
on 

 l!ll! 

z 
-II 
1'1 
~ 
c 

it~ 

a 
'1:1 
I"' 

z  XI 

"<! 

0 
c 
X 
"tt 
m 
::11:1 
1'1'1 
z 
e 
1M 

t 

DURING  the  last  decade  or  so  there 
have  been  many  great  and  important 
advances in the capabilities of information 
processing  equipments  and  techniques. 
However,  certain  types  of  problems, 
mostly  those  involving  inherently  non(cid:173)
numerical  types  of  information,  can  be 
solved  efficiently  only  with  the  use  of 
machines  exhibiting  a  high  degree  of 
learning  or  self-organizing  capability. 
Examples  of  problems  of  this  type  in(cid:173)
clude  automatic  print  reading,  speech 
recognition,  pattern  recognition,  auto(cid:173)
matic  language  translation,  information 
retrieval,  and  control  of  large  and 
complex  systems. 

SElF-ORGANIZING  SYSTEMS 
contains the proceedings of a conference 
co-sponsored by the Information Systems 
Branch  of the  U.S.  Office  of  Naval  Re(cid:173)
search and Armour Research Foundation, 
and  includes  both  the  prepared  papers 
and  the associated  discussion. 

fourteen  formal  papers  were  pre(cid:173)
sented,  the  authors  of  which  provided 
almost equal  representation  in  the fields 
of  Biology,  Engineering,  Mathematics, 
and  Psychology.  These  papers 
fall 
inter(cid:173)
naturally 
disciplinary  groups: 

four  different 

into 

I.  Perception  of the  Environment 
II.  Effects  of Environmental  Feedback 
Ill.  Learning  in  Finite Automata 
IV.  Structure  of  Self-Organizing 

Systems 

This  extremely  topical  and  important 
volume, containing as  it does a complete 
presentation  of  the  existing  research 
activities  relating  to  the  theory  of self(cid:173)
organization,  will  be  invaluable  to  the 
scientific  community;  it  will  encourage 
them  in  their efforts and  provide a  basis 
for  additional  research. 

I 

60s. net 

Already published in  this series: 

A  PRACTICAL  MANUAL  ON  THE  MONTE  CARLO  METHOD  FOR 
RANDOM  WALK  PROBLEMS.  By  E.  D.  CASHWELL  and 

C.  J.  EVERETT,  1959. 

SELF -ORGANIZING 

SYSTEMS 

PROCEEDINGS  OF  AN 

INTERDISCIPLINARY  CONFERENCE 

5 ~D 6 MAY,  1959 

Co-sponsored by 

INFORMATION  SYSTEMS  BRANCH 
OF  OFFICE  OF  NAVAL  REsEARCH 

and 

ARMOUR  RESEARCH  FOUNDATION 

OF  ILLINOIS  INSTITUTE  OF  TECHNOLOGY 

Editors 

MARSHALL  C.  YOVITS 

Office of Naval Research 
CONFERENCE  CHAIRMAN 

SCOTT  CAMERON 
Armour Research Foundation 

CONFERENCE  SECRETARY 

SYMPOSiuM  PUBLICATIONS  DIVISION 
PERGAMON  PRESS 

OXFORD  LONDON  NEW  YORK  PARIS 

1960 

PERGAMON  PRESS  LTD. 
Headington  Hill Hall,  Oxford 

4  &  5 Fitzroy Square, London  W.1. 

PERGAMON  PRESS  INC. 

122 East 55th Street,  New  York 22,  N.Y. 

1404 New  York Avenue N. W.,  Washington,  D;C. 

PERGAMON  PRESS  S.A.R.L. 

24 Rue des Ecoles, Paris  ye 

PERGAMON  PRESS  G.m.b.H. 

Kaiserstrasse  75,  Frankfurt-am-Main 

Copyright 

 
1960 

PERGAMON  PRESS  INc. 

LIBRARY  OF  coNGREss  cA.Rri  NUMBER:  60-12574 

Printed in  Great Britain by Bell &  Bain, Ltd., Glasgow 

PREFACE 

DuRING  the  last  decade  or  so  there  have  been  many  great  and 
important  advances  in  the  capabilities  of information  processing 
equipments  and  techniques.  For  the  most  part  these  have  been 
based  on the concept of the fixed  stored program computer.  This 
type  of computer  has shown  itself able  to  solve  large  classes  of 
problems  which can first  be put into  some  sort of numerical form 
and for which a program in machine language can he written. 

Improvements  in  the  speed,  size,  and  sophistication  of existing 
machines by factors of ten or a hundred appear to be near at hand, 
and a  certain amount  of research is  presently  directed  toward,  the 
millimicrosecond  or "  ultimate "  stored program computer.  These 
advances will certainly open the way to making many more classes 
of problems  conveniently tractable by digital computers. 

However, it appears that certain types  of problems, mostly those 
involving  inherently  non-numerical  types  of information,  can  be 
solved  efficiently  only  with the use  of machines  exhibiting  a  high 
degree  of  learning  or  self-organizing  capability.  Examples  of 
problems  of  this  type  include  automatic  print  reading,  speech 
recognition,  pattern  recognition,  automatic  language  translation, 
information  retrieval,  and  control  of large  and  complex  systems. 
Efficient  solutions to problems  of these types will probably require 
some  combination of a  fixed  stored program computer and a  self(cid:173)
organizing machine. 

In recent  months,  it  had  become  evident  that  interest  in  this 
field  of cognitive systems was  growing quite rapidly.  A  number of 
new  groups  had  been  formed  to  do  research  which  would  lead 
toward an understanding  of these  self-organizing  systems.  On the 
one hand the psychologist, the embryologist, the neurophysiologist 
and  others involved  in the  life  sciences  were  attempting to under(cid:173)
stand  the  self-organizing  properties  of  biological  systems,  while 
mathematicians,  engineers,  and physical  scientists  were  attempting 

v 

vi 

Preface 

to  design  artificial  systems  which  could  exhibit  self-organizing 
properties. 

Accordingly,  the  Information  Systems  Branch  of the  Office  of 
Naval  Research  together  with  Armour  Research  Foundation, 
decided  to sponsor a  conference  enabling the workers in the many 
disciplines  involved  to  meet  together  to  discuss  their  research 
activities  and to  explore  common  problems,  mutual interests,  and 
similar directions  of research.  This volume comprises the Proceed(cid:173)
ings  of  that  Conference,  including  the  prepared  papers  and the 
associated  discussion.  The  name, Interdisciplinary  Conference  on 
Self-Organizing Systems,  was chosen in order to emphasize deliber(cid:173)
ately  the  broad  nature  of the  research  necessary  to  pursue  these 
endeavors. 

The  papers  for  the  program  were  chosen  entirely  by invitation 
of the Conference Committee and were intended to be representative 
of the appropriate research activities in progress by workers in the 
various  disciplines.  Most  of  the  speakers  invited  had  already 
achieved reputations  within their respective  fields  and were  known 
rather  widely  within  the  scientific  community.  Fourteen  formal 
papers were presented, the authors of which provided almost equal 
representation  of the fields  of Biology,  Engineering,  Mathematics, 
and Psychology.  In addition, an after-dinner address was pre.seilted 
at  the  Conference  banquet  by  Dr.  A.  M.  Uttley  of the  National 
Physical Laboratory, Teddington, England.  The welcoming address 
was delivered by Dr. H. A. Leedy, Director of the Armour Research 
Foundation, and the opening address of the Conference was delivered 
by  Dr.  F.  J.  Weyl,  Research  Director  of  the  Office  of  Naval 
Research.  Almost 400 people, divided among the various scientific, 
engineering, and social-scientific disciplines, attended the Conference. 
There are,  of course, in addition to those who participated in the 
Conference, many other research workers of equally great reputation 
who  are  contributing  significantly  to  an  understanding  of  self(cid:173)
organizing  systems.  The  Committee  deeply regrets  the inability to 
include  these  people  on  the  program.  To  the  many  people  who 
kindly offered  to present papers at the  Conference, the Committee 
gives  its sincere  thanks as  well  as  its  apologies  for  the inability to 
include these contributions.  The Conference could easily have been 
extended several more days with contributed papers, most of which 
would have been of very high quality.  Perhaps it would have been 

Preface 

Vll 

wiser  to  plan  the  Conference  for  more  than  the  two  days  which 
were  actually used.  It was  the  Committee's feeling,  however,  that 
significantly more of the important interested people would be able 
to attend a  two-day meeting than one  of longer  duration  and that 
the  fundamental  purposes  of  the  Conference  would  be  best 
accomplished by the shorter meeting. 

Those paper that were  presented appeared to fall  naturally into 
four  different  interdisciplinary  Groups.  These  were,  with  the 
authors of the papers in the order presented: 

I.  Perception of the Environment 

Farley;  von Foerster;  Estes;  Rosenblatt. 

II.  Effects of Environmental Feedback 

Auerbach;  Goldman;  Bishop. 

III.  Learning in Finite Automata 

Newell,  Shaw, Simon;  Milner;  Minsky;  Campbell. 

IV.  Structure of Self-Organizing Systems 

Pask;  McCulloch;  Burks. 

The  Committee  wishes  to  thank  each  of  these  authors  and 
co-authors, as well as Drs. Leedy, Weyland Uttley, for participating 
in the Conference and helping to make it a success.  Their assistance 
is greatly appreciated. 

The  papers  in  Groups  I  and II were  presented  during  the  first 
day under the Chairmanship of Dr. Otto M. Schmitt, Departments 
of Zoology  and  Physics,  University  of  Minnesota,  Minneapolis, 
Minnesota.  The papers in Groups III and IV were presented during 
the  second  day  under  the  Chairmanship  of Dr.  John  McCarthy, 
Department of Mathematics, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 
Cambridge,  Massachusetts.  The  Committee  wishes  to  express  its 
thanks  to Dr.  Schmitt and Dr.  McCarthy for the excellent way  in 
which they handled the presentations and the subsequent discussions. 
They  were  instrumental  in  bringing  out  many  interesting  points 
that would not otherwise have arisen.  The success of the Conference 
was due in large part to these Chairmen. 

Each  of the  papers  was  scheduled  for  thirty  ;minutes,  with  ten 
minutes  allotted  for'questions.  At the  end  of each  day  a  panel, 
made up of the authors who  spoke that day  and the Chairman for 

viii 

Preface 

the  day,  held  an  open  discussion,  with  questions  and  comments 
being welcomed from the audience.  It was  apparent in the  editing 
that many of the  comments  in the  open discussions  were  directed 
at  specific  papers  which  had  been  presented  that  day  and  were 
therefore  accordingly  placed  after  the  appropriate  papers  in  the 
written proceedings in the interest of clarity for the reader. 

All  of the  papers  presented  at  the  Conference  are  included  in 
these  Proceedings  in  the  order  presented,  each  followed  by  the 
appropriate  discussion  as  explained  above,  with  the  exception  of 
the paper entitled "  Progress  on the Advice Taker "  by Dr. Marvin 
Minsky,  Department  of Mathematics,  Massachusetts  Institute  of 
Technology,  Cambridge,  Massachusetts.  Because  of other comitt(cid:173)
ments it was not possible for Dr. Minsky to submit his manuscript 
prior to publication of the Proceedings.  It is expected that the paper 
will  eventually  be  submitted  to  one  of the  scientific  journals  for 
publication. 

 

The  Committee  which  planned this  Conference  was  made up of 
Marshall  C.  Yovits,  Office  of Naval  Research,  Chairman;  Scott 
Cameron,  Armour  Research  Foundation,  Secretary;  Albert  R. 
Dawe,  Office  of Naval  Research;  Gordon D.  Goldstein,  Office  of 
Naval Research;  Harold Kantner,  Armour Research Foundation; 
and Maynard Shelly,  Office of Naval Research. 

For the  Committee, 

MARsHALL  C.  Yovns, Chairman 
Head, Information Systems Branch 
Office of Naval Research 

CONTENTS 

Preface ... by M.  C. YoVITs 
Welcome Address ... by H. A. LEEDY 
Opening Address ... by F. J. WEYL 
Self-Organizing Models for Learned Perception ... by B.  G.  FARLEY 
On Self-Organizing Systems and  Their  Enviroilments 

... by H.  VON  FOERSTER 

Statistical Models for Recall and Recognition of Stimulus Patterns 

by Human Observers ... by W.  K. EsTEs 

Perceptual  Generalization  over  Transformation  Groups 

... by F. RosENBLATT 

The  Organization  and  Reorganization  of Embryonic  Cells 

... by R. AUERBACH 

Further  Consideration  of Cybernetic Aspects of Homeostasis 

... by S. GOLDMAN 

Feedback  Through  the  Environment  as  an  Analog  of  Brain 

Functioning ... by G.  H. BISHOP 

FIRST DAY'S PANEL DISCUSSION 
A Variety of Intelligent Learning in a  General Problem Solver 

... by A. NEWELL,  J.  C. SHAw and H. A. SIMON 

Learning in Neural Systems .. . by P.  M.  MILNER 
Blind  Variation  and  Selective  Survival  as  a  General  Strategy  in 

Knowledge-Processes ... by D. T.  CAMPBELL 
The Natural History ofNetworks ... by G.  PASK 
The Reliability of Biological Systems ... by W.  S.  McCuLLocH 
Computation,  Behavior,  and  Structure  in  Fixed  and  Growing_ 

Automata ... by A.  W. BURKs 
SECOND  DAY'S PANEL DISCUSSION 
The Mechanization of Thought Processes ... by A.  M.  UTTLEY 

ix 

PAGE 

v 

3 
7 

31 

51 

63 

101 

108 

122 
147 

153 
190 

205 
232 
262 

282 
312 
319 

