FACTA UNIVERSITATIS  
Series: Physics, Chemistry and Technology Vol. 4, No 1, 2006, pp. 45 - 55 

GLOBAL WARMING AND GREENHOUSE GASES   

UDC 53+504.055 

Dragoljub S. Belic 

Faculty of Physics, University of Belgrade,  

Studentski trg 12, 11000 Belgrade, Serbia & Montenegro, belicd@ff.bg.ac.yu 

Abstract.  Global  warming  or  Climate  change  refers  to  long-term  fluctuations  in 
temperature,  precipitation,  wind,  and  other  elements  of  the  Earth's  climate  system. 
Natural processes such as solar-irradiance variations, variations in the Earth's orbital 
parameters, and volcanic activity can produce variations in climate. The climate system 
can  also  be  influenced  by  changes  in  the  concentration  of  various  gases  in  the 
atmosphere, which affect the Earth's absorption of radiation. 
Key words:   global warming, greenhouse gases, carbon dioxide, methane,  

nitrous oxide, ozone, Kyoto protocol 

INTRODUCTION 

The  Earth  naturally  absorbs  and  reflects  incoming  solar  radiation  and  emits  longer 
wavelength terrestrial (thermal) radiation back into space. In average, the absorbed solar 
radiation is balanced by the outgoing terrestrial radiation emitted to space. A portion of 
this terrestrial radiation, though, is itself absorbed by gases in the atmosphere. The energy 
from this absorbed terrestrial radiation warms the Earth's surface and atmosphere, creat-
ing what is known as the "natural greenhouse effect." Without the natural heat-trapping 
properties of these atmospheric gases, the average surface temperature of the Earth would 
be about 33oC lower (Intra-governmental Panel on Climate Change, IPCC 2001). 

Under the UNFCCC, the definition of climate change is "a change of climate which is 
attributed directly or indirectly to human activity that alters the composition of the global 
atmosphere and which is in addition to natural climate variability observed over compa-
rable time periods." Given that definition, in its Second Assessment Report of the science 
of climate change, the IPCC concluded that: 

"Human activities are changing the atmospheric concentrations and distributions of 
greenhouse  gases  and  aerosols.  These  changes  can  produce  a  radiative  forcing  by 
changing either the reflection or absorption of solar radiation, or the emission and ab-
sorption of terrestrial radiation (IPCC 1996)." 

Built on that conclusion, the more recent IPCC Third Assessment Report asserts that 

                                                           
  Received July 21, 2005 

46 

D. S. BELIC 

"concentrations of atmospheric greenhouse gases and their radiative forcing have contin-
ued to increase as a result of human activities" (IPCC 2001). The IPCC went on to report 
that the global average surface temperature of the Earth has increased by between 0.6  
0.2C over the 20th century. 

GREENHOUSE GASES 

Although  the  Earth's  atmosphere  consists  mainly  of  oxygen  and  nitrogen,  neither 
plays a significant role in enhancing the greenhouse effect because both are essentially 
transparent  to  terrestrial  radiation.  The  greenhouse  effect  is  primarily  a  function  of  the 
concentration of water vapor, carbon dioxide, and other trace gases in the atmosphere that 
absorb the terrestrial radiation leaving the surface of the Earth (IPCC 1996). Changes in 
the atmospheric concentrations of these greenhouse gases can alter the balance of energy 
transfers between the atmosphere, space, land, and the oceans. A gauge of these changes 
is called radiative forcing, which is a simple measure of changes in the energy available 
to the Earth-atmosphere system (IPCC 1996). Holding everything else constant, increases 
in greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere will produce positive radiative forc-
ing (i.e., a net increase in the absorption of energy by the Earth). 

Climate  change  can  be  driven  by  changes  in  the  atmospheric  concentrations  of  a 
number of radiatively active gases and aerosols. We have clear evidence that human ac-
tivities  have  affected  concentrations,  distributions  and  life  cycles  of  these  gases  (IPCC 
1996). 

Naturally  occurring  greenhouse  gases  include  water  vapor,  carbon  dioxide  (CO2), 
methane (CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), and ozone (O3). Several classes of halogenated sub-
stances that contain fluorine, chlorine, or bromine are also greenhouse gases, but they are, 
for  the  most  part,  solely  a  product  of  industrial  activities.  Chlorofluorocarbons  (CFCs) 
and  hydrochlorofluorocarbons  (HCFCs)  are  halocarbons  that  contain  chlorine,  while 
halocarbons  that  contain  bromine  are  referred  to  as  bromofluorocarbons  (i.e.,  halons). 
Because CFCs, HCFCs, and halons are stratospheric ozone depleting substances, they are 
covered under the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer. The 
UNFCCC defers to this earlier international treaty; consequently these gases are not in-
cluded  in  national  greenhouse  gas  inventories.  Some  other  fluorine  containing  halo-
genated  substances    hydrofluorocarbons  (HFCs),  perfluorocarbons  (PFCs),  and  sulfur 
hexafluoride (SF6)  do not deplete stratospheric ozone but are potent greenhouse gases. 
These  latter  substances  are  addressed  by  the  UNFCCC  and  accounted  for  in  national 
greenhouse gas inventories. 

There are also several gases that, although they do not have a commonly agreed upon 
direct  radiative  forcing  effect,  do  influence  the  global  radiation  budget.  These  tropo-
spheric  gases    referred  to  as  ambient  air  pollutants    include  carbon  monoxide  (CO), 
nitrogen dioxide (NO2), sulfur dioxide (SO2), and tropospheric (ground level) ozone (O3). 
Tropospheric ozone is formed by two precursor pollutants, volatile organic compounds 
(VOCs) and nitrogen oxides (NOx), in the presence of ultraviolet light (sunlight). 

Aerosols    extremely  small  particles  or  liquid  droplets    often  composed  of  sulfur 
compounds,  carbonaceous  combustion  products,  crystal  materials  and  other  human  in-
duced pollutants  can affect the absorptive characteristics of the atmosphere. However, 
the level of scientific understanding of aerosols is still very low (IPCC 2001). 

 

Global Warming and Greenhouse Gases 

47 

Carbon dioxide, methane, and nitrous oxide are continuously emitted to and removed 
from the atmosphere by natural processes on Earth. Anthropogenic activities, however, 
can cause additional quantities of these and other greenhouse gases to be emitted or se-
questered,  thereby  changing  their  global  average  atmospheric  concentrations.  Natural 
activities such as respiration by plants or animals and seasonal cycles of plant growth and 
decay are examples of processes that only cycle carbon or nitrogen between the atmos-
phere and organic biomass. Such processes  except when directly or indirectly perturbed 
out  of  equilibrium  by  anthropogenic  activities    generally  do  not  alter  average  atmos-
pheric greenhouse gas concentrations over decadal timeframes. 

Climatic changes resulting from anthropogenic activities, however, could have posi-
tive or negative feedback effects on these natural systems. Atmospheric concentrations of 
these gases, along with their rates of growth and atmospheric lifetimes, are presented in 
Table 1. 

Table 1. Global atmospheric concentration (ppm unless otherwise specified),  

rate of concentration change (ppb/year) and atmospheric lifetime (years) of 
selected greenhouse gases 

 

Pre-industrial concentration 
Atmospheric concentration 1998 
Rate of concentration change  (90-99) 
Atmospheric  lifetime 

CO2 
278 
365 
1.5 

50-200 

CH4 
0.700 
1.745 
0.007 
12 

N2O 
0.270 
0.314 
0.0008 
114 

0 
4.3 
0.24 
3,200 

SF6(ppt)  CF4(ppty) 

40 
80 
1.0 

>50,000 

Water Vapor (H2O). Overall, the most abundant and dominant greenhouse gas in the 
atmosphere is water vapor. Water vapor is neither long-lived nor well mixed in the at-
mosphere, varying spatially from 0 to 2 percent (IPCC 1996). In addition, atmospheric 
water  can  exist  in  several  physical  states  including  gaseous,  liquid,  and  solid.  Human 
activities are not believed to directly affect the average global concentration of water va-
por;  however,  the  radiative  forcing  produced  by  the  increased  concentrations  of  other 
greenhouse gases may indirectly affect the hydrologic cycle. A warmer atmosphere has 
an increased water holding capacity; yet, increased concentrations of water vapor affects 
the formation of clouds, which can both absorb and reflect solar and terrestrial radiation. 
Aircraft contrails, which consist of water vapor and other aircraft emittants, are similar to 
clouds in their radiative forcing effects (IPCC 1999). 

Carbon  Dioxide  (CO2).  In  nature,  carbon  is  cycled  between  various  atmospheric, 
oceanic, land biotic, marine biotic, and mineral reservoirs. The largest fluxes occur be-
tween the atmosphere and terrestrial biota, and between the atmosphere and surface water 
of  the  oceans.  In  the  atmosphere,  carbon  predominantly  exists  in  its  oxidized  form  as 
CO2.  Atmospheric  carbon  dioxide  is  part of  this  global  carbon  cycle,  and  therefore  its 
fate is a complex function of geochemical and biological processes. 

48 

D. S. BELIC 

Fig. 1. Concentration change and radiative forcing of CO2 in the last thousand years. 

 

Carbon dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere increased from approximately 280 
parts per million by  volume  (ppmv) in pre-industrial times to 367 ppmv in 1999, a 31 
percent  increase  (IPCC  2001).  The  IPCC  notes  that  "[t]his  concentration  has  not  been 
exceeded during the past 420,000 years, and likely not during the past 20 million years. 
The rate of increase over the past century is unprecedented, at least during the past 20,000 
years." The IPCC definitively states that "the present atmospheric CO2 increase is caused 
by anthropogenic emissions of CO2" (IPCC 2001). Forest clearing, other biomass burn-
ing, and some non-energy production processes (e.g., cement production) also emit nota-
ble quantities of carbon dioxide. In its second assessment, the IPCC also stated that "[t]he 
increased amount of carbon dioxide [in the atmosphere] is leading to climate change and 
will produce, on average, a global warming of the Earth's surface because of its enhanced 
greenhouse effect  although the magnitude and significance of the effects are not fully 
resolved" (IPCC 1996). 

Methane (CH4). Methane is primarily produced through anaerobic decomposition of 
organic matter in biological systems. Agricultural processes such as wetland rice cultiva-
tion, enteric fermentation in animals, and the decomposition of animal wastes emit CH4, 
as does the decomposition of municipal solid wastes. Methane is also emitted during the 
production and distribution of natural gas and petroleum, and is released as a by-product 
of  coal  mining  and  incomplete  fossil  fuel  combustion.  Atmospheric  concentrations  of 
methane have increased by about 150 percent since pre-industrial times, although the rate 
of increase has been declining. The IPCC has estimated that slightly more than half of the 
current CH4 flux to the atmosphere is anthropogenic, from human activities such as agri-
culture, fossil fuel use and waste disposal (IPCC 2001). 

Methane is removed from the atmosphere by reacting with the hydroxyl radical (OH) 
and is ultimately converted to CO2. Minor removal processes also include reaction with 
Cl in the marine boundary layer, a soil sink, and stratospheric reactions. Increasing emis-
sions of methane reduce the concentration of OH, a feedback which may increase meth-
ane's atmospheric lifetime (IPCC 2001). 

 

Global Warming and Greenhouse Gases 

49 

 

Fig. 2. Concentration change and radiative forcing of CH4 in the last thousand years. 

Nitrous Oxide (N2O). Anthropogenic sources of N2O emissions include agricultural 
soils, especially the use of synthetic and manure fertilizers; fossil fuel combustion, espe-
cially  from  mobile  combustion;  adipic  (nylon)  and  nitric  acid  production;  wastewater 
treatment and waste combustion; and biomass burning. The atmospheric concentration of 
nitrous oxide (N2O) has increased by 16 percent since 1750, from a pre industrial value of 
about 270 ppb to 314 ppb in 1998, a concentration that has not been exceeded during the 
last  thousand  years.  Nitrous  oxide  is  primarily  removed  from  the  atmosphere  by  the 
photolytic action of sunlight in the stratosphere. 

Fig. 3. Concentration change and radiative forcing of N2O in the last thousand years. 

Ozone  (O3).  Ozone  is  present  in  both  the  upper  stratosphere,  where  it  shields  the 
Earth from harmful levels of ultraviolet radiation, and at lower concentrations in the tro-
posphere,  where  it  is  the  main  component  of  anthropogenic  photochemical  "smog." 
During the last two decades, emissions of anthropogenic chlorine and bromine-containing 

 

50 

D. S. BELIC 

halocarbons, such as chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), have depleted stratospheric ozone con-
centrations. This loss of ozone in the stratosphere has resulted in negative radiative forc-
ing, representing an indirect effect of anthropogenic emissions of chlorine and bromine 
compounds (IPCC 1996). The depletion of stratospheric ozone and its radiative forcing 
was expected to reach a maximum in about 2000 before starting to recover, with detec-
tion  of  such  recovery  not  expected  to  occur  much  before  2010  (IPCC  2001). The  past 
increase in tropospheric ozone, which is also a greenhouse gas, is estimated to provide 
the  third  largest  increase  in  direct  radiative  forcing  since  the  pre-industrial  era,  behind 
CO2 and CH4. Tropospheric ozone is produced from complex chemical reactions of vola-
tile organic compounds mixing  with nitrogen oxides (NOx) in the presence of sunlight. 
Ozone,  carbon  monoxide  (CO),  sulfur  dioxide  (SO2),  nitrogen  dioxide  (NO2)  and  par-
ticulate  matter  are  included  in  the  category  referred  to  as  "criteria  pollutants"  in  the 
United States under the Clean Air Act and its subsequent amendments. The tropospheric 
concentrations of ozone and these other pollutants are short-lived and, therefore, spatially 
variable. 

Halocarbons, Perfluorocarbons, and Sulfur Hexafluoride (SF6). Halocarbons are, 
for the most part, man-made chemicals that have both direct and indirect radiative forcing 
effects. Halocarbons that contain chlorine  chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), hydro-chloro-
fluoro-carbons (HCFCs),  methyl chloroform, and carbon tetrachloride  and bromine  
halons, methyl bromide, and hydrobromofluorocarbons (HBFCs)  result in stratospheric 
ozone depletion and are therefore controlled under the Montreal Protocol on Substances 
that Deplete the Ozone Layer. Although CFCs and HCFCs include potent global warm-
ing  gases,  their  net  radiative  forcing  effect  on  the  atmosphere  is  reduced  because  they 
cause stratospheric ozone depletion, which is itself an important greenhouse gas in addi-
tion to shielding the Earth from harmful levels of ultraviolet radiation. Under the Mont-
real Protocol, the United States phased out the production and importation of halons by 
1994 and of CFCs by 1996. Under the Copenhagen Amendments to the Protocol, a cap 
was placed on the production and importation of HCFCs by non-Article 5 countries be-
ginning in 1996, and then followed by a complete phase-out by the year 2030. The ozone 
depleting gases covered under the Montreal Protocol and its Amendments are not covered 
by  the  UNFCCC.  Hydrofluorocarbons  (HFCs),  perfluorocarbons  (PFCs),  and  sulfur 
hexafluoride (SF6) are not ozone depleting substances, and therefore are not covered un-
der the Montreal Protocol. They are, however, powerful greenhouse gases. HFCs  pri-
marily  used  as  replacements  for  ozone  depleting  substances  but  also  emitted  as  a  by-
product of the HCFC-22 manufacturing processcurrently have a small aggregate radia-
tive forcing impact; however, it is anticipated that their contribution to overall radiative 
forcing will increase (IPCC 2001). PFCs and SF6 are predominantly emitted from various 
industrial processes including aluminum smelting, semiconductor manufacturing, electric 
power  transmission  and  distribution,  and  magnesium  casting.  Currently,  the  radiative 
forcing impact of PFCs and SF6 is also small; however, they have a significant growth 
rate, extremely long atmospheric lifetimes, and are strong absorbers of infrared radiation, 
and therefore have the potential to influence climate far into the future (IPCC 2001). 

Carbon Monoxide (CO). Carbon monoxide has an indirect radiative forcing effect 
by  elevating  concentrations  of  CH4  and  tropospheric  ozone  through  chemical  reactions 
with other atmospheric constituents (e.g., the hydroxyl radical, OH) that would otherwise 
assist in destroying CH4 and tropospheric ozone. Carbon monoxide is created when car-
bon-containing  fuels are burned incompletely. Through  natural processes in the atmos-

 

Global Warming and Greenhouse Gases 

51 

phere, it is eventually oxidized to CO2. Carbon monoxide concentrations are both short-
lived in the atmosphere and spatially variable.  

Nitrogen Oxides (NOx). The primary climate change effects of nitrogen oxides (i.e., 
NO and NO2) are indirect and result from their role in promoting the formation of ozone 
in the troposphere and, to a lesser degree, lower stratosphere, where it has positive radia-
tive forcing effects. Additionally, NOx emissions from aircraft are also likely to decrease 
methane  concentrations,  thus  having  a  negative  radiative  forcing  effect  (IPCC  1999). 
Nitrogen  oxides  are  created  from  lightning,  soil  microbial  activity,  biomass  burning   
both natural and anthropogenic fires  fuel combustion, and, in the stratosphere, from the 
photo-degradation  of  nitrous  oxide  (N2O).  Concentrations  of  NOx  are  both  relatively 
short-lived in the atmosphere and spatially variable. 

Non-methane Volatile Organic Compounds (NMVOCs). Non-methane volatile or-
ganic compounds include compounds such as propane, butane, and ethane. These com-
pounds  participate,  along  with  NOx,  in  the  formation  of  tropospheric  ozone  and  other 
photochemical oxidants. NMVOCs are emitted primarily from transportation and indus-
trial  processes,  as  well  as  biomass  burning  and  non-industrial  consumption  of  organic 
solvents. Concentrations of NMVOCs tend to be both short-lived in the atmosphere and 
spatially variable.  

 
Fig. 4. Concentration of sulphur aerosols deposited in Greenland ice 

Aerosols.  Aerosols  are  extremely  small  particles  or  liquid  droplets  found  in  the  at-
mosphere. They can be produced by natural events such as dust storms and volcanic ac-
tivity, or by anthropogenic processes such as fuel combustion and biomass burning. They 
affect  radiative  forcing  in  both  direct  and  indirect  ways:  directly  by  scattering  and  ab-
sorbing solar and thermal infrared radiation; and indirectly by increasing droplet counts 
that  modify  the  formation,  precipitation  efficiency,  and  radiative  properties  of  clouds. 
Aerosols are removed from the atmosphere relatively rapidly by precipitation. Because 
aerosols generally have short atmospheric lifetimes, and have concentrations and compo-
sitions  that  vary  regionally,  spatially,  and  temporally,  their  contributions  to  radiative 
forcing are difficult to quantify (IPCC 2001). The indirect radiative forcing from aerosols 

52 

D. S. BELIC 

is typically divided into two effects. The first effect involves decreased droplet size and 
increased droplet concentration resulting from an increase in airborne aerosols. The sec-
ond effect involves an increase in the water content and lifetime of clouds due to the ef-
fect of reduced droplet size on precipitation efficiency (IPCC 2001). Recent research has 
placed a greater focus on the second indirect radiative forcing effect of aerosols. Various 
categories of aerosols exist, including naturally produced aerosols such as soil dust, sea 
salt,  biogenic  aerosols,  sulphates,  and  volcanic  aerosols,  and  anthropogenically  manu-
factured aerosols such as industrial dust and carbonaceous aerosols (e.g., black carbon, 
organic carbon) from transportation, coal combustion, cement manufacturing, waste in-
cineration, and biomass burning. The net effect of aerosols is believed to produce a nega-
tive radiative forcing effect (i.e., net cooling effect on the climate), although because they 
are short-lived in the atmosphere  lasting days to weeks  their concentrations respond 
rapidly to changes in emissions. Locally, the negative radiative forcing effects of aerosols 
can offset the positive forcing of greenhouse gases (IPCC 1996). "However, the aerosol 
effects do not cancel the global-scale effects of the much longer-lived greenhouse gases, 
and significant climate changes can still result" (IPCC 1996). The IPCC's Third Assess-
ment Report notes that "the indirect radiative effect of aerosols is now understood to also 
encompass effects on ice and mixed-phase clouds, but the magnitude of any such indirect 
effect is not known, although it is likely to be positive" (IPCC 2001). Additionally, cur-
rent research suggests that another constituent of aerosols, elemental carbon, may have a 
positive radiative forcing (Jacobson 2001). The primary anthropogenic emission sources 
of elemental carbon include diesel exhaust, coal combustion, and biomass burning. 

GLOBAL WARMING POTENTIALS 

Global Warming Potentials (GWPs) are intended as a quantified measure of the glob-
ally averaged relative radiative forcing impacts of a particular greenhouse gas. It is de-
fined as the cumulative radiative forcing both direct and indirect effects integrated over a 
period  of  time  from  the  emission  of  a  unit  mass  of  gas  relative  to  some  reference  gas 
(IPCC 1996). Carbon dioxide (CO2) was chosen as this reference gas. Direct effects occur 
when the gas itself is a greenhouse gas. Indirect radiative forcing occurs when chemical 
transformations  involving  the  original  gas  produce  a  gas  or  gases  that  are  greenhouse 
gases, or when a gas influences other radiatively important processes such as the atmos-
pheric lifetimes of other gases. The relationship between gigagrams (Gg) of a gas and Tg 
CO2 Eq. can be expressed as follows:   

Tg(CO2)Eq = (Gg of gas)  (GWP)  (Tg/1.000Gg) 

GWP values allow policy makers to compare the impacts of emissions and reductions 
of  different  gases.  According  to  the  IPCC,  GWPs  typically  have  an  uncertainty  of 
roughly  35 percent, though some GWPs have larger uncertainty than others, especially 
those which lifetimes have not yet been ascertained. In the following decision, the parties 
to the UNFCCC have agreed to use consistent GWPs from the IPCC Second Assessment 
Report (SAR), based upon a 100 year time horizon, although other time horizon values 
are available (see Table 2). 

 

Global Warming and Greenhouse Gases 

53 

Table 2. Atmospheric lifetimes (years) and GWP values of some greenhouse gases. 

Atmospheric 

20-year 
GWP 
1 
56 
280 
9,100 
4,600 
3,400 
5,000 
460 
4,300 
5,100 
3,000 
4,400 
6,200 
4,800 
5,000 
16,300 

500-year 
GWP 
1 
65 
170 
9,800 
920 
420 
1,400 
42 
950 
4,700 
400 
10,000 
14,000 
10,100 
10,700 
34,900 

100-year 
GWP 
1 
21 
310 
11,700 
2,800 
1,300 
3,800 
140 
2,900 
6,300 
1,300 
6,500 
9,200 
7,000 
7,400 
23,900 

lifetimes 
50-200 
12 
120 
264 
32.6 
14.6 
48.3 
1.5 
36.5 
209 
17.1 
50,000 
10,000 
2,600 
3,200 
3,200 

Gas 
Carbon-dioxide (CO2) 
Methane (CH4) 
Nitrous-oxide (N2O) 
HFC-23 
HFC-125 
HFC-134a 
HFC-143a 
HFC-152a 
HFC-227ea 
HFC-236fa 
HFC-4310mee 
CF4 
C2F6 
C4F10 
C6F14 
SF6 
Greenhouse  gases  with  relatively  long  atmospheric  lifetimes  (e.g.,  CO2,  CH4,  N2O, 
HFCs, PFCs, and SF6) tend to be evenly distributed throughout the atmosphere, and con-
sequently global average concentrations can be determined. The short-lived gases such as 
water  vapor,  carbon  monoxide,  tropospheric  ozone,  other  ambient  air  pollutants  (e.g., 
NOx,  and  NMVOCs)  and  tropospheric  aerosols  (e.g.,  SO2  products  and  black  carbon), 
however, vary spatially, and consequently it is difficult to quantify their global radiative 
forcing impacts.  GWP values are generally not attributed to these gases  that are short-
lived and spatially inhomogeneous in the atmosphere. 

Estimated relative contributions of particular greenhouse gases as well as other natu-
ral or anthropogenic factors to the radiative forcing, climate change and global warming 
of Earth's atmosphere are illustrated in figure 5. 

Fig. 5. Various impacts of various factors to the atmospheric radiative forcing. 

 

54 

D. S. BELIC 

GLOBAL WARMING AND CLIMATE CHANGE 

Since  industrial  revolution  concentrations  of  CO2  have  been  increased  by  30  %,  of 
methane  doubled  and  of  N2O  increased  for  about  15  %.  There  are  various  predictions 
about further development and impact of this increase of greenhouse gases on the climate 
change. Generally, it has been predicted that CO2 will increase for another 30-150% by 
2100. It is evident that this will increase radiative forcing of the atmosphere and therefore 
increase of its temperature, precipitation level, ice melting and rise of sea level all around 
the world. These changes have already been started. 

Global Earth's temperature has been increased for about 0.6 oC in the last Century, see 
figure 6. Level of ice has been decreased. Sea level has increased in the same period for 
about 4-8 inch or 10-20 cm. It is predicted that temperature will further increase for some 
0.6  to  2.5  oC  in  the  next  50  Years  or  for  1.4  to  5.8  oC  in  the  next  Century,  with  the 
significant  regional  variations.  This  will  increase  water  evaporation  and  thus  increase 
atmospheric precipitations. In the same time period, sea level will increase for about two 
feats or over 60 cm along the northern hemisphere. 

All these changes will cause significant climate changes at Earth. Some models pre-
dict the shift of the green region at the north hemisphere for some 300 km toward north. 

Fig.  6. Change of the Earth's atmosphere temperature in the last Century. 

 

It has been estimated that all these changes will cause damage of the Worlds economy 

for some 40-60 billion dollars. 

KYOTO PROTOCOL AND REDUCTION OF EMMISION OF GREENHOUSE GASES 

Serious  problems  and  possible  consequences  have  brought  discussed  issues  to  the 
highest institutions, governments of developed countries and to the United Nations. Many 
conferences have been organized and devoted to these problems: Stockholm conference 
in 1972, Vienna convention  in 1985, Montreal protocol in 1987. Following are  Rio de 
Janeiro conference in 1992, Berlin conference in 1995 and Kyoto protocol in 1997. The 
last  one  is  devoted  to  the  reduction  of  greenhouse  gases.  By  this  protocol  developed 
countries, highest producers of CO2, are supposed to reduce greenhouse gases emission to 
proposed levels by 2010. 

 

Global Warming and Greenhouse Gases 

55 

USA  is  producing  1/5  of  total  greenhouse  gases  and  they  are  supposed  to  reduce 
emission for 24,3 %. However, USA has not approved this agreement, until now. On the 
other hand, the government of USA is aware of all consequences of discussed effects and 
they are currently in progress of gas emission reduction. In last two decades, USA has 
reduced greenhouse gases and ozone layer depleting gases for about 30 %. It is interest-
ing to mention the way it has been achieved. Trading quote principles are introduced and 
it worked out efficiently. 

Acknowledgments. This work was done as a part of the activities within the frame of 141015 Project of 
the  Ministry  of  Science  and  Environmental  Protection  of  the  Republic  of  Serbia  and  World  Year  of 
Physics 2005 activities supported by Serbian and European Physical Society. 

REFERENCES 

1.  FCCC (1996) Framework Convention on Climate Change; FCCC, 1996, Report of the Conference of the 

Parties at its second session, Geneva 1996. 

2.  IPCC (2001) Climate Change 2001; A Scientific Basis, Intragovernmental Panel on Climate Change; J. 
T. Houghton, Y. Ding, D. J. Griggs, M. Noguer, P. J. Van Der Linden, X. Dai, C. A. Johnson and K. 
Maskell, eds. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, U. K. 

3.  UNEP/WMO (2000) Information Unit on Climate Change, Framework Convention on Climate Change, 

http://www.unfccc.de 

4.  WMO (1999) Scientific Assesment of Ozone Depletion, Global Ozone Research and Monitoring Project 

 Report No.44, World Meteorological Organization, Geneva, Switzerland. 

5.  EPA (2005) Environmental Protection Agency; Climate Change, http://www.epa.gov. 

GLOBALNO ZAGREVANJE I EFEKAT STAKLENE BASTE 

Dragoljub S. Belic 

Globalno zagrevanje ili promena klime se odnosi na dugovremenske fluktuacije temperature, 
padavina,  vetrova  i  ostalih  elemenata  klimatskog  sistema  Zemlje.  Prirodni  procesi  kao  sto  su 
varijacije u solarnoj iradijaciji, varijacije parametara Zemljine orbite ili vulkanske aktivnosti mogu 
da izazovu promene klime. Klimatske promene medjutim mogu da budu izazvane i promenama u 
koncentraciji odredjenih gasova u Zemljinj atmosferi koji uticu na apsorpciju zracenja na Zemlji i 
u njenoj atmosferi putem tzv. antropogenog efekta staklene baste. 

