Preventing and Defending Against Cyber Attacks
June 2011

The Department of Homeland Security (DHS) is responsible for helping Federal Executive
Branch civilian departments and agencies secure their unclassified networks (.gov). DHS also
works with owners and operators of critical infrastructure and key resources (CIKR)—whether
private sector, state, or municipality-owned—to bolster their cybersecurity preparedness, risk
assessment and mitigation, and incident response capabilities.
The activities under way to implement the recommendations of the Cyberspace Policy Review
build on the Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative (CNCI) launched by President
George W. Bush in National Security Presidential Directive 54/Homeland Security Presidential
Directive 23 (NSPD-54/ HSPD-23) in January 2008. President Obama determined that the CNCI
and its associated activities should evolve to become key elements of a broader, updated national
U.S. cybersecurity strategy. These CNCI initiatives will play a key role in supporting the
achievement of many of the key recommendations of President Obama’s Cyberspace Policy
Review.
The Nation’s first ever Quadrennial Homeland Security Review (QHSR), delivered to Congress
in February 2010, identified “safeguarding and securing cyberspace” as one of the Nation’s five
priority homeland security missions.
DHS has made significant strides to enhance the security of the nation’s critical physical
infrastructure as well as its cyber infrastructure and networks. Current tools include the National
Cybersecurity Protection System, of which the EINSTEIN cyber intrusion detection system is a
key component; the National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center, which
serves as the nation’s principal hub for organizing cyber response efforts; and a 2010 landmark
agreement between DHS and the Department of Defense to align and enhance America’s
capabilities to protect against threats to critical civilian and military computer systems and
networks.
Cybersecurity Coordination and Outreach
National Cyber Incident Response Plan
The President’s Cybersecurity Policy Review called for “a comprehensive framework to
facilitate coordinated responses by Government, the private sector, and allies to a significant
cyber incident.” DHS coordinated the interagency, state and local government, and private sector
working group that developed the National Cyber Incident Response Plan.
The plan enables DHS to coordinate the response of multiple federal agencies, state and local
governments, international partners, and private industry to incidents at all levels. It is designed
to be flexible and adaptable to allow synchronization of response activities across jurisdictional
lines.

1

The NCIRP was recently tested during the CyberStorm III national exercise, which simulated a
large-scale attack on the nation’s critical information infrastructure. Seven Cabinet agencies,
eleven states, twelve international partners, and sixty private sector companies participated in the
CyberStorm III exercise.
National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration Center (NCCIC)
In October 2009, DHS established the National Cybersecurity and Communications Integration
Center, a 24-hour, DHS-led coordinated watch and warning center, to serve as the Nation’s
principal hub for organizing cyber response efforts and maintaining the national cyber and
communications common operational picture.
 The NCCIC combines two of DHS's operational organizations: the U.S. Computer
Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT) and the National Coordinating Center for
Telecommunications (NCC), the operational arm of the National Communications System.
 It also integrates the efforts of DHS's National Cybersecurity Center (NCSC), which
coordinates operations among the six largest federal cyber centers, the DHS Office of
Intelligence and Analysis and private sector partners.
 Additional representatives from federal agencies, the private sector and state and local
governments are also collocated at the NCCIC.
U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team
DHS’s U.S. Computer Emergency Readiness Team (US-CERT) is the operational arm of NCSD
that provides response support and defense against cyber attacks for the Federal Civilian
Executive Branch (.gov) networks. US-CERT also collaborates and shares information with state
and local government, industry, and international partners to address cyber threats and develop
effective security responses.
Critical Infrastructure and Key Resources
DHS works to ensure the systems that support critical infrastructure and key resources (CIKR) –
the essential functions that underpin American society – are protected from cyber threats.
 The Industrial Control Systems Cyber Emergency Response Team (ICS-CERT) provides
onsite support to owners and operators of critical infrastructure for protection against and
response to cyber threats, including incident response, forensic analysis, and site
assessments. ICS-CERT also provides tools and training to increase stakeholder awareness
of evolving threats to industrial control systems.
 In August 2009, DHS and the Information Technology Sector Coordinating Council released
the IT Sector Baseline Risk Assessment (ITSRA) to identify and prioritize national-level
risks to critical sector-wide IT functions while outlining strategies to mitigate those risks and
enhance national and economic security.
o The ITSRA validated the resiliency of key elements of IT sector infrastructure while
providing a process by which public and private sector owners and operators can
continually update their risk management programs.
o The ITSRA links security measures to concrete data to provide a basis for meaningful
infrastructure protection metrics.

2

Cybersecurity Initiatives and Exercises
The EINSTEIN Program
The EINSTEIN system is designed to provide the U.S. Government with an early warning
system for intrusions to Federal Executive Branch civilian networks, near real-time identification
of malicious activity, and automated disruption of that malicious activity.
 EINSTEIN 1: The first iteration of the EINSTEIN system was developed in 2003 and
automates the collection and analysis of computer network security information from
participating agency and government networks to help analysts identify and combat
malicious cyber activity that may threaten government network systems, data protection and
communications infrastructure.
 EINSTEIN 2: The second phase of EINSTEIN, developed in 2008, incorporated intrusion
detection capabilities into the original EINSTEIN system. DHS is currently deploying
EINSTEIN 2 to federal executive branch civilian agencies and Networx Managed Trusted
Internet Protocol Services (MTIPS) providers, private internet service providers that serve
federal agencies, to assist them with protecting their computers, networks and information.
o EINSTEIN 2 has now been deployed at 15 of 19 departments and agencies..
Additionally, the four MTIPS providers currently provide service to seven federal
agencies.
o In 2010, EINSTEIN 2 sensors registered 5.4 million “hits,” an average of over 450,000
hits per month. A hit is an alert triggered by a predetermined intrusion detection
signature that corresponds to a known threat.
 EINSTEIN 3: DHS is currently developing the third phase of the EINSTEIN system – an
intrusion prevention capability which will provide DHS with the ability to automatically
detect and disrupt malicious activity before harm is done to critical networks and systems.
Trusted Internet Connections Initiative
As part of the President’s Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative (CNCI), DHS works
with the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) to reduce and consolidate the number of
external connections to the Internet that federal agencies have to the Internet through the Trusted
Internet Connections (TIC) initiative.
 This initiative reduces the number of potential threats to government networks and allows
DHS to focus monitoring efforts on limited and known avenues through which Internet
traffic must travel.
 DHS conducts onsite evaluations of department and agency progress toward implementing
TIC goals.
National Strategy for Trusted Identities in Cyberspace
In July 2010, DHS supported the White House publication of a draft National Strategy for
Trusted Identities in Cyberspace – which seeks to secure the identities of individuals,
organizations, services and devices during online transactions, as well as the infrastructure
supporting the transaction – fulfilling one of the near-term action items of the President’s
Cyberspace Policy Review.
 The Strategy supports the protection of privacy and civil liberties by enabling only the
minimum necessary amount of personal information to be transferred in any particular
transaction.

3



Individuals will have a single credential to log into any website, which will provide greater
security than passwords alone and offers increased protection of online anonymity.

Intergovernmental Partnerships
DHS works closely with its federal and state partners to protect government cyber networks.
 In December 2009, DHS initiated a first-of-its-kind federal-state cybersecurity partnership to
deploy DHS’s EINSTEIN 1 cybersecurity system to the state of Michigan’s government
networks. As part of the partnership with Michigan, DHS’s U.S. Computer Emergency
Readiness Team (US-CERT) will identify possible abnormal activities on Michigan’s
networks and address threats to critical cyber infrastructure—strengthening defenses against
cyber attacks and the overall resiliency of Michigan’s networks and cyber resources.
 DHS and OMB work cooperatively with agencies across the federal government to
coordinate the protection of the nation’s federal information systems through compliance
with the Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002.
 In October 2010, DHS and the Department of Defense (DoD) signed a memorandum of
agreement that aligns and enhances America’s capabilities to protect against threats to our
critical civilian and military computer systems and networks, including deploying a DoD
support team to the NCCIC to enhance the National Cyber Incident Response Plan and
sending a full-time senior DHS leader and support team to DoD’s National Security Agency.
 In May 2010, DHS and the Department of Education developed the National Initiative for
Cybersecurity Education (NICE) from the Comprehensive National Cybersecurity Initiative,
extending the scope of cyber education beyond the federal workplace to include the public
and students in kindergarten through post-graduate school. The goal of NICE is to establish
an operational, sustainable and continually improving cybersecurity education program for
the nation to promote the use of sound cyber practices that will enhance the nation’s security.
The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) is leading the NICE initiative,
comprised of over 20 federal departments and agencies, to ensure coordination, cooperation,
focus, public engagement, technology transfer and sustainability.
 In November 2010, the Multi-State Information Sharing and Analysis Center (MS-ISAC)
opened their Cyber Security Operations Center, a 24-hour watch and warning facility, which
will both enhance situational awareness at the state and local level for the NCCIC and allow
the federal government to quickly and efficiently provide critical cyber risk, vulnerability,
and mitigation data to state and local governments.
Public-Private Partnerships and Information Sharing
Private industry owns and operates the vast majority of the nation’s critical infrastructure and
cyber networks. Consequently, the private sector plays an important role in cybersecurity, and
DHS has initiated several pilot programs to promote public-private sector collaboration.
 In February 2010, DHS, the Department of Defense, and the Financial Services Information
Sharing and Analysis Center launched a pilot designed to help protect key critical networks
and infrastructure within the financial services sector by sharing actionable, sensitive
information.
 In June 2010, DHS implemented the Cybersecurity Partners Local Access Plan, which allows
security-cleared owners and operators of CIKR, as well as state technology officials and law
enforcement officials, to access secret-level cybersecurity information and video
teleconference calls via local fusion centers.

4



In November 2010, DHS signed an agreement with the Information Technology Information
Sharing and Analysis Center (IT-ISAC) to embed a full-time IT-ISAC analyst and liaison to
DHS at the NCCIC, part of an ongoing effort to collocate private sector representatives
alongside federal and state government counterparts. The IT-ISAC consists of information
technology stakeholders from the private sector and facilitates cooperation among members
to identify sector-specific vulnerabilities and risk mitigation strategies.

Cyber Storm III
In September 2010, DHS hosted Cyber Storm III, a response exercise in which members of the
cyber incident response community address the scenario of a coordinated cyber event in which
the National Cyber Incident Response Plan is activated, testing the National Cybersecurity and
Communications Integration Center and the federal government’s full suite of cybersecurity
response capabilities.
Promoting Public Awareness of Cybersecurity
DHS is committed to developing innovative new ways to enhance public awareness about the
importance of safeguarding America's computer systems and cyber networks from attacks.
 Every October, DHS and its public and private sector partners promote efforts to educate
citizens about guarding against cyber threats as part of National Cybersecurity Awareness
Month.
 In March 2010, Secretary Napolitano launched the National Cybersecurity Awareness
Challenge — which called on members of the public and private sector companies to develop
creative and innovative ways to enhance awareness of the importance of cybersecurity and
safeguard America’s computer systems and networks from attacks.
 In July 2010, seven of the more than 80 proposals were selected and recognized at a White
House ceremony. The winning proposals helped inform the National Cybersecurity
Awareness Campaign, Stop. Think. Connect.
Stop. Think. Connect. National Cybersecurity Awareness Campaign
In October 2010, in conjunction with National Cybersecurity Awareness Month, DHS launched
the Stop. Think. Connect. public cybersecurity awareness campaign—a national public
education campaign designed to increase public understanding of cyber threats and how
individual citizens can develop safer cyber habits that will help make networks more secure. The
campaign fulfills a key element of President Obama’s 2009 Cyberspace Policy Review, which
tasked DHS with developing a public awareness campaign to inform Americans about ways to
use technology safely.
In June 2011, Stop.Think.Connect. identified three public service announcements from a
national competition that inform Internet users of the importance of safe online practices. The
campaign also upgraded its web presence including enhancements for outreach and increased
efforts for community involvement, building on the Secretary’s message that homeland security
is a shared responsibility and requires everyone’s participation.

5

Cybersecurity Workforce Development
DHS is focused on building a world-class cybersecurity team by hiring a diverse group of
cybersecurity professionals—computer engineers, scientists, and analysts—to secure the nation’s
digital assets and protect against cyber threats to our critical infrastructure and key resources.
 The DHS National Cyber Security Division (NCSD) is hiring cybersecurity and information
technology professionals, nearly tripling its cybersecurity workforce in FY 2009 and nearly
doubling that number in FY 2010. NCSD currently has more than 230 cybersecurity
professionals on board, with dozens more in the hiring pipeline.
 DHS and the National Security Agency co-sponsor the Centers of Academic Excellence in
Information Assurance Education and Research programs, the goal of which are to produce a
growing number of professionals with information assurance expertise in various disciplines.
 DHS and the Department of State co-hosted Operation Cyber Threat (OCT1.0), the first in a
series of Government-wide experiential and interactive cybersecurity training pilots designed
to apply learning concepts and share best practices in a secure, simulated environment to
build capacity within the federal workforce.
 In December 2010, the Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers (IEEE) Computer
Society, the world’s leading organization of computing professionals, formally recognized
the Master of Software Assurance (MSwA) Reference Curriculum, which DHS sponsored
through its Software Assurance (SwA) Curriculum Project.
o The MSwA program is the first such curriculum of its kind to focus on assuring the
functionality, dependability, and security of software and systems.
 DHS co-sponsored the annual Colloquium for Information Systems Security Education and
the Scholarship for Services (SFS) Job Fair/Symposium, which brought together 55 federal
agencies and more than 200 SFS students.
Privacy and Civil Liberties
DHS is committed to supporting the public’s privacy, civil rights, and civil liberties.
Accordingly, the Department has implemented strong privacy and civil rights and civil liberties
standards into all its cybersecurity programs and initiatives from the outset.
 DHS established an Oversight and Compliance Officer within the National Protection and
Programs Directorate (NPPD).
 Key personnel receive specific training on the protection of privacy and other civil liberties
as they relate to computer network security activities.
 In an effort to increase transparency, DHS has published on its Web site, www.dhs.gov,
privacy impact assessments of all of its cybersecurity systems.

6

