 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

Pricing Policy for Tourism in Protected Areas:
Lessons from Komodo National Park, Indonesia

MATTHEW J. WALPOLE,* HAROLD J. GOODWIN, AND KARI G. R. WARD
Durrell Institute of Conservation and Ecology (DICE), University of Kent, Canterbury, Kent CT2 7NS,
United Kingdom

Abstract:
Protected areas are under increasing pressure to provide economic justification for their existence,
particularly  in  developing  countries  where  demand  for  land  and  natural  resources  is  high.  Nature-based
tourism offers a mechanism to generate substantial benefits from protected areas for both governments and
local communities, and ecotourism is increasingly promoted as a sustainable use of protected areas. The ex-
tent to which ecotourism offsets the costs of a protected area has rarely been examined. We used financial
data from Komodo National Park, Indonesia, and a willingness-to-pay questionnaire of independent visitors
to (1) examine the financial contribution of tourism in offsetting the costs of tourism and wider manage-
ment and (2) assess the effect of hypothetical fee increases on park revenues, visitation patterns, and local
economies. Although only 6.9% of park management costs were recovered, visitors were willing to pay over
10 times the current entrance fee, indicating a substantial potential for increased revenue. The potential neg-
ative effect of large fee increases on visitor numbers and the resultant effect on local economic benefits from
tourism may limit the extent to which greater financial benefits from Komodo National Park (KNP) can be
realized. Our results suggest that a moderate, tiered increase in entrance fees is most appropriate, and that
partial revenue retention by KNP would help demonstrate the conservation value of tourism to both visitors
and managers and has the potential to increase visitors willingness to pay.

Politica Tarifaria para el Turismo en Areas Protegidas: Lecciones del Parque Nacional Komodo, Indonesia

Resumen:
Las  areas  protegidas  se  encuentran  bajo  una  creciente  presion  para  proveer  una  justificacion
economica para su existencia, particularmente en paises en desarrollo donde la demanda por tierra y recur-
sos naturales es alta. El turismo basado en la naturaleza ofrece un mecanismo para generar beneficios sub-
stanciales en las areas protegidas tanto para los gobiernos como para las comunidades locales y el ecotur-
ismo  es  promovido  como  un  uso  sustentable  de  las  areas  protegidas.  La  medida  en  la  cual  el  ecoturismo
compensa los costos de las areas protegidas ha sido poco examinado. Nosotros utilizamos datos del Parque
Nacional Komodo de Indonesia y un cuestionario sobre la voluntad para pagar de visitantes independientes
para (1) examinar la contribucion financiera del turismo en la compensacion de los costos del turismo y del
manejo general (2) evaluar el efecto de incrementos hipoteticos en tarifas sobre los ingresos del parque, los
patrones de visitas y las economias locales. A pesar de que solo un 6.9 % de los costos de manejo del parque
fueron recobrados, los visitantes estaban dispuestos a pagar mas de 10 veces la tarifa actual de entrada, indi-
cando un potencial considerable para una mayor generacion de ingresos. El efecto negativo potencial de in-
crementos grandes en las tarifas sobre el numero de visitantes y el efecto resultante en los beneficios de la
economia local del turismo puede limitar la magnitud con la que los beneficios financieros del Parque Nacio-
nal de Komodo puedan implementarse. Nuestros resultados sugieren que un incremento moderado y esca-
lonado de las tarifas de entrada es mas apropiado y que la retencion parcial de ingresos por el Parque Nacio-
nal Komodo podria ayudar a demostrar el valor de conservacion del turismo tanto a los visitantes como a
los manejadores y tiene el potencial para incrementar la voluntad de los visitantes para pagar.

*
email m.j.walpole@ukc.ac.uk
Paper submitted May 3, 1999; revised manuscript accepted May 10, 2000.

218

Conservation Biology, Pages 218227
Volume 15, No. 1, February 2001

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

Walpole et al.

Introduction

Protected areas are the cornerstone of in situ biological
conservation efforts. From the earliest national parks in
the United States, protected areas were established as ar-
eas  set  aside  from  exploitation  to  preserve  our  natural
heritage for its scenic, and later biological, value (Nash
1982; Runte 1987; Leader-Williams et al. 1990). Such pres-
ervation was maintained mostly for the purpose of pub-
lic  enjoyment  through  visitation.  As  such,  access  was
generally  provided  at  minimal  cost  to  the  visitor.  As
freely available public goods, and in the absence of com-
mercial  exploitation,  protected  areas  did  not  generate
significant  direct  revenues.  When  economic  rationales
became necessary, they were usually expressed in terms
of the wider, indirect benefits that foreign visitation to
protected areas had for the economy of the host country
(Runte 1987; MacKenzie 1988). The costs of protection
and maintenance of protected areas were, and continue
to be, borne in large part by sovereign governments.

In recent years the role of protected areas in society
has been re-evaluated (World Conservation Union et al.
1980; McNeely & Miller 1984; McNeely 1993; Ghimire &
Pimbert 1997). Biocentric preservationist attitudes have
proved difficult to put into practice in much of the world,
given  the  political  and  economic  realities  facing  many
developing countries. The cost of preservation versus com-
peting public needs (Inamdar et al. 1999) and an increas-
ing  demand  for  land  and  resources  place  pressure  on
governments in developing countries to choose land-use
policies  in  favor  of  exploitation.  As  a  result,  the  eco-
nomic  performance  of  protected  areas  is  increasingly
scrutinized by critics and governments (Goodwin et al.
1997), and conservationists are being forced to identify
explicit  economic  rationales  for  protected  areas  (Mc-
Neely 1988; Edwards & Abivardi 1998).

Protected  areas  are  difficult  to  justify  on  economic
grounds  in  comparison  with  competing  forms  of  land
use (Inamdar et al. 1999). This is a result of market fail-
ure; few of the benefits of protected areas to society, in-
cluding  ecological  processes,  biodiversity,  and  ethical,
cultural, and future existence values, can be exchanged
in markets. Hence, they rarely have a financial value as-
cribed to them and are either underestimated or ignored
in  economic  analyses.  At  the  same  time,  many  of  the
costs of protected areas are more immediate and quanti-
fiable and hence appear sizeable in comparison to their
quantifiable benefits (Dixon & Sherman 1990, 1991). Al-
though  the  benefits  of  protected  areas  are  diffuse  and
bestowed mainly upon society in general, their costs are
generally acute and borne by governments or individu-
als, in particular surrounding local communities that suf-
fer the greatest costs of annexation, such as loss of ac-
cess  to  land  and  natural  resources  (Ghimire  &  Pimbert
1997; Goodwin et al. 1998; Getz et al. 1999).

Tourism is one of the few permitted uses of protected

Pricing Policy in Protected Areas

219

areas  which  generates  financial  benefits,  and  ecotour-
ism, or sustainable nature-based tourism, has emerged as
a potential solution to the dilemmas facing managers of
protected areas in developing countries (Boo 1992; Gi-
annecchini 1993; Orams 1995; Goodwin 1996). In the-
ory, ecotourism provides a means of generating tangible
economic benefits from protected areas to offset the of-
ten substantial costs of protection, without the environ-
mental  costs  associated  with  extractive  industries  such
as mining, forestry, and agriculture. In addition, ecotour-
ism forms a link between protected areas and the liveli-
hood  of  local  people,  providing  revenue  to  the  local
community sufficient for local people to value, and there-
fore  protect,  their  wildlife  heritage  as  a  source  of  in-
come (Goodwin 1996:288).

It is generally perceived, however, that due to a wide-
spread adherence to consistently low entrance fees, pro-
tected-area tourism underperforms financially and does
not provide substantial enough revenues to offset costs
(Laarman  &  Gregersen  1996).  Few  published  interna-
tional case studies exist that provide quantitative analy-
ses  of  the  contribution  of  tourism  to  park  finances.  In
only a few cases have parks been shown to generate sig-
nificant revenue above and beyond management costs.
For example, the Galapagos National Park is reported to
have  recouped  nine  times  its  management  costs,  and
tourism  based  on  gorilla  viewing  in  Rwanda  generated
significant profits prior to the civil war in that country
(Lindberg & Enriquez 1994). In both cases uncommonly
high entrance fees are charged.

Other  results  are  mixed.  An  early  report  on  Plitvice
National Park, Yugoslavia, suggests that it is self-support-
ing (Movcan 1982), and the Bonaire Marine Park in the
Caribbean is reported to be financially self-sustaining as
of 1991 (Dixon et al. 1993). The Uluru (Ayers Rock) Na-
tional  Park  in  Australia  recouped  83%  of  management
costs from entrance-fee revenue prior to 1991 (Lindberg &
Enriquez  1994).  In  the  19911992  financial  year,  how-
ever, user revenue equalled only 64% of management costs
(Driml 1994). In the same year, Kosciusko National Park
recouped 95% of management costs through user fees,
although  other  Australian  and  Tasmanian  parks  and  re-
serves included in the survey recouped considerably less.
Total user revenue over eight protected areas amounted
to 
25% of the annual budgetary outlay for these areas
(Driml 1994). Similarly, annual revenue from protected
areas in Nepal amounted to only 18% of expenditure on
management and protection (Wells 1993), whereas Keo-
ladeo National Park in India recouped 24% of total park
management costs in 19951996 (Goodwin et al. 1997,
1998).

,

As a result of below-cost pricing policies, many of the
benefits of tourism are not monetary and accrue to users
rather  than  to  governments  or  other  funding  agencies.
Economic estimation techniques have been used to value
the nonmonetary benefits of tourism and have revealed

Conservation Biology
Volume 15, No. 1, February 2001

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

220

Pricing Policy in Protected Areas

Walpole et al.

that  the  value  visitors,  or  society  in  general,  place  on
protected  areas  is  often  much  higher  than  traditional
pricing structures reflect (Brown & Henry 1989; Dixon &
Sherman 1990; Tobias & Mendelsohn 1991; Dixon et al.
1993; Maille & Mendelsohn 1993; Shafer et al. 1993; Mo-
ran  1994).  Such  studies  are  often  used  to  defend  pro-
tected areas as a form of land use in which the total eco-
nomic value to society outweighs the costs of protection
and the opportunity costs of foregone land-use options.
Nonmarket  values  cannot  be  used  to  meet  real  costs,
however. As a result, some countries, such as Kenya and
Zimbabwe,  have  begun  to  adjust  their  pricing  policies
for protected areas and now charge comparatively high
entrance  fees  in  an  effort  to  generate  greater  revenues
and  achieve  some  element  of  cost  recovery.  Some  au-
thorities  have  considered  privatization,  whereby  pro-
tected  areas  would  become  responsible  for  generating
their own revenues for management and protection with-
out government subsidy (Goodwin et al. 1997, 1998).

The  extent  to  which  increased  revenue  generation
can be achieved and the wider implications of price in-
creases have received little attention. The modern, mul-
tifaceted mission of protected areas includes a social re-
sponsibility  to  surrounding  communities  (McNeely  &
Miller  1984;  McNeely  1993).  Equally,  ecotourism  is  de-
fined as contributing toward both conservation and (lo-
cal) development objectives (Boo 1992; Goodwin 1996).
Furthermore, protected areas may be considered impor-
tant recreational and educational components of society
that should not be restricted to the affluent. Under these
circumstances, strategies for increasing revenue genera-
tion  must  be  assessed  in  light  of  the  potential  implica-
tions for visitors and local communities.

We present the results of a study of the economic ben-
efits of tourism to Komodo National Park (KNP), Indone-
sia. Using a combination of methods, we examined pric-
ing structure, revenues, and visitors willingness to pay.
We measured both direct costs and benefits and the un-
captured value placed on visiting KNP by visitors. We ex-
amined the potential for increased revenue and to what
extent this could be achieved without compromising the
interests of other stakeholder groups, and we evaluated
the implications of alternative pricing strategies for park
revenues, visitation patterns, and local benefits.

Methods

Study Area

9
8
9
8
Komodo National Park (KNP; lat 119
35
 E, long 8
30
 S)
is located in the Lesser Sunda Islands of Indonesia in the
province of East Nusa Tenggara. Lying in the Sape Straits
between Flores and Sumbawa, KNP comprises the three
islands of Komodo, Rinca, and Padar; smaller surround-
ing islands; the straits between the main islands; and all

Conservation Biology
Volume 15, No. 1, February 2001

waters within 1000 m of shore (Fig. 1). The total area of
2
KNP is 1730 km
, of which 35% is terrestrial and 65% is
marine (Goodwin et al. 1997).

The rugged topography of the islands reflects their po-
sition  in  the  volcanic  belt  between  Australia  and  the
Sundas  shelf.  Annual  rainfall  is  8001000  mm,  falling
mostly during the monsoon season between December
and March. The islands have little perennial surface wa-
ter. The predominant vegetation type is open grass-wood-
land  savannah,  mainly  of  anthropogenic  origin,  which
covers some 70% of the terrestrial area of the park. Trop-
ical lowland deciduous forest survives in valleys and on
some upper hill slopes. Terrestrial biodiversity, although
moderate,  is  notable  for  containing  both  Asian  and
Australasian representatives, due to the location of KNP
in  the  Wallacean  transition  zone  (Blower  et  al.  1977;
Sumardja 1981; Robinson & Bari 1982).

, known locally as 

Varanus komodoensis)

Komodo National Park is best known for the Komodo
monitor (
ora
and colloquially called the Komodo dragon. Discovered
in 1910, its total population is not more than 3000 indi-
viduals and has a limited distribution. It is found only on
the islands of Komodo, Rinca, Gili Motong, and in certain
coastal regions of western and northern Flores. The spe-
cies is probably extinct on Padar, where it was last seen
in 1975. It is the worlds largest living lizard, with males
sometimes  weighing  over  90  kg  and  exceeding  3  m  in
length (Auffenberg 1981). The Komodo dragon is listed
as vulnerable by the World Conservation Union (1996).

Tourists have traveled to the islands since the discov-
ery of the Komodo dragon, which remains the principal
attraction.  Tourism  has  grown  steadily  since  KNP  was
formally established in 1980. There were almost 30,000
visitors  in  the  19951996  financial  year,  of  which  93%
were foreign. Of these, 73% were European, 20% were
American,  and  7%  were  Australian  and  other  nationali-
ties. Almost 80% of arrivals were day visitors who each
spent  23  hours  in  the  park  to  view  and  photograph
dragons (Walpole 1997).

All  visitors  to  Komodo  National  Park  arrive  by  boat.
Currently  there  are  three  means  of  transport:  the  gov-
ernment ferry, a charter boat, or a cruise ship from Bali
or further afield. Independent tourists (48.2% in 1995
1996) have access to the ferry or can charter boats, and
package tourists (51.8%) arrive either in cruise ships or
in local boats chartered by their tour company.

All  visitors  pay  an  entrance  fee  upon  arrival  in  KNP,
which in common with most Indonesian protected areas
is  very  low  (Kinnaird  &  OBrien  1996).  At  the  time  of
this  study  (19951996),  the  entrance  fee  was  2000  ru-
piah (approximately US$0.87) per person. This revenue
is  returned  to  the  government,  which  in  turn  provides
an annual operating budget to the park.

Komodo National Park is funded entirely from govern-
ment  sources.  A  routine  budget  is  provided  for  staff
wages,  equipment,  maintenance,  and  transport.  Two

 

 
 

 

 

 

Walpole et al.

development  budgets  are  also  provided  for  construc-
tion and community activities. Only revenues from visi-
tor entrance fees are returned to the government. Other
tourist expenditure within KNP on guides, accommoda-
tion, food, and souvenirs accrues to a local cooperative
organization  that  provides  visitor  accommodation  and
restaurant  facilities  in  KNP  and  gateway  towns  to  the
east and west.

Comparing Revenues and Costs of Tourism in Komodo 
National Park

Data on entrance fee revenues and the total annual KNP
budget from 19901991 to 19941995 were obtained from
KNP accounts and were compared to assess the extent
to  which  tourism  offsets  park  management  costs.  Be-
cause many of the wider benefits of protected areas ac-
crue  to  society  as  a  whole  and  not  just  to  users,  it  has
been argued that users should not be expected to bear
the  total  park  costs  alone  (Lindberg  &  Enriquez  1994;
Laarman & Gregersen 1996; Goodwin et al. 1997). There-
fore,  we  compared  revenues  with  total  park  costs  and
with a subset of only the estimated tourism-related costs.
Separating  the  financial  costs  of  tourism  from  total
park  costs  is  problematic,  even  with  detailed  park  ac-
counts  (Lindberg  &  Enriquez  1994).  In  this  case,  how-
ever, recurrent tourism expenditure occurred only from

Pricing Policy in Protected Areas

221

the  routine  budget.  Of  the  components  of  the  routine
budget,  the  simplest  to  calculate  in  terms  of  tourism-
related  expenditure  was  salaries  (91%  of  the  routine
budget).  We  interviewed  KNP  staff  to  identify  which
staff  members  undertook  tourism  duties  and  for  what
proportion of their time. We then used salary data from
KNP accounts to estimate the proportion of salaries con-
sumed by tourism-related staff. Other components of the
routine  budget  besides  salaries  were  equipment  (6%),
maintenance (3%), and transport (1%). In the absence of
more accurate information, we assumed that the propor-
tion of each of these budgets used in support of tourism
staff was equal to the proportion of the total salary bud-
get used for tourism staff. Total recurrent tourism-related
costs  were  therefore  estimated  by  extrapolation  from
the  salary  proportion  to  the  total  routine  budget.  This
may be an underestimate of total tourism-related costs,
because  it  may  be  appropriate  to  include  a  discounted
element of infrastructure costs in each annual estimate.
Data are lacking on this aspect of park costs, however.
Environmental  costs  of  tourism  are  equally  difficult  to
quantify and so have been excluded.

Where  conversions  to  U.S.  dollars  have  been  made,
we  used  the  annual  end-of-period  exchange  rates  pub-
lished by the International Monetary Fund (IMF). We ad-
justed  annual  totals  to  a  19951996  U.S.  dollar  equiva-
lent  to  account  for  inflation  using  IMF  real  effective

Figure 1. Komodo National Park, In-
donesia.

Conservation Biology
Volume 15, No. 1, February 2001

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

 

222

Pricing Policy in Protected Areas

Walpole et al.

exchange-rate indices based on relative wholesale prices.
The 1995 end-of-period exchange rate was US$1 equals
2308 rupiah (IMF 1997).

Willingness of Visitors to Pay Increased Fees

We conducted a contingent valuation (CVM) survey of
visitors to examine the effect of hypothetical rises in en-
trance  fee  on  visitation  and  revenue  generation.  Pro-
tected areas usually have low entrance fees that are not
set by market forces and thus may fail to capture much
of the value visitors place on protected areas. The CVM
method  attempts  to  measure  this  uncaptured  value  by
asking a sample of respondents to state their willingness
to pay to prevent a specified change in an environmen-
tal asset (Mitchell & Carson 1989; Moran 1994; Jakobs-
son & Dragun 1996). In this case, the change was access
to  KNP,  so  CVM  provides  a  means  of  estimating  how
much additional value would be captured by a specified
increase in entrance fee.

Between August and November 1995, a questionnaire
survey of KNP visitors was conducted at the cafeteria
in  the  visitor  camp  on  Komodo  Island.  Questionnaires
were  distributed  by  a  KNP  staff  member  to  each  con-
senting  group  of  visitors  in  the  cafeteria  throughout
the  day.  An  individual  from  each  group  was  asked  to
read  and  complete  the  questionnaire  and  return  it  be-
fore  leaving  the  park.  The  survey  employed  an  upper-
and  lower-bounded  dichotomous-choice  form  of  ques-
tion  (cf.  Moran  1994).  Respondents  were  first  asked
how  a  specified  increase  in  entrance  fee  would  affect
their decision to visit KNP; depending on their answer,
they  were  then  asked  how  higher  or  lower  increases
would affect them. Three variations of the questionnaire,
with different suggested increases in entrance fee, were
distributed randomly among the sample of respondents.

q

 

ce

p

k

2

kp

5
 

, where 

 is the entrance fee, 

Initial suggested increases to US$4, US$8, and US$16 were
followed  up  with  suggestions  of  half  and  double  the
original increase, ranging from US$2 to US$32 (Table 1).
A  hypothetical  demand  curve  was  constructed  from
willingness-to-pay results. A regression model was fitted
to the curve by means of the negative exponential func-
tion 
 is the per-
centage of the sample respondents willing to pay 
, and
 are constants. This function provided the best fit
 and 
c
to the observed data. The model was used to calculate
the mean and median amount respondents were willing
 50%.
to pay. The median is the value of 
The  mean  was  calculated  by  integrating  the  demand
function truncated between the bid limits of the survey
( Jakobsson & Dragun 1996). We used differentiation to
calculate the fee at which the maximum revenue would
be generated.

p

 at which 

5

 
q

q

p

Limitations of the Contingent Valuation Survey

There  are  a  number  of  well-known  limitations  to  CVM
(Mitchell  &  Carson  1989),  principally  the  assumptions
that  respondents  know  the  surplus  they  derive  from
an  environmental  asset  and  that  they  will  state  this
surplus  truthfully  ( Jakobsson  &  Dragun  1996).  Stated
preferences will be affected by aspects of survey design
(design  biases),  cognitive  function  (strategic  bias),  and
hypothetical  bias  (hypothetical  questions  yield  hypo-
thetical  answers).  Many  of  these  can  be  minimized  by
sensitive survey design.

To minimize hypothetical bias, we designed the CVM
survey to simulate as closely as possible a real market sit-
uation. First, discrete-choice questions are more realistic
than  open-ended  continuous  ones,  because  they  more
closely simulate a take-it-or-leave-it market situation. Sec-
ond, the use of a familiar payment mechanism, the en-

Table 1. Willingness to pay (WTP) questionnaires used in a survey of tourists visiting Komodo National Park.*

Questionnaire
category

Questionnaire A

Questionnaire B

Questionnaire C

Dichotomous-choice WTP bidding format

first suggested fee 

(US$)

response

second suggested

fee (US$)

response

4

8

16

no

yes

no

yes

no

yes

8

2

16

4

32

8

yes
no
yes
no
yes
no
yes
no
yes
no
yes
no

*
Three versions (A, B, and C) were distributed randomly among respondents. Respondents were asked whether a certain entrance fee (first sug-
gested fee) would prevent their visit. Depending on their response, they were then asked whether a second suggested fee would prevent their
visit.

Conservation Biology
Volume 15, No. 1, February 2001

Walpole et al.

Pricing Policy in Protected Areas

223

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

trance fee, also enhances the approximation to reality in
the constructed market scenario. Finally, the use of ac-
cess as the contingent factor, rather than a more abstract
change in environmental quality, constructs a more real-
istic scenario that is easier for respondents to interpret.
Although the discrete-choice method is more realistic, it
risks not capturing the full range of willingness-to-pay re-
sponses. It has been suggested that if 10% of the sample
answers yes to the highest bid amount, then the sur-
vey has well indicated the range of willingness to pay
( Bostedt 1995). We tested this for our survey.

The comparatively realistic nature of the hypothetical
market  constructed  in  this  study  increased  the  risk  of
strategic  bias,  whereby  stated  willingness  to  pay  was
compromised by unrevealed motivations of respondents.
Strategic  bias  could  be  a  problem  if  respondents  per-
ceived that their answers would influence park pricing
policy and is most likely to result in a lower stated will-
ingness to pay. This is particularly so if respondents are
likely to revisit the park. Although strategic bias has rarely
been found empirically ( Jakobsson & Dragun 1996), it is
probably wise to consider willingness to pay as a conser-
vative estimate of potential revenue generation.

Only independent tourists were asked to participate in
the survey; package tourists on charter boats and cruise
ships  were  not  included.  Package  tourists  do  not  pay
their own entrance fee (it is included in the price of the
package), and a pilot survey revealed that most did not
know the current price of entrance to KNP. By compari-
son, over 90% of respondents to the independent visitor
survey correctly identified the entrance fee as approxi-
mately  US$1.  These  results  suggest  that  it  would  have
been invalid to examine the responses of package tour-
ists to hypothetical fee increases without reference to the
effect  of  fee  increases  on  their  tour  price.  (See  Moran
1994 for a CVM survey of tourists which uses tour price
instead of entrance fee as the payment mechanism.)

Effects of Hypothetical Fee Increases on the Local Economy

An increase in the entrance fee of a protected area could
result in a decrease in visitation, which has implications
for the generation of tourism revenues in the local econ-
omy.  Although  the  decision  not  to  visit  KNP  does  not
necessarily  mean  an  individual  will  not  visit  the  sur-
rounding area, it is likely to have a negative effect on the
spending of that individual within the local economy. A
survey of tourism-related spending in the local economy
surrounding KNP was conducted by Walpole and Good-
win (2000), who found that 40% of local expenditure by
tourists accrues to transport operators offering passage
to and from KNP. It is reasonable to assume that, were a
visitor to decide not to visit KNP, the minimum loss to
the  local  economy  would  be  the  amount  the  visitor
would  have  spent  on  transport  to  and  from  KNP  plus

the amount spent on accommodation and guiding by the
visitor within KNP.

Using data on local transport revenues from Walpole
and Goodwin (2000), data on accommodation and guid-
ing revenues in KNP from Walpole (1997), and the re-
sults  of  our  CVM  surveys,  we  estimated  the  amount  of
local revenue lost as a result of a specified increase in
entrance  fee.  We  made  estimates  for  two  specified  in-
creases: a reasonable fee and a fee that would maximize
entrance fee revenue.

Results

Revenues and Costs of Tourism in Komodo National Park

The  mean  annual  budget  for  KNP  between  19901991
and 19941995 was US$218,000, whereas the mean an-
nual tourism revenue from entrance fees during this pe-
riod was US$15,060. Thus, tourism revenues amounted
to only 6.9% of total expenditure during this period.

Comparing entrance-fee revenues with estimated tour-
ism-related  costs  suggests  a  more  balanced  cost-benefit
relationship.  Of  the  90  staff  employed  by  the  park  in
19951996, 21 had full-time tourism-related duties. Their
total salaries and benefits were 20.7% of the total salary
budget.  If  it  is  assumed  that  20.7%  of  the  total  routine
budget was used for tourism-related purposes, then esti-
mated mean annual tourism-related costs for the period
from  19901991  to  19941995  were  US$18,250.  En-
trance-fee revenues of US$15,060 therefore represented
82.6% of tourism-related costs. Given the limitations of
how we estimated tourism-related costs, however, cau-
tion  should  be  applied  in  concluding  that  KNP  has
achieved virtual cost recovery with regard to tourism.

Visitor Willingness to Pay Increased Fees

Of  524  questionnaires  collected,  465  (88.7%)  provided
usable  responses.  Respondents  were  55.6%  male  and
44.4% female. The nationality breakdown of the sample
of  respondents  (80.1%  European,  11.2%  North  Ameri-
can, 6.2% Australasian, and 3.4% other) was slightly bi-
ased  toward  European  respondents  when  compared
with the visitor population as a whole. Of those asked,
10.3%  were  willing  to  pay  the  highest  bid  amount  of
$32,  suggesting  that  our  survey  captured  most  of  the
willingness to pay (Bostedt 1995).

Our results suggest that the current entrance fee is not
a limiting factor in terms of visitation (Table 2; Fig. 2).
Demand  is  relatively  insensitive  to  price  for  even  five-
fold  hypothetical  increases  in  entrance  fee,  because  a
hypothetical raise to US$4 would result in only a 20% de-
cline in independent visitation (

5
 
n

The  regression  model  (
 
c

5
0.994) revealed a median willingness to pay of US$9.73,

  0.0738, 

  102.6, 

5

 465).
5

k

 

r

2
 

Conservation Biology
Volume 15, No. 1, February 2001

224

Pricing Policy in Protected Areas

Walpole et al.

 

 

 
 

 

 

 

 
 

 

 
 

 
 

Table 2.
in the entrance fee to visit Komodo National Park.

Visitors willingness to pay (WTP) hypothetical increases 

Entrance fee (US$)

2
4
8
16
32

Proportional WTP

(%)

90.37
79.31
54.19
28.18
10.26

5

 
n

whereas  the  mean  willingness  to  pay  was  US$11.70.
Revenue would be maximized at a fee of US$13.54, over
15 times the current (1996) fee (Fig. 3). At this fee, an
estimated  587%  of  the  current  revenue  from  indepen-
dent  visitors  (40.6%  of  the  value  of  the  total  park  bud-
get)  would  be  raised,  and  visitor  levels  would  drop  by
62.2%.  Caution  should  be  placed  on  the  interpretation
of results for such large hypothetical fee increases, how-
ever,  because  CVM  results  become  less  reliable  the
higher they are above the actual fee.

A number of respondents (

 28) qualified their an-
swers to the willingness-to-pay question with additional
comments. The largest proportion (35.7%) were willing
to pay higher fees if revenues were used for the upkeep
of  KNP  and  if  information  was  made  available  on  the
way  such  revenue  was  used.  (Similarly,  at  workshops
held  in  Bali  and  Labuan  Bajo  in  April  1996,  Indonesian
tour operators made clear that they would be prepared
to accept a rise in entrance fee to approximately US$4.50,
provided  the  additional  revenue  was  reinvested  in  the
management of KNP.) Several respondents (28.6%) wanted
to  see  improved  visitor  services,  facilities,  and  attrac-
tions associated with higher fees, whereas others (17.9%)
were  concerned  with  the  effect  that  price  increases
would have on low-income groups such as domestic vis-
itors  and  backpackers.  One  respondent  suggested  that
incremental increases in price would be less disruptive
than a single large increase.

Effects of Fee Increases on the Local Economy

During 19951996, visitors to KNP spent approximately
US$1.1  million  in  the  surrounding  local  economy  on
transport, accommodation, guiding, meals, and retail pur-
chases  ( Walpole  1997;  Walpole  &  Goodwin  2000).  Of
this, approximately US$425,000 was spent on transport
to  and  from  KNP  and  a  further  US$40,000  on  guiding
and accommodation in KNP.

Estimates of the loss to the local economy as a result
of  fee  increases  in  KNP  causing  decreased  visitation
were made for a fee of US$4, deemed reasonable by visi-
tors and tour operators alike, and for a fee of US$13.54,
at  which  entrance  fee  revenue  from  independent  visi-
tors  would  be  maximized.  Either  rise  in  entrance  fee
would have a negative effect on the local economy of a
magnitude similar to that of the additional entrance-fee
revenue raised. At a fee of US$4, additional revenue of
US$77,600 to KNP would be offset by a loss of US$65,000
from the local economy, whereas at a fee of US$13.54,
revenue  of  US$203,500  would  be  offset  by  a  loss  of
US$231,100. At the lower fee the benefits of increased
entrance-fee  revenues  outweighs  the  loss  to  the  local
economy  by  approximately  US$12,000,  whereas  at  the
higher fee the loss to the local economy outweighs the
increase in fee revenues by almost US$28,000. Although
ours is a simplistic model based in part on hypothetical
scenarios, it demonstrates the potential for increases in
entrance fee to decrease local benefits from tourism.

Discussion

Our  results  suggest  that  annual  revenues  to  KNP  from
tourism  do  not  significantly  offset  annual  management
costs, although estimated recurrent tourism-related costs
are mostly offset. Furthermore, our results reveal consid-
erable willingness to pay, some of which could be cap-
tured through higher entrance fees. These results reflect

Figure 2. Visitors willingness to pay increases in the 
entrance fee to Komodo National Park.

Figure 3. Proportional increase in entrance fee revenue 
at different entrance fees for Komodo National Park.

Conservation Biology
Volume 15, No. 1, February 2001

Walpole et al.

Pricing Policy in Protected Areas

225

 

 
 

 

those from empirical studies elsewhere (e.g., Lindberg &
Enriquez  1994;  Goodwin  et  al.  1997,  1998).  We  also
demonstrated that (1) the extent to which increased rev-
enue can be generated is limited by visitor responses to
increased fees, such that total cost recovery is unlikely,
and (2) there is a negative effect of increased fees on lo-
cal  economies  as  a  result  of  the  linkage  between  local
benefits and volume of visitation.

The question remains as to what the most appropriate
pricing strategy should be for KNP or other protected ar-
eas.  According  to  Laarman  and  Gregersen  (1996),  pric-
ing strategy should be based on a combination of policy
objectives and information about visitors willingness to
pay. Pricing can be used as a tool to achieve certain ob-
jectives,  and  the  analysis  based  on  willingness  to  pay
that we have presented provides information on the im-
plications of adopting particular strategies. We assessed
three alternatives: (1) continuing a policy of low pricing,
(2) pursuing a policy of revenue maximization, and (3)
adopting a policy of tourism-related cost recovery.

To retain the current policy of low pricing is socially
acceptable in that it does not discriminate between visi-
tors on the basis of economic well-being. Moreover, be-
cause it maximizes visitation it also generates the great-
est local benefits from tourism, thereby stimulating local
development. But it is economically inefficient in that it
fails  to  capture  much  of  the  value  ascribed  to  KNP  by
visitors. It may also be politically unacceptable because
it does not demonstrate significant value from KNP and
results  in  the  domestic  population  effectively  subsidiz-
ing  the  visits  of  foreign  tourists.  This  suggests  that,  for
protected areas in many developing countries (Child &
Heath 1990), low entrance fees are inappropriate where
international tourists are the primary beneficiaries.

The  opposite  approach  to  low  pricing  is  a  policy  of
revenue  maximization.  Although  results  suggest  that
total  cost  recovery  is  unlikely  in  KNP,  the  greatly  in-
creased financial returns to government from a revenue-
maximization  strategy  would  nevertheless  demonstrate
the  significant  direct  value  of  KNP,  thereby  helping  to
politically justify conservation policy. With a change in
government  financial  structure  to  allow  some  revenue
retention  by  KNP,  a  policy  of  revenue  maximization
might also generate direct benefits for KNP itself.

Such a policy would necessitate large increases in en-
trance  fees;  in  the  case  of  KNP,  revenue  maximization
would necessitate a 15-fold increase in the current fee.
Sudden large increases in entrance fee have proved diffi-
cult to implement elsewhere. Protests occurred in response
to large price increases in Costa Rica in 1994 (Laarman
& Gregersen 1996) and in Zimbabwe in 1997 (Goodwin
et  al.  1997).  In  the  latter  case,  public  criticism  rapidly
forced the authorities to reduce the increased prices by
half.  Such  problems  might  be  avoided  by  introducing
price increases incrementally over a period of time.

Nevertheless, our results suggest a potentially marked

decline in visitor numbers in response to large price in-
creases. This has two important implications. Lower in-
come classes such as domestic visitors and independent
travelers would be discriminated against, such that clien-
tele  would  become  restricted  to  cruise  and  package
charter passengers. Consequently, economic benefits for
surrounding local communities would decline. The ma-
jority of spending in the local economy is done by inde-
pendent travelers (Walpole & Goodwin 2000), and the
disproportionate  effect  of  large  price  increases  on  this
group would translate into significant losses for the local
economy. Given the importance of local development in
both international and Indonesian conservation and de-
velopment  strategies  (BAPPENAS  1993;  McNeely  1993;
P. Djuwantoko, Park management for community partic-
ipation in Komodo National Park, paper presented at a
workshop  on  sustainable  tourism  and  biodiversity,  La-
buan Bajo, Indonesia, April 1996), this is a politically un-
acceptable side effect that weighs against large increases
in entrance fees.

A politically defensible policy (Laarman & Gregersen
1996) is one of recovering the direct costs of supplying
the tourism product. The difficulty lies in fully identify-
ing the costs to be recovered, particularly environmental
costs, and hence in setting the appropriate fee. As a re-
sult, a more practical policy may be one based on a rea-
sonable fee level that comfortably offsets best estimates
of  tourism-related  costs  and  reflects  willingness  to  pay
so as not to discriminate against certain user groups. Re-
sults of our willingness-to-pay surveys suggest that a five-
fold  increase  to  US$45  would  not  significantly  affect
the number of visitors to KNP and would add substan-
tially to government revenue from tourism. This revenue
would adequately cover estimated tourism-related costs,
including some element of capital costs. Moreover, local
benefits  from  tourism  would  not  be  greatly  affected.
Such an intermediate policy may not maximize financial
returns  from  KNP,  but  it  would  balance  competing
needs and address the various perspectives on the role
that protected areas are required to play.

Additional adaptations may increase benefits. First, to
avoid discrimination against domestic visitors, a dual pricing
structure may be adopted whereby domestic visitors pay
less  than  foreign  visitors.  Although  such  a  strategy  is
never entirely equitable, being based on broad assump-
tions about the relative economic well-being of different
groups  (Laarman  &  Gregersen  1996),  it  is  nevertheless
gaining credence in a number of developing countries
( Jansen  1993;  Laarman  &  Gregersen  1996)  and  is  ac-
cepted as an appropriate strategy by many foreign visi-
tors (Goodwin et al. 1998; this study). Because KNP cur-
rently has few domestic visitors, dual pricing may seem
unnecessary.  Given  the  unpredictability  of  the  interna-
tional  market,  however,  the  domestic  market  may  be-
come a valuable and important target group for KNP as a
buffer for such fluctuations. A form of dual pricing may

Conservation Biology
Volume 15, No. 1, February 2001

226

Pricing Policy in Protected Areas

Walpole et al.

 

 

 
 

 

 

 
 

also  be  considered  between  independent  and  package
visitors, in the form of a cruise levy that recognizes the
increased local economic input of independent visitors.
Second, visitors would be more willing to pay a higher
fee if the revenue generated was used for the benefit of
the visited area. In the case of KNP, this would necessi-
tate a change in government financial structure to allow
KNP to retain some of the revenues generated from tour-
ism.  Revenues  that  are  earmarked  for  and  returned  to
KNP  may  act  as  an  incentive  to  managers  to  promote
and efficiently manage tourism (Lindberg & Huber 1993;
Laarman & Gregersen 1996). A lack of revenue retention
in  Hwange  National  Park,  Zimbabwe,  combined  with
government  underfunding,  has  resulted  in  a  decline  in
staff morale and park infrastructure (Potts et al. 1996). A
proportion of retained revenues could be used to assist
the local community to become more involved in tour-
ism  development.  Such  activities  are  currently  the  do-
main of nongovernmental organizations and donor agen-
cies.  The  greatest  limitation  to  participation  by  local
people in the tourism sector is access to the market, due
to  lack  of  necessary  skills  or  resources  (Walpole  &
Goodwin 2000); at a workshop in 1996, local stakehold-
ers  requested  further  training  opportunities  for  local
people.

Third,  in  conjunction  with  partial  revenue  retention,
greater information dissemination to visitors to increase
their awareness of fee structures and highlight the ways
fees are used may also increase willingness to pay. Simi-
larly, it is vital that information be gathered by managers
through regular monitoring of park revenues, visitation
patterns, local benefits, and periodic evaluations of will-
ingness to pay to assess the performance of pricing strat-
egies against clearly defined policy objectives.

The most appropriate pricing strategy would be a mod-
erate increase in entrance fee, combined with dual pric-
ing and a partial retention of revenues. This would satisfy
three principal policy objectives: tourism-related cost re-
covery, equitable visitor access, and maximized local de-
velopment opportunities. This approach embodies much
of the current thinking on pricing policy for protected ar-
eas (Lindberg & Huber 1993; Laarman & Gregersen 1996;
Goodwin et al. 1998). For implementation of these poli-
cies, some decentralization in financial management and
more efficient monitoring of visitor opinions are needed.
In  scenarios  where  different  conditions  apply,  differ-
ent  solutions  may  be  appropriate.  For  example,  some
protected  areas  may  generate  high  enough  visitor  de-
mand  to  be  able  to  recover  total  costs.  In  some  cases,
charging  higher  fees  may  not  limit  local  opportunities.
In others, where conservation efforts depend on direct
revenue generation, the need to generate as much reve-
nue as possible may outweigh social policy objectives. A
strategy  of  complete  financial  autonomy  that  permits
protected  areas  to  become  self-funding  is  unlikely  for
most protected areas. At the time of this study there was

Conservation Biology
Volume 15, No. 1, February 2001

much  debate  about  KNP  retaining  revenues.  We  con-
sider  this  a  dangerous  course  because  even  with  high
price increases it seems unlikely that management costs
could be completely recovered. Tourism is an unstable
source of revenue, particularly when it is based on for-
eign visitation. Destinations are vulnerable to unpredict-
able events such as natural disasters, health scares, and
political  upheaval,  which  all  negatively  affect  visitor
numbers (Goodwin et al. 1998). Without the guaranteed
support of government funding, such events would spell
disaster for protected areas. Furthermore, there may be
nonmarket benefits of protected areas such as biodiver-
sity  values,  watershed  values,  and  existence  values  for
future generations that justify government funding even
in  the  absence  of  full  cost  recovery.  Unquestionably,
core funding for protected areas should not be entirely
replaced  by  less  predictable  revenue-generating  activi-
ties  (whether  such  funding  should  be  supplied  by  do-
mestic governments or the international community is a
separate debate).

We  have  incorporated  financial  records  and  survey
data  based  on  a  hypothetical  scenario  into  a  decision-
making framework for a single case study. What is now
required  is  translation  of  the  results  of  such  economic
analyses  into  actual  policy  changes  so  that  real  rather
than hypothetical scenarios can be evaluated.

Acknowledgments

Funding for this work was provided by the United King-
doms  Department  for  International  Development  and
by the Durrell Institute of Conservation & Ecology, Uni-
versity of Kent. The authors thank the staff of Komodo
National Park for support and assistance. I. Kent and K.
Parker provided valuable comments and advice.

Literature Cited

Auffenberg, W. 1981. The behavioral ecology of the Komodo monitor.

University of Florida Press, Gainesville.

BAPPENAS. (Ministry of National Development Planning). 1993. Biodi-

versity action plan for Indonesia. Jakarta, Indonesia.

Blower, J. H., A. P. M. van der Zon, and Y. Mulyana. 1977. Proposed
Komodo National Park management plan, 19781982. United Na-
tions  Development  Program  and  Food  and  Agriculture  Organiza-
tion, Bogor, Indonesia.

Boo,  E.  1992.  The  ecotourism  boom:  planning  for  development  and
management. Technical paper series 2. World Wildlife Fund, Wash-
ington, D.C.

Bostedt, G., editor. 1995. Benefits of amenities in the forest environ-
ment:  four  papers  based  on  contingent  valuation.  Department  of
Forest  Economics,  Swedish  University  of  Agricultural  Sciences,
Umea.

Brown, G., and W. Henry. 1989. The economic value of elephants. Dis-
cussion  paper  8912.  London  Environmental  Economics  Centre,
London.

Child, G. F. T., and R. A. Heath. 1990. Underselling national parks in

Walpole et al.

Pricing Policy in Protected Areas

227

 

 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Zimbabwe:  the  implications  for  rural  sustainability.  Society  and
Natural Resources 

215227.

3:

Dixon, J. A., and P. B. Sherman. 1990. Economics of protected areas: a

new look at benefits and costs. Island Press, Washington, D.C.

Dixon, J. A., and P. B. Sherman. 1991. Economics of protected areas.

Ambio 

20(2):

6874.

Dixon, J., L. F. Scura, and T. vant Hoft. 1993. Meeting ecological and
22(2-3):

economic  goals:  marine  parks  in  the  Caribbean.  Ambio 
117125.

Driml, S. 1994. Protection for profit: economic and financial values of
the Great Barrier Reef World Heritage Area and other protected ar-
eas.  Research  publication  35.  Great  Barrier  Reef  Marine  Park  Au-
thority, Townsville, Queensland, Australia.

ecology and economy blend. Biological Conservation 

Edwards, P. J., and C. Abivardi. 1998. The value of biodiversity: where
239246.
Getz, W. M., L. Fortmann, D. Cumming, J. du Toit, J. Hilty, R. Martin,
M. Murphree, N. Owen-Smith, A. M. Starfield, and M. I. Westphal.
1999. Sustaining natural and human capital: villagers and scientists.
Science 

18551856.

283:

83:

Ghimire,  K.  P.,  and  M.  P.  Pimbert,  editors.  1997.  Social  change  and

conservation. Earthscan, London.

Giannecchini,  J.  1993.  Ecotourism:  new  partners,  new  relationships.

Conservation Biology 

7:

429432.

tors.  Ecotourism:  a  guide  for  planners  and  managers.  Ecotourism
Society, North Bennington, Vermont.

MacKenzie,  J.  M.  1988.  The  empire  of  nature:  hunting,  conservation
and British imperialism. Studies in Imperialism. Manchester Univer-
sity Press, Manchester, United Kingdom.

Maille, P., and R. Mendelsohn. 1993. Valuing ecotourism in Madagas-

car. Journal of Environmental Management 

38:

213-218.

McNeely,  J.  A.  1988.  Economics  and  biological  diversity:  developing
and  using  economic  incentives  to  conserve  biological  resources.
World Conservation Union, Gland, Switzerland.

McNeely,  J.  A.,  editor.  1993.  Parks  for  life:  report  of  the  IVth  World
Congress on National Parks and Protected Areas. World Conserva-
tion Union, Gland, Switzerland.

McNeely, J. A., and K. R. Miller, editors. 1984. National parks, conser-
vation and development: the role of protected areas in sustaining
society. Proceedings of the World Congress on National Parks, Bali,
Indonesia. Smithsonian Institution Press, Washington, D.C.

Mitchell, R. C., and R. T. Carson. 1989. Using surveys to value public
goods: the contingent valuation method. Resources for the Future,
Washington, D.C.

Moran, D. 1994. Contingent valuation and biodiversity: measuring the
user surplus of Kenyan protected areas. Biodiversity and Conserva-
tion 

663684.

3:

Goodwin, H. 1996. In pursuit of ecotourism. Biodiversity and Conser-

Movcan,  J.  1982.  Development  and  economics  in  Plitvice  National

vation 

5:

277292.

Goodwin, H., I. J. Kent, K. T. Parker, and M. J. Walpole. 1997. Tour-
ism, conservation and sustainable development. Department for In-
ternational Development, London.

Goodwin, H., I. J. Kent, K. T. Parker, and M. J. Walpole. 1998. Tour-
ism, conservation and sustainable development; case studies from
Asia and Africa. Wildlife and development series 12. International
Institute for Environment and Development, London.

Inamdar, A., H. de Jode, K. Lindsay, and S. Cobb. 1999. Capitalizing on

nature: protected area management. Science 

283:

18561857.

Park. Ambio 

11:

282285.

Nash,  R.  1982.  Wilderness  and  the  American  mind.  Yale  University

Press, New Haven, Connecticut.

Orams,  M.  B.  1995.  Towards  a  more  desirable  form  of  ecotourism.

Tourism Management 

16:

38.

Potts, F. C., H. J. Goodwin, and M. J. Walpole. 1996. People, wildlife
and  tourism  in  and  around  Hwange  National  Park,  Zimbabwe.
Pages 199219 in M. F. Price, editor. People and tourism in fragile
environments. Wiley, Chichester, United Kingdom.

Robinson,  A.  H.,  and  A.  Bari.  1982.  Komodo  National  Park:  progress

International Monetary Fund (IMF). 1997. Financial statistics. Washing-

and problems. Parks 

7(2):

1012.

ton, D.C.

Jakobsson,  K.  M.,  and  A.  K.  Dragun.  1996.  Contingent  valuation  and
endangered  species:  methodological  issues  and  applications.  Ed-
ward Elgar, Cheltenham, United Kingdom.

Jansen, D. 1993. Investigation and recommendations on access, pric-
ing and control over resources and services of Department of Na-
tional Parks and Wild Life Management. DNPWLM, Harare, Zim-
babwe.

Kinnaird, M. F., and T. G. OBrien. 1996. Ecotourism in the Tangkoko
65-73.
Laarman,  J.  G.,  and  H.  M.  Gregersen.  1996.  Pricing  policy  in  nature-

DuaSudara Nature Reserve: opening Pandoras box? Oryx 

30:

based tourism. Tourism Management 

17:

247254.

Leader-Williams, N., J. Harrison, and M. J. B. Green. 1990. Designing
protected  areas  to  conserve  natural  resources.  Science  Progress
74:

189204.

Lindberg, K., and J. Enriquez. 1994. An analysis of ecotourisms eco-
nomic  contribution  to  conservation  and  development  in  Belize.
World Wildlife Fund (U.S.) and the Ministry of Tourism and Envi-
ronment, Belize City, Belize.

Lindberg, K., and R. M. Huber. 1993. Economic issues in ecotourism
management. Pages 82115 in K. Lindberg and D. E. Hawkins, edi-

Runte,  A.  1987.  National  parks:  the  American  experience.  University

of Nebraska Press, Lincoln.

Shafer,  E.  L.,  R.  Carline,  R.  W.  Guldin,  and  H.  K.  Cordell.  1993.  Eco-
nomic amenity values of wildlife: six case studies in Pennsylvania.
Environmental Management 

669682.

17:

Sumardja, E. A. 1981. The first five national parks in Indonesia. Parks 
4.
Tobias, D., and R. Mendelsohn. 1991. Valuing ecotourism in a tropical

6:

rain-forest reserve. Ambio 

20:

9193.

Walpole, M. J. 1997. Dragon tourism in Komodo National Park, Indo-
nesia:  its  contribution  to  conservation  and  local  development.
Ph.D. thesis. University of Kent, Canterbury, United Kingdom.

Walpole, M. J., and H. J. Goodwin. 2000. Local economic impacts of
559576.
Wells, M. P. 1993. Neglect of biological riches: the economics of na-

dragon tourism in Indonesia. Annals of Tourism Research 

27:

ture tourism in Nepal. Biodiversity and Conservation 

2:

445464.

World Conservation Union, United Nations Environment Program, and
World Wildlife Fund. 1980. World conservation strategy: living re-
source  conservation  for  sustainable  development.  Gland,  Switzer-
land.

World  Conservation  Union.  1996.  Red  list  of  threatened  animals.

Gland, Switzerland.

Conservation Biology
Volume 15, No. 1, February 2001

