THE CROUCHER FOUNDATION ADVANCED STUDY INSTITUTE 
TOWARD A NEW GENERATION OF DYNAMIC 

NETWORK MODELS 

Nov. 18-20, 2014    Hong Kong 

Sponsers: 

 

Co-organizers: 
Department of   
Civil and Environmental 
Engineering  

 

 

 

 

THE CROUCHER FOUNDATION ADVANCED STUDY INSTITUTE 

TOWARD A NEW GENERATION OF DYNAMIC NETWORK MODELS 

Nov 18-20, 2014 

The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 

The Hong Kong Society for Transportation Studies 

 

Preamble 

 
The  notion  of  equilibrium  has  been  driving  transportation  network  modeling  and 
planning for the past few decades since the origin of this field. Equilibrium analysis 
has  its  appeal,  is  relatively  simple  and  can  be  described  by  a  set  of  well-defined 
mathematical  expressions.  Recently,  there  has  been  resurgence  of  interest  in 
developing a deeper understanding of the dynamical system approach for modeling 
transportation  systems,  perhaps  motivated  by  studies  that  question  the  existence  of 
equilibrium,  its  uniqueness,  stability,  and  attraction  domains.  Moreover,  many 
contend  that  understanding  the  process  or  trajectory  toward  equilibrium  is  just  as 
important as it involves understanding the learning process and behavioral adaptations, 
and such an understanding is instrumental for transportation management. It suffices 
to  say  that  many  aspects  simply  cannot  be  answered  by  traditional  equilibrium 
analysis. The main goal of this Advanced Study Institute (ASI) is to look beyond the 
traditional  equilibrium  analysis  and  explore  a  new  approach  toward  modeling 
dynamic  networks,  which  will  open  up  theoretically  interesting,  yet  practically 
important directions for modeling and managing dynamic transportation networks. 
 
In  this  three-day  ASI,  we  cover  mainly  five  topics  pertaining  to  five  aspects  of 
moving the dynamical system approach forward for dynamic network modeling.   
1.  Dynamical models with stochastic processes (Professor David Watling) 
2.  Calibration and data issues for day to day dynamic models (Professor Martin 

Hazelton) 

3.  Dynamical models for modeling network disruptions (Professor Henry Liu) 
4.  Dynamical interaction between traffic control and route (mode) choice (Professor 

Mike Smith) 

5.  Dynamical interaction between travel choice adjustment and information sharing 

(Professor Takamasa Iryo) 

 
In addition to these five topics, we also invite presentations from Hong Kong and the 
region to enrich the discussion and interactions, and to bring up a new generation of 
transportation network scientists. Participants are invited to make presentations on the 
dynamical  system  approach  for  modeling  transportation  network,  including  topics 
both in theory and innovative applications to real-world problems. 
 
 

 

1 

At the end of each day, we will hold a roundtable discussion of issues and problems 
addressed on that day. The objective is to develop some common themes to formulate 
a  research  agenda  to  move  forward  the  dynamical  systems  approach  for  modeling 
transportation networks.   
 
We  have  arranged  an  agreement  with  Transportation  Research  Part  B  to  publish  a 
special issue on Day-to-Day Dynamics in Transportation Networks based on papers 
presented in this ASI. 
 
Acknowledgement 
The financial sponsorship of the Croucher Foundation is gratefully acknowledged, as 
is  the  support  from  the  HKUST  Jockey  Club  Institute  for  Advanced  Study.  This 
Advanced  Study  Institute  is  co-organized  by  the  Department  of  Civil  and 
Environmental Engineering of the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 
and the Hong Kong Society for Transportation Studies. 
 
Organizing Committee: 
  Prof. William H.K. Lam, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University 
  Prof. Janny M.Y. Leung, The Chinese University of Hong Kong 
  Prof. Hong K. Lo (ASI Director), Hong Kong University of Science and 

Technology 

  Dr. W.Y. Szeto, University of Hong Kong 
  Prof. Pravin Varaiya, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology, and 

University of California, Berkeley 

  Prof. S.C. Wong, University of Hong Kong 
  Prof. Hai Yang, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology 
 

 

 

 

2 

INSTITUTE FOR ADVANCED STUDY 

THE HONG KONG UNIVERSITY OF SCIENCE OF TECHNOLOGY 

CAMPUS MAP 

 

 

 

 

 

3 

 

SESSION SCHEDULE   

 
Nov 18, 2014 
Venue: 2/F Seminar Room (#2042), Institute of Advanced Study, The Hong Kong University 
of Science and Technology (HKUST) 
 

 

10:30 - 10:50 

10:50  11:00 

11:00 - 12:30 

 

12:30 - 2:00 

2:00 - 2:40 

 

2:40 - 3:20 

 

3:20 - 3:40 
3:40 - 4:20 

 

4:20 - 5:00 

 

5:00 - 5:30 

 

Registration 

Welcome address   
Hong K Lo 
The  Stochastic  Process  Approach  to  Modelling  Changing  Transportation 
Systems: Basic Principles and Challenges for Real-Life Implementation 
David Watling 

Lunch 

Information  Provision,  and  Stability  of  Network 

Bayesian  Learning, 
Equilibrium 
Shoichiro Nakayama 
Day-to-Day Flow Dynamics with User Learning 
Hongbo Ye, Feng Xiao, Hai Yang 

Refreshment Break 

Day-to-day path flow dynamics and user heterogeneity 
Zhijia Tan, Hai Yang, Ren-yong Guo 
Re-visit of Traffic Assignment Algorithms in terms of Convergence 
Seungjae Lee, Jooyoung Kim, Shinhae Lee 
A roundtable discussion on the outlook and major issues in model development, 
if tackled, would substantially improve the ability and realism of this approach 
David Watling 

 
 
Nov 19, 2014 
Venue: 2/F Seminar Room (#2042), Institute of Advanced Study, The Hong Kong University 
of Science and Technology (HKUST) 
 

 

9:00 - 10:30 

 

10:30 - 11:00 

11:00 - 12:30 

 

12:30 - 2:00 

 

Calibration and data issues for day to day dynamical models 
Martin Hazelton 

Refreshment Break 

Understanding  the  Traffic  Evolution  Process  after  Network  Disruption:  A 
Boundedly Rational Behavioral Approach 
Henry Liu 

Lunch 

4 

2:00 - 2:40 

 

2:40 - 3:20 

 

3:20 - 3:50 

3:50 - 4:30 

 

4:30 - 5:30 

 

A Markovian assignment model considering stochastic traffic demand 
Sun Huijun, Han Linghui     
Day-to-day traffic dynamics: evolution under forever changes and uncertainties, 
and its implications for traffic management 
Jing Bie, Hong K. Lo 

Refreshment Break 

Steady state analysis of traffic equilibriums with demand and supply regulation 
strategies: Stable games and advanced control notions 
Renxin Zhong, Dabo Xu and Can Chen 
A  roundtable  discussion  on  the  data  requirements  and  the  need  of  creating  a 
common database to allow for model comparison and validation 
Martin Hazelton 

 
 
Nov 20, 2014 
Venue: 2/F Seminar Room (#2042), Institute of Advanced Study, The Hong Kong University 
of Science and Technology (HKUST) 
 

 

9:00 - 10:30  Traffic Control and Route Choice: Capacity Maximisation and Queueing Stability 

Mike Smith 

 

10:30 - 11:00 
11:00 - 12:30  Dynamical interaction between travel choice adjustment and information sharing   

Refreshment Break 

Takamasa Iryo 

Pravin Varaiya 

 

 

12:30 - 2:00 
2:00 - 2:40  Analysis of Fixed-time Control 

Lunch 

2:40 - 3:20  Day-to-day route choice with social interactions 

 

3:20 - 3:40 
3:40 - 4:20 

 

4:20 - 5:00 

 

5:00 - 5:30 

 

 

 

Yu Xiao, Hong K Lo 

Refreshment Break 

Tradable credit scheme for control of day-to-day traffic flows 
Ren-Yong Guo, Hai-Jun Huang , Hai Yang 
Modelling  day-to-day  travellers  route  choice  and  level  of  trust  in  traveller 
information using real-time estimated traffic state 
Afzal Ahmed, David Watling, Dong Ngoduy 
A  roundtable  on  priority  of  research  and  implementation  questions  for  moving 
forward the dynamical systems approach for dynamic network modeling   
Hong K Lo 

5 

The Stochastic Process Approach to Modelling Changing 

Transportation Systems: Basic Principles and Challenges for 

Real-Life Implementation 

David Watling 

Institute for Transport Studies, University of Leeds 

 
 

Abstract 
The presentation has two main objectives. Firstly, it aims to introduce the stochastic 
process approach for representing dynamics and uncertainty in transportation systems. 
This introduction is aimed at those unfamiliar with such an approach, and builds on 
only  a  basic  understanding  of  mathematical  techniques  and  statistics.  Simple  toy 
examples will be used to illustrate the principles, and to explain what the approach 
might be useful for, and how it compares with traditional equilibrium analyses. 
 
Secondly,  it  addresses:  what  are  the  challenges  in  implementing  such  a  method  on 
large,  real-world  transportation  systems,  i.e.  in  taking  the  method  from  theory  into 
practice? In answering this question, many sub-questions arise. What data sources and 
calibration  tools  might  we  need?  What  are  the  conceptual  challenges  in  matching 
real-world phenomena with elements of the model? How does the interpretation of the 
model  components  relate  to  what  we  can  use  it  for  in  transport  appraisal?  In 
addressing these questions, the aim will be to identify what we can do with known 
techniques, and where we may need to focus future research attention. 

 

6 

Bayesian Learning, Information Provision, and Stability of 

Network Equilibrium 

Shoichiro Nakayama 

Institute of Science and Engineering, Kanazawa University, Japan 

 
 

this  study,  we  assume 

Abstract 
From the viewpoint of traffic management, it is particularly important to appreciate 
the conditions under which network flow is stable or unstable. Possible methods of 
examining the problem are to analyze the stability of a determined equilibrium or to 
investigate the day-to-day dynamics of actual network flow that consists of learning 
drivers.  It  is  natural  that  Bayesian  learning  is  adopted  if  drivers  are  substantially 
rational.  In 
that  drivers  under  day-to-day  dynamic 
transportation circumstances choose routes based on Bayesian learning and develop a 
day-to-day dynamic  model  of  network  flow.  This  model  reveals  that a  driver  using 
Bayesian learning chooses the route that frequently takes the minimum travel time. 
Furthermore, we find that the equilibrium point of the day-to-day dynamic model is 
identical  to  Wardrops  equilibrium.  Under  complete  information  (when  information 
about which route takes the minimum travel time is given after the trips), Wardrops 
equilibrium  is  globally  asymptotically  stable  and  the  day-to-day  dynamic  system 
converges to Wardrops equilibrium if initial recognition among drivers is distributed 
widely.  Under  incomplete  information,  Wardrops  equilibrium  is  always  globally 
asymptotically  stable  regardless  of  what 
is. 
Paradoxically,  the  condition  for  stable  equilibrium  under  incomplete  information  is 
more relaxed than that under complete information. 

 

the  drivers 

initial  recognition 

 

7 

Day-to-day flow dynamics with user learning 

Hongbo Ye 

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and 

Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, PR China 

School of Transportation & Logistics, Southwest Jiaotong University, Chengdu, PR China   

Feng Xiao 

Hai Yang 

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and 

Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, PR China 

 
Abstract 
Xiao  et  al.  (2013)  constructed  a  second-order  flow-based  day-to-day  dynamics 
derived  from  a  combined  model  of  flow  and  perceived  cost.  The  second-order 
dynamics was analyzed by analogizing to a damped oscillation system: mass and 
energy  of  the  day-to-day  dynamic  traffic  network  was  defined,  the  intrinsic 
properties  such  as  angular  frequency,  damping  ratio  and  system  stability  were 
discussed. However, discussion on the possible negative path flows was excluded in 
their paper: the nonnegativity of path flows was assured by a strong assumption but 
not  the  flow  evolution  process  itself.  This  paper  relaxes  the  assumption  of  positive 
path  flows  in  the  day-to-day  model  proposed  by  Xiao  et  al.  (2013)  which 
simultaneously  considered  travelers  learning  and  route  switching  behavior.  With 
nonnegative-path-flow constraints, evolution trajectories of the day-to-day dynamics 
become  discontinuous.  As  a  result,  the  flow  dynamics  with  regard  to  flows  and 
perceived costs cannot be converted to an equivalent second-order ordinary equation 
set  anymore,  and  the  analogy  in  Xiao  et  al.  (2013)  cannot  be  conducted.  With 
separable  link  travel  time  functions,  we  show  that  the  dynamic  path  flows  still 
converge to Wardrops user equilibrium path flow set. Rigorous proof is established 
based  on  a  generalized  invariance  theorem  with  a  piecewise  continuous  Lyapunov 
function.  Stability  and  some  other  system  properties  are  examined  by  numerical 
examples.   
   
 
Keywords: Day-to-day dynamics; user learning; discontinuous evolution process 
 
 
 

 

 

8 

Day-to-day path flow dynamics and user heterogeneity   

School of Management, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Luoyu 

Zhijia Tan 

Road 1037, Wuhan, PR China 

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, The Hong Kong University of 

Science and Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, PR China 

Hai Yang 

College of Computer Science, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot 010021, PR China 

Ren-yong Guo 

 
 
Abstract 
This paper investigates evolutionary implementation of congestion pricing schemes to 
minimize  the  system  costs  measured  in  either  monetary  or  time  units  with  the 
consideration  of  the  travelers  day-to-day  route  adjustment  behavior  and  their 
heterogeneity.  The  travelers  heterogeneity  captured  by  their  value-of-times  is  a 
natural  but  challenge  issue  since  different  travelers  perceived  travel  utility  with 
different values of travel time in a tolled transportation network. We propose a general 
model  framework  to  characterize  the  behavior  of  route  adjustment  of  travelers in  a 
tolled  transportation  network  with  multiple  user  classes  and  investigate  its  stability 
issue. Furthermore, dynamic congestion pricing schemes to drive the system towards 
social optimum in terms of minimization of total monetary or time cost of the whole 
network are examined.   
   
 
Keywords:  dynamic  pricing;  user  heterogeneity;  day-to-day  flow  dynamics;  traffic 
equilibrium; stability 
 
 
 

 

 

9 

Re-visit of Traffic Assignment Algorithms in terms of 

Convergence   

Seungjae Lee and Jooyoung Kim 

University of Seoul 

Shinhae Lee 
Seoul Institute 

Abstract 
Recently,  faster  algorithms  to  solve  the  traffic  assignment  problems  have  been 
proposed in order to overcome the zigzagging slow convergence in the Frank-Wolfe 
algorithm. The papers have argued that the Frank-Wolfe algorithm cannot solve a true 
equilibrium  solution  while  the  faster  path  or  origin  based  algorithms  reach  a  true 
solution.  The  consequences  of  these  arguments  can  lead  how  we  can  view,  and 
overcome the gap between the theoretical and practical aspects of link based and path 
or  origin  based  algorithms.  In  theory,  it  has  been  proven  that  the  link  based  traffic 
assignment algorithm has a stable uniqueness solution, and the Frank-Wolfe algorithm 
can  solve  the  stable  unique  solution.  On  the  other  hand,  the  path  based  algorithms 
(including origin based algorithms) give rise to multiple solutions in theory even in 
the standard and separable traffic assignment problem. In order to give a reasonable 
solution  among  multiple  solutions  in  the  path  based  algorithms,  a  proportionality 
index can be used to indicate if the assigned volumes in the used paths have a good 
proportionality irrespective of numbers of paths, and origin and destination pairs.   
In  this  paper,  we  have  compared  the  convergence  of  some  advanced  algorithms 
embedded  in  commercial  software  in  order  to  solve  the  equilibrium  road  traffic 
assignment.  We  have  tested  traffic  assignment  algorithms  in  Emme,  Cube  and 
Transcad. The advanced algorithms are a path based algorithm (Emme), a conjugate 
algorithm 
(Transcad).  Convergence 
performances are compared from simple contrived networks to large scale networks. 
In simple contrived networks, we can test if the algorithms are able to converge into a 
known  solution.  This  analysis  can  lead  to  see  if  the  link  and  path  or  origin  based 
algorithms  can  solve  a  stable  unique  solution.  We  can  also  test  if  these  algorithms 
have a good proportionality index in terms of number of alternative paths, and origin 
and destination pairs. In large scale networks, we can test if the algorithms calculate 
reasonable solutions by comparing base scenario and do-alternative scenario, which is 
one  of  the  motivations  for  this  paper.  Some  recent  studies  mentioned  the  poor 
convergence  in  the  standard  Frank-Wolfe  algorithm  can  lead  an  inconsistency  in 
convergence  values.  Therefore,  major  investigation  of  this  paper  is  in  a  feasibility 
study  to  build  an  alternative  road  if  the  inconsistent  convergence  in  the  algorithms 
between base and do-alternative scenario lead to different travel time saving benefits. 
The  convergence  criteria  are  a  relative  gap  and  a  proportionality  index.  We  have 
found that the algorithms can be comparable in terms of these criteria. 
 
Keywords: Convergence Analysis, Uniqueness, stability, Proportionality, Frank-Wolfe 
Algorithm, Origin Based Algorithm, Path Based Algorithm, Conjugate Algorithm. 

(Cube)  and  an  origin-based  algorithm 

 

10 

Calibration and data issues for day-to-day dynamic models 

Martin Hazelton 

Massey University, New Zeland 

M.Hazelton@massey.ac.nz 

 
Abstract 
The practical application of dynamic traffic models requires us to address a variety of 
statistical  inference  problems.  Perhaps  the  most  obvious  of  these  is  estimation  of 
model parameters in order to ensure appropriate calibration for the particular traffic 
system  that  is  being  studied.  Also  critical  are  methods  for  model  comparison  and 
goodness-of-fit testing. All these types of statistical inference tend to be challenging 
because  available  data  for  traffic  systems  (e.g.  link  counts)  are  frequently  only 
indirectly related to the parameters of interest (e.g. mean route flows). The situation is 
especially  difficult  for  dynamic  day-to-day  models  because  many  of  the  most 
interesting  properties  of  the  model  (e.g.  parameters  describing  the  ways  in  which 
travellers obtain, process and react to information on past states of the network) are 
particularly hard to estimate. Even when seemingly informative data are available (e.g. 
through vehicle tracking technologies), problems of sampling bias typically need to be 
resolved. 
 
The last 15 years have witnessed a sea change in research on parameter estimation in 
the transport literature, with ad hoc methods giving way to more principled statistical 
techniques. In particular, the rise of Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) methods 
that  rely  on  sampling  of  latent  variables  (e.g.  route  flows)  has  provided  a  general 
framework  for  implementing  theoretically  well  founded  methods  of  statistical 
inference  (within  both  Bayesian  and  Frequentist  paradigms).  Nonetheless,  a  large 
number  of  challenges  remain.  These  include  (i)  theoretical  analysis  of  parameter 
identifiability for day-to-day dynamic models (i.e. working out which models we can 
hope to fit using available data, and which we cannot); (ii) development of efficient 
MCMC  samplers  for  general  day-to-day  models;  (iii)  methods  for  handling 
combinations  of  data  types  (some  subject  to  bias);  (iv)  examination  of  methods  of 
model comparison; (v) development of computationally cheap approximations based 
on  quasi-likelihoods,  for  use  on  large  systems;  and  (vi)  principled  methods  of 
calibrating micro-simulation models. 
 
In  this  talk  I  will  review  recent  progress  on  statistical  inference  for  network-based 
traffic  models,  leading  to  the  description  of  a  unified  framework  for  parameter 
estimation and model testing. I will then attempt to provide some pointers as to how 
the challenges listed above might be tackled. In particular, I will describe some very 
recent developments with regard to challenges (i)-(iii), and will speculate on possible 
research avenues for (iv)-(vi).     
 

 

 

11 

Understanding the Traffic Evolution Process after Network 
Disruption: A Boundedly Rational Behavioral Approach   

Henry Liu 

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering & Transportation Research Institute 

University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 

 
Abstract 
Understanding the traffic evolution process after an unexpected network disruption is 
of great significance to traffic engineers who are responsible for traffic restoration. In 
this talk, we will discuss our findings on the day-to-day traffic equilibration process 
following the unexpected collapse and eventual reopening of the I-35W Bridge over the 
Mississippi River in Minneapolis. Following the I-35W Bridge collapse, drivers were 
observed  to  drastically  avoid  areas  near  the  disruption  site  until  the  perceived 
congestion in that area gradually diminished. After the reopening of the disrupted link, 
despite a complete restoration of network topology, empirical evidence suggested that 
less people used the new bridge. To explain this, we developed a nonlinear dynamical 
system  that  is  capable  of  describing  the  transient  states  of  a  disrupted  network, 
answering questions related to the traffic evolution trajectory from a disequilibrium 
(due  to  a  network  disruption)  toward  an  equilibrium.  We  also  investigated  why 
travelers would not use the new bridge even if it could save their commute time. We 
found that, although perfect rationality is usually assumed in route choice models, such 
classical  approach  fails  to  explain  travelers  route  choice  behavior  observed  in  the 
I-35W bridge collapse case. In our models, travellers are assumed to be boundedly 
rational. In other words, travelers do not always take the shortest paths but their chosen 
routes have the travel time deviating from the shortest paths within a threshold. Though 
the BR travel behavioral concept was proposed in the 1980's, empirical validation of 
such behavioral principle using real-world data along with a theoretical framework was 
non-existent. This research will bridge these gaps from both empirical and theoretical 
perspectives.   
 
 

 

 

12 

A Markovian assignment model considering stochastic 

traffic demand 
Sun Huijun, Han Linghui 

School of Traffic and Transportation, Beijing Jiaotong University, Beijing 100044, China 

 
Abstract 
In real traffic network, both link capacity and traffic demand are subject to stochastic 
fluctuations. These random fluctuations can make travel time uncertain. All existing 
dynamical models considering the uncertainty of travel time are presented with fixed 
traffic  demand.  In  this  study,  we  present  a  Markovian  assignment  model  with 
stochastic  traffic  demand.  The  traffic  demand  is  grouped  into  two  parts-commuters 
with fixed traffic demand and irregular travelers with discrete random demand. With 
wild conditions, we prove that our Markovian assignment model is ergodic and has 
unique stable distribution. We also give an algorithm to describe the Markovian model. 
By  numerical  test,  we  analyze  the  effect  of  commuters  memory  length,  irregular 
travelers  demand  and  commuters  perceived  error  on  the  stable  distribution  of  our 
model. 
 
 

 

 

13 

Day-to-day traffic dynamics: evolution under forever 

changes and uncertainties, and its implications for traffic 

management 

Department of Civil Engineering 

University of Nottingham Ningbo China 

Jing Bie 

 

Hong K. Lo 

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and 

Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong 

 
Abstract 
In this paper we provide a generalized framework for capturing the characteristics of 
day-to-day  traffic  dynamics.  The  inter-day  evolution  is  formulated  as  a  dynamical 
system  problem,  which  also  takes  into  account  the  changes  of  traffic  network  over 
time as well as the intrinsic uncertainties in (perceived) network performance.   
Changes are persistent in our traffic network because the physical infrastructure never 
remains the same. Weather and road conditions are constantly affecting the capacity 
or  supply  of  road  networks.  Changes  also  occur  due  to  weather  events,  traffic 
accidents,  or  even  the  introduction  of  traffic  management  measures  such  as  road 
pricing.  For  a  realistic  representation  of  the  day-to-day  traffic  dynamics,  it  is 
imperative  to  integrate  traffic  dynamics  with  network  dynamics.    This  paper 
provides a comprehensive categorization of various network changes (e.g. naturalistic 
vs. induced, random vs. systematic, incidental vs. recurrent, shock vs. shift) as well as 
how they can be accounted for in our formulation.   
Demand fluctuates as well. More importantly, demand evolves. Demand, imposed on 
a forever changing supply, results in a dynamical system which by appearance may 
look  rather  random  or  chaotic  but  in  essence  represents  an  evolutionary  process. 
During repeated daily trips, the decision making (departure time, mode, routing) goes 
through a learning process, updated whenever new experience and/or knowledge are 
gained.  However,  no  one  is  perfect  and  perception  is  often  biased.  Uncertainty  in 
perception  is  coupled  with  bounded  rationality  in  behavior.  This  paper  adopts  a 
general approach accommodating different behavioral models in choice and learning.   
 
Based  on  our  dynamical  system  formulation,  we  show  that  the  conventional 
equilibrium as a state (or a probabilistic distribution of states) can be replaced by an 
equilibrium process, thus incorporating the temporal dimension and resolving some 
of the discrepancies in equilibrium definition. Moreover, we are able to demonstrate a 
few issues that are of particular interest to dynamic traffic management, which is no 
longer  target-oriented  but  more  process-oriented.  Examples 
include:  (a) 
Irreversible network  change  occurs  when  a  shock  to  the  system,  i.e.  a  temporary 
change, causes permanent effects. This implies that sometimes changes cannot just be 
undone to restore original system; on the other hand, traffic managers can introduce 
short term measures to induce long term impact; (b) Sequential traffic management 

 

14 

measures can be employed by applying a series of changes onto the system in order to 
reach the target scenario, which a single change would not achieve; (c) Flexibility in 
traffic management measures often arises given that travelers are boundedly rational. 
This implies that there exists certain freedom or leeway for the traffic manager to test 
different measures or to optimize the measure by trial and error. 
 
Keywords:  Network  change;  Bounded  rationality;  Equilibrium  process;  Dynamic 
traffic management; Irreversibility; Sequential measures; Management flexibility 
 

 

 

15 

Steady state analysis of traffic equilibriums with demand 

and supply regulation strategies: Stable games and 

advanced control notions   

Research Center of Intelligent Transportation Systems, School of Engineering, Sun 

Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China   

Renxin ZHONG 

School of Automation, Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing, 

Dabo XU 

China 

Can CHEN 

Research Center of Intelligent Transportation Systems, School of Engineering, Sun 

Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China 

 

 
Abstract 
This  paper  introduces  an  interconnected  dynamic  system  approach  to  address  the 
convergence and stability issues of traffic adjustment processes in presence of demand 
(e.g. market based road pricing and tradable travel credit schemes) and supply (e.g. 
signal  timing,  queue  control  and  other  schemes  that  can  be  modeled  by  side 
constraints)  regulations.  The  proposed  framework  intends  to  answer  the  following 
questions related to the basic assumption of static traffic assignment models, i.e. the 
system operates at its steady state: 
 

Is it possible to establish a bridge to connect the short-term (dynamic within-day) 
models and the long-run (static) models? 

  Given a set of demand and supply regulation strategies, whether the traffic on a 

network would approach to a steady state based on certain assumptions for 
behavioral realism? 

  How to model the demand variation (or uncertainty) due to exogenous elements 

rather than the demand elasticity under the umbrellas of conventional traffic 
assignment and road pricing frameworks? 

To the best of the authors knowledge, no model has been proposed to describe such 
kind of steady state analysis. If affirmative answers to these questions can be obtained, 
then  the  dynamics  is  mathematically  consistent  with  the  axiom  of  static  user 
equilibrium, namely, after a sufficient long time of evolution, the traffic network will 
eventually reach a steady-state user equilibrium. On the other hand, if the traffic flow 
adjustment  process  of  a  traffic  network  under  a  certain  set  of  demand  and  supply 
regulations cannot evolve towards a stable traffic equilibrium, it is interesting and of 
importance for us to look into the problem that how can we adjust the demand and 
supply regulations so that the traffic flow of the network would evolve towards stable 
traffic equilibria eventually. Most of the papers addressing long-term dynamics and 
stability of transportation networks assume that the traffic network is a closed system 

 

16 

and isolated from the environment such that the system is unforced and the system 
trajectory  is  defined  by  the  initial  condition  and  the  prescribed  traffic  management 
schemes.  However,  a  traffic  network  cannot  be  isolated  from  the  environment  but 
interacts  with  it.  One  of  the  major  reasons  for  understanding  long-term  traffic 
evolution dynamics is to control or influence the system trajectory in some way. The 
planner  may  also  wish  to  influence  the  traffic  dynamics  to  the  most  desirable 
trajectory by adjusting the demand and supply regulation schemes with respect to its 
interaction  with  the  environment,  e.g.  the  demand  uncertainty  due  to  economic 
environment  and  inaccurate  cost  measurement.  The  final  part  of  this  paper  aims  to 
deal with this problem by introducing some advanced control notions. Travel demand 
is assumed to be uncertain but bounded from above. Unlike the isolated case, wherein 
(global) stability results can be obtained (in terms of link based dynamics), practical 
stability  can  be  achieved  when  there  is  uncertainty.  Finally,  we  present  several 
numerical simulations to validate the main results.   
 
Keywords:  Interconnected  dynamic  system,  stability  &  convergence,  disequilibrium 
dynamics, traffic regulation scheme, uncertainty, traffic equilibrium. 

 

 

 

 

17 

Traffic control and route choice: capacity maximization and 

queueing stability 

Mike Smith 

Department of Mathematics, University of York, Heslington, York, UK 

 
Abstract 
Part 1 of this paper presents idealised natural general and special dynamical models of 
day-to-day re-routeing and of day to day green-time response. (In these, route-flows 
only swap to cheaper routes and stage green-time only swaps toward more pressurised 
stages.) The green-time response models are based on the responsive control policy 
P0  introduced  in  Smith  (1979a,  1987).  It  is  shown  that,  for  any  steady  feasible 
demand within a flow model, if the general day to day re-routeing model is combined 
with the general day to day green-time response model then under natural conditions 
any (flow, green-time) solution trajectory cannot leave the region of supply-feasible 
(flow,  green-time)  pairs  and  costs  are  bounded.  It  is  also  shown  that  if  the  special 
re-routeing model is combined with the special green-time response model then every 
(flow,  green-time)  solution  trajectory  converges  to  a  non-empty  set  of  equilibria 
consistent with the P0 control policy. Throughput or network capacity is maximised: 
given  any  constant  feasible  demand;  this  demand  is  (i)  met  on  each  day  as  any 
allowed  routeing  /  green-time  trajectory  evolves  and  also  (ii)  met  at  any  stationary 
point of the combined routeing - green-time response model. Such a stationary point 
is  a  user  equilibrium  which  is  consistent  with  the  P0  green-time  control  policy; 
guaranteed  to  exist  under  natural  conditions.  Part  2  of  the  paper  then  shows  that, 
within  a  simple  day  to  day  model  with  queues  and  just  one  junction,  a  modified 
Varaiya  (2013)  responsive  control  and  a  modified  version  of  a  responsive  control 
designed by Le at al (2013) do not have these properties. It is shown that (with each of 
these two modified control policies) there is a steady demand within the capacity of 
the  simple  network  for  which  there  is  no  equilibrium  consistent  with  the  control 
policy. These modified policies are not queue-stabilising when drivers route choices 
are  allowed  for.  In  contrast,  it  is  shown  that  using  responsive  P0  on  this  example 
network  does  maximise  throughput  at  a  quasi-dynamic  user  equilibrium  consistent 
with  P0,  and  yields  bounded  queues  along  all  allowed  trajectories.  This  result  is 
extended  to  allow  for  certain  time-varying  demands;  and  then  further  rather 
speculatively extended toward possible new backpressure traffic control policies. 
 
Keywords:  Traffic  Control  and  Route-Choice,  Capacity  maximization,  Queueing 
Stability 
 
References 
Le, T., Kovacs, P., Walton, N., Vu, H. L., Andrew, L. H., Hoogendoorn, S. P. 2013, 
Decentralised  Signal  Control  for  Urban  Road  Networks.  arXiv:  1310.0491v1 
[math.OC] 1 Oct 2013. 
Smith, M. J. 1979a. A local traffic control policy which automatically maximises the 

 

18 

overall  travel  capacity  of  an  urban  road  network.  Proceedings  of  the  International 
Symposium on Traffic Control Systems, University of California, Berkeley, Volume 
2A, 11-32; and in Traffic Engineering and Control, 21, 1980, 298 - 302.   
Smith,  M.  J.  1987.  Traffic  control  and  traffic  assignment  in  a  signal  controlled 
network  with  queueing.  Proceedings  of  the  Tenth  International  Symposium  on 
Transportation  and  Traffic  Theory  (Editors:  Gartner,  N.  H.,  Wilson,  N.  H.  M.), 
Elsevier, 61-68. 
Varaiya,  P.  2013.  Max  pressure  control  of  a  network  of  signalised  intersections. 
Transportation Research Part C, 177-195. 
 
 

 

 

19 

Dynamical interaction between travel choice adjustment and 

information sharing 

Takamasa Iryo 

Department of Civil Engineering, Kobe University 

 

Abstract 
It  is  natural  to  assume  that  travellers  would  make  their  choices  depending  on 
information  provided  by  other  travellers  as  well  as  their  own  past  experiences.  For 
example, in the past literature, a day-to-day dynamical model has been referred to as a 
model  that  explicitly  models  the  system  adjustment  mechanism  including  users 
memory and learning process (Cascetta and Cantarella, 1993) or a behavioural model 
considering how the behaviour on day n is affected by behaviour and the state of the 
network on days n1 and earlier (Watling and Hazelton, 2003). These descriptions of 
day-to-day  dynamical  models  did  not  directly  mention  that  travellers  obtain 
information provided by someone else. However, it is apparent that travellers in these 
models need to collect information from someone else to learn situations of a network 
because  they  cannot  experience  all  the  choices  (e.g.  route  choices)  and  know  their 
details (e.g. travel time) at the same time. If they just rely on their own experience, 
they need to change their choices quite often to experience many choices available in 
a system. This seems not realistic, especially when travellers do not recurrently make 
choices (e.g. destination choices for sightseeing). 
 
Considering how information is shared among travellers is important to construct a 
day-to-day  dynamical  model  that  is  consistent  with  their  microscopic  behaviour. 
Although  many  day-to-day  dynamical  models  have  been  proposed  in  the  area  of 
transport  studies,  it  is  not  common  to  incorporate  microscopic  information  search 
behaviour  of  travellers  into  a  model  explicitly.  A  model  including  microscopic 
behavioural model is beneficial when we need to consider how far (or whether) the 
performance of a transport system becomes better when a new information provision 
tool is introduced to distribute information to travellers who attempt to make a choice. 
Note  that  improving  an  information  provision  system  may  result  in  a  situation  in 
which travellers will fail to obtain sufficient information to select a better choice (Iryo 
et  al.,  2012),  and  hence  examining  effect  by  improving information  transmission  is 
important to estimate whether it is beneficial or not. 
 
This talk provides three topics related to information sharing in day-to-day dynamical 
models.  First,  a  few  selected  past  studies  of  day-to-day  models  are  introduced  to 
understand how they (explicitly or implicitly) incorporate a mechanism of information 
sharing  among  travellers.  Then,  a  day-to-day  dynamical  model  that  explicitly 
incorporates  information  search  behaviour  of  travellers  is  explained.  Lastly,  an 
in-room  experiment  that  investigated  peoples  information  search  behaviour  is 
introduced to understand how far the model represents actual microscopic behaviour 
of travellers. 

 

20 

 
References: 
Cascetta, E., & Cantarella, G. (1993). Modelling dynamics in transportation networks: 
state of the art and future developments. Simulation practice and theory, 1(2), 65
91. 

assignment models. Networks and Spatial Economics, 3, 349370. 

Iryo, T., Yamabe, K., & Asakura, Y. (2012). Dynamics of information generation and 
transmissions  through  a  social  network  in  non-recurrent  transport  behaviour. 
Transportation Research Part C, 20(1), 236251.   

Watling,  D.,  &  Hazelton,  M.  (2003).  The  dynamics  and  equilibria  of  day-to-day 

 

 
 
 

 

 

 

21 

Analysis of FT Control 

Ajith Muralidharan 

Sensys Networks, Inc, Berkeley, CA 94710 

amuralidharan@sensysnetworks.com 

Ramtin Pedarsani 

University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-1770 

ramtin@berkeley.edu 

Pravin Varaiya 

University of California, Berkeley, CA 94720-1770 

Corresponding Author, varaiya@berkeley.edu, 1-510-642-5270 

 
Abstract 
T  A  network  of  signalized  intersections  is  modeled  as  a  queuing  network.  The 
intersections are regulated by fixed-time (FT) controls, all with the same cycle length 
or period, T. Vehicles arrive from outside the network at entry links in a deterministic 
periodic stream, also with period T, make turns at intersections in fixed proportions, 
and eventually leave the network. Vehicles take a fixed time to travel along each link, 
and  at  the  end  of  the  link  they  join  a  queue.  There  is  a  separate  queue  at  each 
intersection  for  each  movement.  The  storage  capacity  of  the  queues  is  infinite,  so 
there is no spill back. The state of the network at time t is the vector x(t) of all queue 
lengths,  together  with  the  position  of  vehicles  traveling  along  the  links.  The  state 
evolves according to a delay-differential equation. Suppose the network is stable, that 
is, x(t) is bounded. Then 
(1) there exists a unique periodic trajectory x*(t), with period T; 
(2) every trajectory converges to this periodic trajectory; 
(3) if vehicles do not follow loops, the convergence occurs in finite time. 
The periodic trajectory determines the performance of the entire network. 
 
Keywords: Fixed-time control, periodic solution, store-and-forward model, queueing 
network, global asymptotic stability, delay-differential equation 

 

 

22 

Day-to-day route choice with social interactions 

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and 

Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong 

Hong K. Lo 

cehklo@ust.hk 

Yu Xiao 

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and 

Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong 

yxiaoac@ust.hk 

they  receive  different 

 
Abstract 
Existing studies usually model route choice by assuming that travelers have identical 
and complete information about the performance of transportation network, although 
the  perceived  error  of  travel  time  is  considered  in  some  of  them.  In  reality,  this 
condition might be a strong assumption and somewhat unrealistic. Without external 
traffic information, a traveler may only know the travel time of her own choice. Even 
after the applications of public traffic information systems, travelers may receive or 
use information from different sources. On the other hand, we noticed that with the 
prevalence of social media and location-aware mobile devices, the social interactions 
among  travelers  become  unprecedented  frequent,  and  the  crowd-sourcing  traffic 
information applications have been developed and got huge number of users. Under 
this  circumstance,  due  to  the  discrepancy  of  the  status  of  travelers  in  their  social 
networks, 
the 
transportation network, and then make best responses based on available information. 
In this study, we target to model the day-to-day route choice with social interactions. 
Consider  a  traveler  with  m  friends,  with  proportion  of  choosing  each  route  being
p
p
1(
=   ,  R  is  the  total  number  of  routes.  Then  the  set  of  her  friends  is 
treated  as  a  sample  of  the  whole  group  of  travelers,  and  she  infers  the  global 
performance  based  the  sample  information,  the  perceived  error  is  modeled  by  logit 
model.  We  formulate  the  evolution  of  two-route  choice  problem  with  social 
interaction, and use three kinds of typical network structures (lattice network, small 
world  network,  and  fully  connected  network)  to  illustrate  the  influence  of  social 
network information on the day-to-day route choice. The result shows that travelers 
choices  and  the  transportation  network  performance  at  stable  status  will  be 
significantly influence by the discrepancy of received information. 
 
Keywords: route choice, social network information   

the  performance  of 

information  about 

p
i

,

p

R

)

,

,

 

23 

Tradable credit scheme for control of day-to-day traffic 

flows 

College of Computer Science, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot 010021, PR China 

Ren-Yong Guo   

School of Economics and Management, Beihang University, Beijing 100191, PR China 

Hai-Jun Huang 

Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering, The Hong Kong University of Science and 

Technology, Clear Water Bay, Kowloon, Hong Kong, PR China 

Hai Yang 

 

Abstract 
Most tradable credit schemes published so far are implemented in a traffic network at 
equilibrium  state.  In  this  paper,  we  propose  a  dynamic  tradable  credit  scheme  for 
control of day-to-day evolution process of traffic flows towards stationary equilibrium 
state.  Travelers  obtain  the  credits  from  the  traffic  authority.  On  each  day,  travelers 
using a link have to pay a certain number of credits. They choose routes according to 
the previous days travel time costs and intraday credit costs that are determined by 
link credit charge and credit price. During each period covering a number of days, the 
authority announces a fixed credit price by considering the relationship of supply and 
demand of credits in the previous period. The day-to-day adjustment process of link 
flows  and  credit  price  evolution  constitute  a  dynamic  game  between  authority  and 
travelers.  It  is  expected  that  the  link  flow  pattern  and  credit  price  will  ultimately 
evolve to a Nash equilibrium state.   
 
Doubly  interactive  dynamics  between  traffic  flow  adjustment  and  credit  price 
evolution  is  formulated  as  a  dynamical  system.  Several  properties  of  the  proposed 
dynamical  system  under  certain  preconditions  are  investigated,  including  the 
consistence of  stationary  user  equilibrium  (UE)  state  and credit  trading  equilibrium 
(CTE)  state,  the  existence  of  stationary  link  flow  pattern  and  credit  price,  the 
uniqueness of stationary link flow pattern, the boundness and convexity of the set of 
stationary  credit  prices,  and  the  convergence  of  day-to-day  adjustment  process. 
Moreover,  the  effects  of  dynamic  tradable  credit  scheme  on  revenues  of  both 
authority and travelers are analyzed, and a rule to distribute credits among all users in 
the  day-to-day  process  is  proposed.  Finally,  numerical  results  on  both  a  simple 
network  and  a  middle-size  network  are  presented  to  show  the  application  of  the 
proposed  dynamic  tradable  credit  scheme  and  to  demonstrate  the  properties  of  the 
dynamical system. This study is helpful for narrowing the gap between the theory of 
tradable credit scheme and its application to reality.   
 
Keywords: Traffic dynamics, tradable mobility credits, user equilibrium, credit trading 
equilibrium 
 

 

 

24 

Modelling day-to-day travellers route choice and level of 
trust in traveller information using real-time estimated 

traffic state 
Afzal Ahmed 

Institute for Transport Studies, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, United Kingdom 

Institute for Transport Studies, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, United Kingdom 

David Watling 

Institute for Transport Studies, University of Leeds, Leeds LS2 9JT, United Kingdom 

Dong Ngoduy 

 

 Abstract 
Real-time  traffic  state  estimation  techniques  have  been  widely  used  to  determine  a 
more reliable picture of existing traffic condition along a traffic network. Traffic state 
estimated based on estimation algorithm such as Kalman filter is more accurate than 
the  prediction  using  traffic  flow  model  or  measurements  from  the  sensors.  On  the 
other hand, the existing applications of dynamic traffic assignment (DTA) models are 
based  on  either  traffic  flow  models  based  on  historic  information  or  real-time 
measurements  from  the  sensors,  whereas  estimated  traffic  state  can  capture  the 
dynamics  in  network  capacity  or  travel  demand  more  accurately.  This  research  is 
aimed to combine the applications of DTA models with estimated traffic state based 
on real-time measurements.     
 
In  this  paper  we  propose  a  framework  to  utilize  real-time  traffic  state  estimation 
technique to model day-to-day dynamics of traffic flow on the network with provision 
of  real-time  traveller  information  with  time-varying  traffic  demand.  The  traveller 
information is predicted based on real-time estimated traffic state. We also propose to 
model  the  level  of  trust  in  the  information  as  a  dynamic  parameter,  as  commuters 
level of trust in ATIS increases with the accuracy of the information provided. The 
proposed framework for combining DTA with real-time estimated traffic state is also 
applied for within day application of DTA for incident management.       
 
For numerical illustration, the proposed framework is applied to a hypothetical traffic 
network with time-varying traffic demand. The travel times for the ATIS are predicted 
based  on  real-time  estimated  traffic  state,  which  combines  prediction  from  the  cell 
transmission model (CTM) and real-time observations from measurement sensors in 
extended  Kalman  filter  (EKF).  Commuters  update  their  perception  about  expected 
travel time based on their past experience and real-time information provided by the 
ATIS  and  make  the  decision  about  en-route  choice.  The  results  of  numerical 
experiment  show  a  significant  improvement  in  network  performance  and  saving  of 
commuters travel time with the proposed framework.   
 

 

25 

