www.pwc.com/us/lfs

Safeguarding your firm 
from cyber attacks
Law Firm Services

Law Firm Services

Dedicated to serving law 
firms and their partners

At a glance
Cyber attacks against law 
firms are on the rise.

For international law firms, 
the greatest threat comes 
from well-funded hackers 
seeking information on 
clients pending deals 
and litigation.

To protect their data and 
reputation, law firms need 
to make sure their cyber 
defenses keep pace with 
ever-evolving threats.

Introduction
Law firms are growing increasingly aware that they are being targeted 
by cyber criminals intent on stealing their clients secrets. A series of 
breaches at major international firms has convinced many of them 
to strengthen their defenses. They are also finding that enhancing 
security controls1 and storing client information on the firms network 
are becoming prerequisites for doing business.

1  For instance, by installing data-loss-prevention 

technologies that tag certain files, phrases, and 
code names that the law firm would like to block, 
with the aim of preventing sensitive information 
from leaving the firms network

Notice to law firms: 
Hackers want your secrets 

Despite their heightened alertness to 
data security, a number of law firms 
believe they are too small or obscure 
to warrant the interest of professional 
hackers. They may want to rethink that 
logic. A fraud alert issued by the FBI 
last spring warned that cyber crimi-
nals had begun to aggressively target 
small and midsize businesses,2 and in 
July the Wall Street Journal reported 
that there had been a sharp increase 
in data breaches among companies 
with 100 or fewer employees. Hackers 
are expanding their sights beyond 
multinationals to include any business 
that stores data in electronic form, 
the Journal said.3

There is no question that law firms are 
among the companies being targeted 
by cyber criminals, says Shane Sims, 
a director in PwCs Forensic Services 
group. Mary Galligan, head of the 
cyber division in the New York City 
office of the FBI, agrees: As financial 
institutions in New York City and the 
world become stronger, a hacker can 
hit a law firm and its a much, much 
easier quarry.4

Sims notes that cyber criminals come 
in many stripes, and all of them are 
looking for an easy score. While 
some hackers may want only to steal 
an unwary partners online banking 
credentials, others have much more 
ambitious goals.

A key threat, according to the US 
government,5 comes from foreign 
intelligence agencies looking to 
learn the plans of major corporations 
that are making large investments, 
contemplating joint ventures, or 
considering acquisitions.

Many states view economic espio-
nage as an essential tool in achieving 
national security and economic 
prosperity, notes a report on cyber 
crime that the Office of the Director 
of National Intelligence presented 
to Congress in 2011.6 The report 
goes on to say that such espionage 
includes computer network intrusions 
and exploitation of insider access to 
corporate and proprietary networks 
to develop information that could give 
these states a competitive edge over 
the United States and other rivals.

2  China Wire Transfer Fraud Alert, Federal Bureau of 

Investigation, April 26, 2011

3  Hackers Shift Attack to Small Firms, Wall Street 

Journal, July 21, 2011

4  China-Based Hackers Target Law Firms to Get 
Secret Deal Data, Bloomberg, January 31, 2012

5  Foreign Spies Stealing US Economic Secrets 

in Cyberspace: Report to Congress on Foreign 
Economic Collection and Industrial Espionage, 
October 2011

6 

Ibid

PwC   03

Organizations involved in cyber crime are well 
funded, extremely sophisticated, and relentless. 
And they grow more so every day.

Law firms are not immune to these 
threats, as highlighted in a panel 
discussion hosted by the American 
Bar Association last yearForeign 
Espionage Targets the Private Sector: 
The Cybersecurity Threat from Nation 
Statesand in a related article 
published by the ABA Journal.7 Once 
the law firms involved in a deal are 
identified, their computer defenses 
are attacked, along with those of 
the corporations.

Whether criminal hackers are acting on 
their own, at the behest of intelligence 
agencies, or for corrupt corporate com-
petitors, they are not just looking for 
personal information and credit card 
numbers; they are after any kind of 
intelligence that has economic value. 
Its imperative to understand that the 
organizations involved in cyber crime 
are well funded, extremely sophisti-
cated, and relentless, Sims says. And 
they grow more so every day.

Data on the growth of cyber crime is 
largely anecdotal and piecemeal. Few 

companies that have experienced 
an information-security breach are 
willing to talk about it, although 
some high-profile companies have 
nonetheless ended up in the news 
as a result of well-publicized attacks 
in recent months. 

What companies have willingly 
revealed is that information security 
is becoming a priority for them. 
Among private businesses in particular, 
information security is the top area 
of planned IT investment, according 
to PwCs Trendsetter Barometer 
survey.8 And PwCs 2012 Global 
State of Information Security Survey 
found that among medium-size US 
companies, a written privacy policy 
is in place at 68% of them, and 63% 
require their employees to certify in 
writing that theyre in compliance with 
the companys privacy safeguards.9 

There is no way to predict the like-
lihood that any given law firm will be 
attacked, says David Gaulin, co-leader 
of PwCs Law Firm Services, but the 
consequences of a security breach 
are obvious and painful: Privacy and 
confidentiality are bedrock qualities 
for law firms. The theft of client 
information could be devastating 
to a firms reputation, which is their 
most important asset.

7  Law Firms Overlook Vulnerabilities to 

9  2012 Global State of Information Security  

Cyberattacks, ABA Journal, August 6, 2011

Survey, PwC, September 2011

8  Trendsetter Barometer: Private Companies  

Rebuild IT Budgets, PwC, June 2011

04    Law Firm Services

Where firms are vulnerable

Many law firms are moving to strengthen their defenses, says Gaulin. He 
stresses that the most sophisticated hackers do not try to penetrate a firms 
perimeter defenses, such as firewalls. Instead, they target personal workstations 
through email, hoping that a careless or distracted employee will click on a bogus 
link, allowing the hacker entry. This poses a widespread risk, considering the size 
of law firms today and their diverse operations.

End-user computers are the weakest 
spot in most companies systems, says 
Sims. Typically, these computers are 
protected only by antivirus software, 
and the most sophisticated hackers 
attack at that point rather than try to 
work their way through a web server 
or other external-facing protections.

If a hacker has penetrated the network 
of a law firms client and stolen the 
email of in-house counsel, for example, 
its then easy to identify the email 
addresses of outside attorneys and to 
fabricate messages that deceive people 
at the law firm.

Companies that rely heavily on com-
munications technology frequently 
hire outside experts to test the 
security of their networks. These 
outside firms, called ethical hack-
ers, are usually able to penetrate 
internal networks. Sometimes they 
do this by the simplest means, such 
as phoning employees, claiming to 

be internal IT staffers, and then asking 
for a password. Or they gain entry to 
the office and steal laptops or paper-
work that serves as a giveaway.

Once cyber criminals gain access to a 
computer system, they typically have 
the ability and desire to stay there 
and hide. Their goal is not to snatch 
information and flee, but to remain 
secretly entrenched, monitoring the 
information flow and harvesting 
ever more valuable intelligence. 
Hackers can maintain a presence in 
corporate systems for many months 
without detection, unless a firm 
takes proactive measures.

Privacy and confidentiality are bedrock 
qualities for law firms. The theft of client 
information could be devastating to a firms 
reputation, which is their most important asset. 

PwC   05

What firms can do

So prevalent is hacking that PwCs advice to major organizations (law firms 
included) is to assume that their systems have been compromised and then 
proceed from that assumption in testing and improving their defenses. We 
recommend that, at a minimum, all law firms consider taking six basic actions:

2
Install antivirus programs that protect 
against known viruses. To be effective, 
these programs must be centrally 
managed and updated regularly.

3
Continually update spam filters. Such 
filters need to be kept current if they are 
to do an adequate job of intercepting 
unwanted or suspicious email.

1
Make sure leadership is sensitive to the 
threat and aware of the importance of 
constant vigilance. Leading law firms 
ensure this by making one or more senior 
partners responsible for IT activities 
or by establishing an IT committee of 
partners. These approaches provide 
an open communications channel from 
the IT people to senior management 
and ensure that data security has 
the attention of the highest levels 
of management.

Smart moves
42% of medium-size US companies that 
participated in PwCs 2012 Global State of 
Information Security Survey say theyve 
instituted controls for copying company 
data to external devices such as USB 
drives.10 Indeed, a number of firms require 
employees who are traveling or working 
at home to use a virtual desktop provided 
by the company rather than load data into 
their laptops or workstations. When the 
employee logs off, the desktop disappears, 
and nothing is stored in the computer.

06    Law Firm Services

10 2012 Global State of Information Security Survey,  

PwC, September 2011

4
Run an analysis program that detects  
unusual behaviors, activities, or pro-
grams in the system. These programs, 
often called host-intrusion protection 
(HIP), are necessary because hackers 
frequently develop special malicious 
software (malware) that antivirus pro-
grams are unable to detect.

5
Develop a response in case the firms 
systems are violated. This should 
consist of a plan regarding whom to 
notify if a breach occurs, as well as 
what actions to take to protect the data, 
determine who violated the system (and 
how), and minimize the damage and 
disruption to the firm.

6
Institute ongoing training programs. 
It is important that all partners and 
staff become sensitive to the threat 
of an information-security breach 
and be educated in what they can 
do to prevent or detect it. A culture 
of awareness should therefore be 
developed in the firm via ongoing 
training programs and best practices 
aimed at protecting information. 

These and other defenses against cyber crime are constantly evolving to keep pace 
with the techniques of criminals, and no one in the field expects that to change. 
The miracles wrought by computers and communications technology can be used 
for good purposes or bad ones, said Gaulin, and they always will be.

PwC   07

www.pwc.com/us/lfs

To have a deeper conversation 
about how cyber security 
may affect your business,  
please contact:

David Gaulin 
Partner 
Law Firm Services  
646 471 1810 
david.gaulin@us.pwc.com

Shane Sims 
Director 
Forensic Services  
703 918 6219 
shane.sims@us.pwc.com

 2012 PwC. All rights reserved.PwC and PwC US refer to PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, a Delaware limited liability partnership, which is a member firm of 
PricewaterhouseCoopers International Limited, each member firm of which is a separate legal entity. This document is for general information purposes only, and 
should not be used as a substitute for consultation with professional advisors. NY-12-0430

