International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)
Volume 104 – No.1, October 2014

Application of Graph Theory in Computer
Science and Engineering
Rishi Pal Singh

Vandana

Assistant Professor

Research Scholar

ABSTRACT
Graphs are considered as an excellent modeling tool which is
used to model many type of relations amongst any physical
situation. Many problems of real world can be represented by
graphs. This paper explores different concepts involved in
graph theory and their applications in computer science to
demonstrate the utility of graph theory. These applications are
presented especially to project the idea of graph theory and to
demonstrate its objective and importance in computer science
engineering.









provides abstracted view
establishes relationship among objects
balancing
modeling
decision -making ability
structural arrangement of various objects
easy modification or change in the existing system

2. APPLICATION IN COMPUTER
SCIENCE

Keywords
Graphs, connectivity, constraints, graph coloring, graph
drawing

1.

INTRODUCTION

Graph theory is a branch of discrete mathematics. In
mathematics and computer science, graph theory is the study
of graphs which are mathematical structures used to model
pair wise relations between objects. There is wide use of
graphs in providing problem solving techniques, because it
gives an intuitive manner prior to presenting formal
definition. To analyze the graph theory application two
problem areas are considered.

2.1 Data base designing
In data base designing graphs are used as graph data bases [2].
Graph database uses graph representation with nodes, edges,
and properties to represent and store data. This graph structure
has key role in designing database, because it gives fast
implementation process using different functionality and
properties of graph structure .Graph database uses as:






1- Classical problem
2- Problems from applications
the classical problem are defined with the help of the graph
theory as connectivity, cuts, paths and flows, coloring
problems and theoretical aspect of graph drawing. Whereas
problems from application particularly emphasis on
experimental research and the implementation of the graph
theory algorithms. Graph drawing [1] is a key topic in
implementation point of view, because the automatic
generation of drawing graph has important applications in key
computer science technologies such as data base design,
software engineering, circuit designing, network designing
and visual interfaces.

2.2

Storage system that provides index free adjacency
Analyzing tool for interconnection
Powerful tool for graph like-query
Graph databases are often faster for associative data
sets that map more directly to the structure of
object-oriented applications.

Software engineering

Graph has many applications in software engineering. For
example: during Requirements Specification, Data Flow
diagrams are used where vertices represent transformations
and edges represents the data flows. During Design phase,
graphical design is used for describing relations among
modules; while during Testing, the control flow of a program
associated with McCabe's complexity measure which employs
directed graphs for addressing the sequence of executed
instructions and etc. Even Software Process Management has
also applications of network diagrams which involves graph
algorithms.

1.1 Graphs

2.3

Graphs provide a convenient way to represent various kinds
of mathematical objects. Essentially, any graph is made up of
two sets:
1- A set of vertices
2- A set of edges.

Graph theory has wide application in the field of networking.
To analyze the graph theory application in networking two
areas are considered: graph based representation and network
theory. Graph based representation has many advantages such
as it gives different point of view; it makes problem much
easier and provide more accurate definition. Whereas network
theory provide a set of techniques for analyzing a graph and
applying network theory using a graph representation. The
term graph and network are equal. Both refer to a type of
structure in which there exists vertices (i.e. nodes, dots) and
edges (i.e. links, lines). There are numerous types of graphs
and networks which yield more or less structure. These two

Depending on the particular situation, restrictions are imposed
on the type of edges we allow. For some problems directed
edges are applied and for other problem undirected edges are
applied from one vertex to other. So graphs give us many
techniques and flexibility while defining and solving a real
life problem. Graphs has many features, some of them are:

Network system

10

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)
Volume 104 – No.1, October 2014
terms can be differentiating on the basis of their utility. the
term graph is used in mathematics whereas the term network
is used in physics.

processing are: to find edge boundaries using graph search
algorithms in segmentation.




2.3.1 Purpose of a Graph in mathematics





Mathematicians are concerned with the abstract
structure of a graph.
Mathematician’s deﬁne operations to analyze and
manipulate graphs.
They develop theorems based upon structural
axioms.

2.3.2 Purpose of a Network in physics



Physicists are concerned with modeling real-world
structures with networks.
Physicist’s deﬁne algorithms that compress the
information in a network to more simple values (e.g.
statistical analysis).

Graph theoretic concepts are applied in several fundamental
issues in network such as connectivity, data gathering, routing,
mobility, energy efficiency, topology control, traffic analysis,
finding shortest path and load balancing [11].

3.4 Computer hardware
In computer hardware graph theory concepts are used to
model the limitation of the physical layer.
Graph theory concepts are used in hardware world to provide:
 Register allocation by graph coloring
 Representation of instruction sequences by graphs
by adjacency matrix
 In instruction parallel processing
 Process of allocation scheduling[3]

3.5

3.7

These two considerations is fulfilled by the graph theoretical
concepts. Arbitrary relation among data can also be
represented by a graph and its matrices , operations performed
on these metrics are further useful for deriving relations and
data association and is useful in order to understand how
these data may be stored in memory [4][5].

Image processing

Image Analysis is the methodology by which information
from images is extracted. Image analysis is mainly performed
on digital image processing techniques.
The image
processing techniques can be improved using a graph
theoretic approach. The applications of graphs in image

Data mining

Graph mining is the main application area of graph theory in
data mining. Graph mining represents the relational aspect of
data. There are five theoretical based approaches of graph
based data mining. They are sub graph categories, sub graph
isomorphism, graph invariants, mining measures and solution
methods.

3.8

Operating system

A graph is a data structure of finite set of pairs, called edges
or vertices. Many practical problems can be solved with the
help of graph in the field of operating system such as job
scheduling and resource allocation problems. For example
graph coloring concept can be applied in job scheduling
problems of CPU, jobs are assumed as vertices of the graph
and there will be an edge between two jobs that cannot be
executed simultaneously and there will be one to one
relationship between feasible scheduling of graphs [10].

3.8.1 Graph purpose in operating system





Data structure

Data may be organized many different ways. The logical or
mathematical model of a particular organization of data is
called a “data structure”. The choice of data model depends on
two considerations:
 It must be rich enough in structure to mirror actual
relationship of data in real world.
 The structure should be simple enough that one can
effectively process data when necessary.

3.6



To calculate he alignment of the picture
Finding mathematical constraints such as entropy by
using minimum spanning tree.
Finding distance transforms of the pixels and
calculates the distance between the interior pixels
by using shortest path algorithms.

3.9

System processes are represented in graph form.
Graph extraction techniques are used in event
tracing.
Excellent testing tool in performance evaluation
because of easy validation and modification.

Website designing

Website designing can be modeled as a graph, where the web
pages are represented by vertices and the hyper links between
them are represented by edges in the graph. This concept is
known as web graph. Which discover the interesting
information? Other application areas of graphs are in web
community. Where the vertices represent classes of objects,
and each vertex representing one type of objects, and each
vertex representing a type of object is connected to every
vertex representing other kind of objects. In graph theory such
a graph is called a complete bipartite graph. There are many
advantages of using graph representation in website
development such as:





Searching and community discovery.
Graph representation (directed graph) in web site
utility evaluation and link structure.
Finding all connected component and provide easy
detection.

11

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)
Volume 104 – No.1, October 2014

4. TABLE 1: Application of Graph Theory in Computer Science and Engineering
Application
field

Property and concepts Applications area
of graph theory

Database
designing

Index-free adjacency

Graph database

Software
engineering

Connectivity and Data flow,
Directed graph,
and cyclomatic complexity

DFD, Control flow
Transformations, Capturing requirements,
graph, ER-diagram ,
Describing relations among modules, Designing
process sequencing and system and In testing process.
software quality[12]

Computer
hardware

Graph coloring and Matrix
representation

Coloring algorithms
Fine-grain parallelism
analysis , Data
dependence matrix

Compilers uses graph coloring algorithms for
Register allocation to variables , Calculate
parallelism degree, Very useful in analytical
modeling[3] , Addressing the sequence of
instruction execution , Resource allocation and
Economizing the memory space(file
organization).

Network design

Connectivity,
Traversing, Adjacency, Vertex
cover algorithms and
Different graph
representation

Topological control
and Weighted graph,
Butterfly network and
2-D array

Finding shortest path, Searching and
Arrangement of nodes in network designing,
Modeling communication networks [7], Traffic
analysis and in Network security.

Data Structure

Directed graphs , Matrices
and Matrices operation

Array, Tree, Linked
list, Pointers , Stacks,
and Queues

Efficient organization of data, Finding minimum
cost tree, Minimizing data retrieval times ,
Minimizing page swapping in data structure
paging system and Provides link structure in
websites

Image processing

Edge connectivity, Regions,
Spanning tree

Edge boundaries,
Entropy, Shortest path
algorithms and Search
algorithms

Segmentation and registration, Distance
transform and Center line extraction

Data mining

Sub graphs, Isomorphism

Graph mining

Sub structure matching, Reducing search space.

Operation system

Graph coloring, Directed
graph

Job scheduling
problems and
Simultaneous
execution of job

Provide feasible solution to job scheduling and
Efficient resource(processor) allocation in
solving simultaneous job execution problems.[8]
and In process representation

Web site designing Directed graph, Undirected
graph, In degree and out
degree,
Search algorithms and
Bipartite graph

5.

Uses

Analyzing interconnection, Direct mapping and
Natural scaling to large data sets.

Web graph, Web pages Community discovery , Searching
and Hyperlinks
and Website evaluation

CONCLUSION

This paper is designed to benefit the students of computer
science to gain depth knowledge on graph theory and its
relevance with other subjects like operating systems,
Networks, Databases, software engineering etc. this paper
focused on the various applications of major graph theory that

have relevance to the field of computer science and
applications.

12

International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)
Volume 104 – No.1, October 2014

6.

REFERENCES

[1] Graph algorithms and applications: special issue by
Nishizeki, Takao; Tamassia, Roberto; Wagner, Dorothea.
- Berlin: Springer, 2000. - (Algorithmica: 26. 2000, 1)
[2] Designing Graph Database Models from Existing
Relational Databases by Subhrajyoti Bordoloi Bichitra
Kalita Dept. Of Computer Applications Dept. Of
Computer Applications Assam Engg. College, Guwahati,
Assam
Engineering.
College,
Guwahati,
Assam.(International Journal of Computer Applications
(0975 -8887), Volume 74, no-1,July 2013)
[3] On Applying Graph Theory to ILP Analysis by Raúl
Durán, Rafael Rico Department of Computer
Engineering, Universidad de Alcalá, Spain(2005)
[4] 4-graph application to data structures by V.manjula
(2012)
[5] On the application of graph theory to computer data
structure by R.Williams.
[6] A genetic framework for the application of graph theory
to image processing by sonali barua (2007)
[7] Application of graph theory in communication networks
by suman deswal and Anita singhrova, International

IJCATM : www.ijcaonline.org

Journal of Application or Innovation in Engineering &
Management (IJAIEM), Volume 1, Issue 2, and October
2012
[8] The role of data structure in multiple disciples in
computer science: A Review by N.Sobhna Rani and
Suman S.P, International Journal of Scientific &
Engineering Research, Volume 4, Issue 7, July-2013
[9] Graph Databases: Adrian Silvescu, Doina Caragea, Anna
Atramentov Artificial Intelligence Research Laboratory
Department of Computer Science Iowa State University
Ames, Iowa 50011
[10] Applications of Graph Coloring in Modern Computer
science by Shamim Ahmed (ijcit, issn 2078-5828 (print),
issn 2218-5224 (online), volume 03, issue 02, manuscript
code: 130101(2012)
[11] Applications of graph theory in computer science an
overview by S.G.Shirinivas, S.Vetrivel and Dr.
N.M.Elango (International Journal of Engineering
Science and Technology, Vol. 2(9), 2010, 4610-4621)
[12] Graph theory application in developing software test
strategies for networking system by Vladimir. V. Riabov
(2007)

13

