1

What causes global climate change?

frequently regions experience heat waves, droughts, floods, storms, 
and other extreme weather. It is important to note that changes in 
individual weather events will potentially contribute substantially 
to changes in climate variability.
Climate change could occur naturally as a result of a change in the 
suns energy or Earths orbital cycle (natural climate forcing), or it 
could occur as a result of persistent anthropogenic forcing, such as 
the addition of greenhouse gases, sulfate aerosols, or black carbon 
to the atmosphere, or through land-use change.

The Climate System and the Carbon Cycle 
The climate system is driven by the suns energy and regulated by 
natural processes and cycles in the Earth system (Figure 1). These 
include the carbon cycle and greenhouse effect, orbital cycles, 
ocean currents that distribute warmer and colder water around 
the globe, and atmosphere-ocean interactions that moderate 
temperature. Humans are principally affecting the climate system 
through alterations to the carbon cycle, which regulates the flow 

Key Points
There is a scientific consensus that concentrations of greenhouse 
gases in the atmosphere are increasing and that this is causing 
global climate change. Human-driven emissions of carbon dioxide 
and other greenhouse gases, as well as land-use change, are the 
processes primarily responsible for the increase. Emissions of black 
carbon (soot) may also be contributing to the warming. Emissions 
of reflective sulfate aerosols have been associated with a net cool-
ing effect. 

Defining Weather and Climate
Weather is the state of the atmosphere at a specific time in a 
specific place. Temperature, cloudiness, humidity, precipitation, and 
winds are examples of weather elements. Thunderstorms, torna-
does, and monsoons are also part of the weather of some places 
during some seasons. 
Climate is defined as long-term weather patterns that describe a 
region. For example, the New York metropolitan regions climate is 
temperate, with rain evenly distributed throughout the year, cold 
winters, and hot summers.
Climate Variability and Climate Change
Climate variability refers to variations in the prevailing state of the 
climate on all temporal and spatial scales beyond that of indi-
vidual weather events. Variability may be due to natural internal 
processes within the climate system, or to variations in natural or 
anthropogenic (human-driven) external forcing. Global climate 
change indicates a change in either the mean state of the climate 
or in its variability, persisting for several decades or longer. This 
includes changes in average weather conditions on Earth, such as 
a change in average global temperature, as well as changes in how 

Figure 2. Carbon cycles through all living things and can be found in the 
ocean, atmosphere, rocks, and soil. Units are in metric tonnes of carbon per 
year. Source: United States Geological Survey (USGS). Global Environmental 
Change and the Carbon Cycle. USGS Fact Sheet137-97 1997. http://geo-
change.er.usgs.gov/pub/carbon/fs97137/co2bdgt90.jpg

of carbon among living and non-living parts of the Earth system 
(Figure 2). Carbon is found in all living things, in soils and rocks, in 
fossil fuels, in ocean sediments and corals, and as carbon dioxide in 
the atmosphere. Each of these carbon reservoirs stores a percent-
age of the Earths total carbon and carbon moves at varying rates 
among the reservoirs. In some cases, the carbon may remain in a 
reservoir for millions of years, as in the case of fossil fuels before 
the Industrial Revolution. As humans burn fossil fuels to produce 
energy and as they clear natural ecosystems, carbon dioxide is 
released into the atmosphere, where it acts as a greenhouse gas.

Figure 1. The climate system is driven by solar radiation, atmospheric com-
position, and interaction with ocean and land processes. Source: Common-
wealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO), Modelling 
Climate: CSIRO Atmospheric Research Greenhouse Information Paper. Australia 
1996. http://www.dar.csiro.au/publications/info98_4.htm

This project is funded by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) under grant #NA16GP2576. For more information about CCIR visit 

http://ccir.ciesin.columbia.edu/nyc       CIESIN User Services: 1 (845) 365-8988 8922       http://www.ciesin.columbia.edu/        

Copyright 2004-2005. The Trustees of Columbia University in the City of New York.

What causes global climate change?

2

Figure 3. The greenhouse effect is responsible for making the Earth hab-
itable. Source: United States Global Change Research Information Office, 
United States Global Change Research Program, 1996. 
http://www.gcrio.org/ocp96/p30box.html

Global Climate Change in 
the Twentieth Century
The climate system includes a 
great deal of natural variability, and 
climate fluctuations have always 
been part of the Earths 4.6 billion 
year history. However, over the past 

Greenhouse Gases
The presence of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere is a natural 
component of the climate system and helps to maintain the Earth 
as a habitable planet (Figure 3). Greenhouse gases are relatively 
transparent to incoming solar radiation, allowing the suns energy 
to pass through the atmosphere to the surface of the Earth. The 
energy is then absorbed by the Earths surface, used in processes 
like photosynthesis, or emitted 
back to space as infrared radiation. 
Some of the emitted radiation 
passes through the atmosphere 
and travels back to space, but 
some is absorbed by greenhouse 
gas molecules and then re-emitted 
in all directions. The effect of this 
is to warm the Earths surface and 
the lower atmosphere. Water vapor 
(H2O) and carbon dioxide (CO2) 
are the two largest contributors to 
the greenhouse effect. Methane 
(CH4), nitrous oxide (N2O), chloro-
fluorocarbons (CFCs) and other 
greenhouse gases are present 
only in trace amounts, but can still 
have a powerful warming effect 
due to their heat-trapping abilities 
and their long residence time 
in the atmosphere. Without the 
greenhouse effect, Earths aver-
age temperature would be -0.4F 
(-18C), rather than the present 59F (15C). 
Concentrations of greenhouse gases  and especially carbon diox-
ide  have risen over the past two hundred and fifty years, largely 
due to the combustion of fossil fuels for energy production. Since 
the Industrial Revolution in the eighteenth century the concentra-
tion of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere has risen from about 
270 parts per million (ppm) to about 370 ppm. Concentrations of 
methane have also risen due to cattle production, the cultivation 
of rice, and release from landfills. Nearly one-third of human-in-
duced nitrous oxide emissions are a result of industrial processes 
and automobile emissions.

Land-use Change
The combustion of fossil fuels is not the only anthropogenic source 
of carbon dioxide. When ecosystems are altered and vegetation is 
either burned or removed, the carbon stored in them is released to 
the atmosphere as carbon dioxide. The principal reasons for defor-
estation are agriculture and urban growth, and harvesting timber 
for fuel, construction, and paper. Currently, up to a quarter of the 
carbon dioxide emissions to the atmosphere can be attributed to 
land-use change.

Sulfate Aerosols and Black Carbon
Sulfate aerosols and black carbon are two important additional ex-
amples of anthropogenic forcings. Sulfate aerosols, which enter the 
atmosphere naturally during volcanic eruptions, are tiny airborne 
particles that reflect sunlight back to space. Industrial activity has 
recently increased their concentration in the atmosphere primarily 
through the burning of fossil fuels containing sulfur. Anthropo-

genic emissions of sulfate aerosols 
have been associated with a net 
cooling effect.
Black carbon is soot generated 
from industrial pollution, traffic, 
outdoor fires, and the burning 
of coal and biomass fuels. Black 
carbon is formed by incomplete 
combustion especially of coal, 
diesel fuels, biofuels and outdoor 
biomass burning. Soot particles 
absorb sunlight, both heating the 
air and reducing the amount of 
sunlight reaching the ground.

century changes in concentrations of greenhouse gases in the 
atmosphere are of an unprecedented rate and magnitude. Human 
population growth has led to increasing demands for energy and 
land resources. Through the burning of fossil fuels to produce 
energy for industrial use, transportation, and domestic power, 
and through land-use change for agriculture and forest products, 
humans have been altering the Earths energy balance. Scientists 
believe that these changes may have already begun to alter the 
global climate.

References
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), 2001. Work-
ing Group I Third Assessment Report. Cambridge University Press. 
Cambridge, UK. 881 pp.
National Academy of Sciences (NAS). 2001. Climate Change Sci-
ence: An Analysis of Some Key Questions.  National Academies 
Press. 42 pp.

Cynthia Rosenzweig, Goddard Institute for Space Studies (http://
www.giss.nasa.gov/)
William Solecki, Hunter College, City University of New York 
(http://www.hunter.cuny.edu/)

This project is funded by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) under grant #NA16GP2576. For more information about CCIR visit 

http://ccir.ciesin.columbia.edu/nyc       CIESIN User Services: 1 (845) 365-8988 8922       http://www.ciesin.columbia.edu/        

Copyright 2004-2005. The Trustees of Columbia University in the City of New York.

