Recommended Desktop Settings for Oracle eBS Applications 

 

Introduction 
Oracle eBS applications and Oracle WebCenter imaging are certified to run on desktops with the XP or 
Windows 7 operating system and using browsers Internet Explorer or Firefox. The following are step-by-
step procedures to optimize your desktop settings for use with Oracle eBusiness Suite (financial) 
applications.  
Section I: Java settings 
Section II: Browser settings 
Section III: Microsoft Excel settings 
Section IV: Oracle WebCenter Imaging settings 
 
Section I: Configuring Java for use with Oracle Applications 
1. 

Oracle Applications requires installation of the Java Runtime Environment (JRE) version 1.6.0_xx 
(the most current and certified version for use with Oracle eBS financials can be downloaded from 
LEAP).   
To install the Sun Java JRE, you will need administrator rights on the desktop.     
Once installed, navigate to Control Panel > Programs > Java. Click on the Advanced Tab > Security 
> Mixed Code (sandboxed vs. trusted) security verification. Make sure 2nd radio button is selected. 
See figure below: 

                                 

          
 
 
Section II: Configuring Internet Explorer (versions 8 or 9) for Use with Oracle Applications 
Note: These settings are for Internet Explorer, but can be used as a guideline for Firefox users as well. On 
Figures II.3 and II.4 of this document are screenshots addressing tabbed browsing specific to Firefox 
users. 
Launch Internet Explorer 8 or 9 and navigate as follows: 

1.  Tools > Compatibility View Settings.  Uncheck all settings to turn off compatibility view.  If you see 

sdsu.edu has been added, remove it.  See figure below: 

Recommended Desktop Settings, v10.0 

Updated August, 2013, Page 1 

 

Recommended Desktop Settings for Oracle eBS Applications 

 

2.  Tools > Internet Options > General (tab) > Browsing History (mid-region) > Settings (button).  

 

On this page, make sure radio button Every time I visit the webpage is selected. See figure below: 

3.  Tools > Internet Options > General (tab) > Tabs (region) > Settings (button). 

 

On this page, make sure radio buttons Always open pop-ups in a new window and A new tab in the 
current window are selected. See figure below: 

Recommended Desktop Settings, v10.0 

Updated August, 2013, Page 2 

 

Recommended Desktop Settings for Oracle eBS Applications 

 

 
If using Firefox, the option for Tabbed browsing is found under Tools > Tabs > Open new windows in a 
new tab instead. 
 

4.  Tools > Internet Options > Security (tab) > Internet (highlighted) > Default Level (button). 

 

On this page, make sure you have selected Default Level. Do this also for the Local intranet. When we 
get to Trusted Sites, well change our settings. See figures below: 

 

   

   

 

5.  With Trusted Sites Sites selected, the Sites button just below should become enabled  click on 

that to open up this region and we will add the following as trusted sites; see figures below: 

https://fiji.sdsu.edu 
https://tahiti.sdsu.edu 
https://bali.sdsu.edu 
https://crete.sdsu.edu 
https://cmsweb.cms.sdsu.edu (if your user uses HCM PeopleSoft apps) 
https://cmsreports.cms.sdsu.edu (if your user uses HCM PeopleSoft apps) 
 

Recommended Desktop Settings, v10.0 

Updated August, 2013, Page 3 

 

Recommended Desktop Settings for Oracle eBS Applications 

 

 

 

   

 

6.  With Trusted Sites still highlighted, select Custom Level and update the following settings. These 

will only apply to those Trusted Sites you just added in #4 above. 

Settings > ActiveX controls and plug-ins >  
  Download signed ActiveX controls (check Enable radio button) 
  Download unsigned ActiveX controls (check Enable radio button) 
  Initialize and Script ActiveX controls not marked as safe for scripting (check Enable radio button) 
See figures below: 

   

 

7.  In the same region, now find the section for Downloads. This will enable Exports from Oracle. 
Settings > Downloads > 
  Automatic prompting for file downloads (check Enable radio button) 
  File Download (check Enable radio button) 
  Font Download (check Enable radio button) 
See figure below: 

 

Recommended Desktop Settings, v10.0 

Updated August, 2013, Page 4 

 

Recommended Desktop Settings for Oracle eBS Applications 

 

8.  In this same region of Settings, under Miscellaneous, disable pop-up blocker. 
Settings > Miscellaneous > 
  Use Pop-up Blocker (check Disable radio button), and click OK. Were finished with this region. 
See figure below: 

 

9.  Click on the Privacy (tab) and check the Turn on Pop-up Blocker option. See figure below: 

 

 

 

Please note: Browser plug-in toolbars such as Google or Yahoo may install pop-up blockers with the 
toolbar. BIS discourages use of any third party toolbars, as it may impede proper Oracle applications 
functionality. If you do use third party toolbars, be sure you disable any pop-ups that may have been 
installed. 

10. Click on Advanced tab, and scroll to the Browsing and Security regions as noted below. 

Advanced > Browsing >  

  uncheck Reuse windows for launching shortcuts (when tabbed browsing is off) 

Advanced > Security >  

  Check Empty Temporary Internet Files folder when browser is closed 

  Uncheck Do not saved encrypted pages to disk 

See figures below: 

Recommended Desktop Settings, v10.0 

Updated August, 2013, Page 5 

 

Recommended Desktop Settings for Oracle eBS Applications 

 

   

 

 
 
Section III: Configuring Microsoft Excel 2010 for use with Oracle Applications 
 

11. Set Microsoft Excel settings and File Types for performing File Exports (downloads) from Oracle 

applications to Excel.  

Open MS Excel 2010 and select File (tab) > Options > Trust Center > Trust Center Settings (button) > 
  Under Macro Settings heading, enable radio button Disable all macros with notification 
  Under Developer Macro Settings heading, check Trust access to the VBA project object model 
See figures below: 

 

 

 

 

 

Recommended Desktop Settings, v10.0 

Updated August, 2013, Page 6 

 

Recommended Desktop Settings for Oracle eBS Applications 

 

 

12. Define a new File Type (.tsv) for performing Exports out of Oracle Apps to Microsoft Excel.  

For Windows XP Users: navigate to My Computer > Tools > Folder Options > File Types > New (button).  
Create New Extension: File Extension = TSV. Then click on Advanced (button). 
For Associated File type choose Microsoft Excel Worksheet from the drop-down of choices. Click OK. 
This brings you back to a window that shows the new File Type of .tsv and that its been associated to 
Microsoft Excel. Click the Advanced button from here, and check Confirm open after download. 
For Windows7: there is no delivered mechanism any longer to create a new file type. So the way to 
accomplish this is to run a query in Oracle and when the results are returned, choose File > Export. When 
the file is finished downloading from Oracle, you should be prompted to either Find or Save the file. Save 
it locally to the desktop.  
Now navigate to the desktop to find the new file. Double click on it to try and open it. You should be 
presented with a dialog box that says Windows cant open this file type (because it doesnt recognize the 
file type), and it will offer a choice to either use a web service to open the program or choose a program 
on the desktop. Choose select Select a program from a list of installed programs. 
Click on the Browse button and find whichever version of Microsoft Excel the user has installed on their 
desktop and choose the Microsoft Excel executable: 
 

  Microsoft Excel 2010 typically installs under this path:  

C:\Program Files\Microsoft Office\Office14\Excel.exe 
 

  Microsoft Excel 2007 typically installs under this path: 

C:\Program Files\Microsoft Office\Office12\Excel.exe 

 
With that first window still open and Microsoft Excel now selected, be sure to check the box that says 
Always use the selected program to open this kind of file so that subsequent exports from Oracle will 
allow the user to open the file immediately into Excel without having to tell the computer what program to 
use for that file type! 
                          
If you have performed the above correctly, all subsequent queries that are exported out of Oracle should 
open up the results directly in Microsoft Excel.  
                  
Section IV: Configuring Oracle WebCenter Imaging 
 

13. You can set your own preference to use the Advanced Viewer as the default when viewing images 
in Oracle WebCenter Imaging or you can select either the Advanced or Basic viewer while viewing 
an image.   
To change the viewer when viewing an image, see the figure below: 

Recommended Desktop Settings, v10.0 

Updated August, 2013, Page 7 

 

 

Recommended Desktop Settings for Oracle eBS Applications 

or you can set your viewer using preferences, see figure below: 

 

 

Preferences > Viewer Settings > Use Advanced Viewer by Default  Set to True, see figure below: 

 

 
If you need assistance or clarification of anything in this document, please contact the Business 
Information Systems HelpDesk (x40899) during standard University business hours (M-F 8:00  4:30 
p.m.). 

 

  
Author 
Donna Roelofsz 
Dennis Espineli 
Dennis Espineli 
Donna Roelofsz 
Donna Roelofsz  
Donna Roelofsz 
Donna Roelofsz  
Donna Roelofsz 
Cyndie Winrow 

 07/10/2013 

Donna Roelofsz  

 8/8/2013 
  
  
  

Donna Roelofsz  
  
  
  

  

  
  
  
  

 

Recommended Desktop Settings, v10.0 

 
 
 

 
   Date 
   12/06/2006 
   06/01/2008 
   03/12/2009 
   08/26/2009 
   09/28/2009 
   02/16/2010 
   11/19/2010 
   04/29/2011 
   08/03/2012 

  

Version 
1.00 
1.01 
2.00 
3.00 
4.00 
5.00 
6.00 
7.00 
8.00 

9.00 

10.00 

 
 
 

  
Change Reference 
Created 
Document Updates 
Document Updates/Version Control 
Document Updates/Version Control 
Document Updates/Version Control 
Document Updates/Version Control 
Document Updates/Version Control 
Document Updates/Version Control 
Document Updates/Version Control 
Document Updates/Version Control  Removed 
IE 7, page 1.  Added compatibility info, page 1.  
Modified trusted sites, page 3 
Document Updates/Version Control/Add Oracle 
WCI settings  Section IV #13 
  
  
  

Updated August, 2013, Page 8 

 

