Mare 461 - Spring 2003 
 

CORAL REEF SEDIMENTOLOGY 

Copyright 2003.  Walter C. Dudley, KMEC, UHH. 

 

 

Though coral reefs are recognized as structures built by animals and plants, it is rarely appreci-

ated that over half of the material in most coral reef complexes is actually made up of sediments.  In fact 
the entire reef itself could actually be considered as one big sedimentary rock.  Therefore in this chapter 
on reef sedimentology we will discuss not just sedimentary particles, but rather the entire reef, both its 
framework and its particulate fill.  Another aspect of reef sedimentology is the important impact sediment 
can have on reef biota.  Sedimentation can damage or kill corals and other reef organisms and the 
presence of unconsolidated sediments can prevent the successful settlement of larvae of many hermatypic 
corals.  Hence, the sedimentology of a reef is an essential aspect of any thorough coral reef study.  We 
will begin our discussion by looking at where reef sediments come from, proceed to the processes of 
transportation and deposition, and then look at cementation and diagenesis in a coral reef system. 

We have already seen that coral reefs are unique environments biologically, but they are also 

unique with respect to their sedimentology.  They differ from virtually all other benthic marine 
sedimentary environments in that they produce most of their own sediment.  Most benthic marine 
environments accumulate sediments transported from elsewhere which are known as exogenous 
sediments.  These may be land-derived materials transported by rivers, wind or icebergs, or sediments of 
biological origin such as the skeletons of plankton which have settled from surface waters to the sea floor. 
 On coral reefs, however, well over 90% of the sediments come from the reef itself (endogenous 
sediments).  In fact, most reefs produce far more sediment than they can accommodate internally.  The 
excess is carried throughout the reef system and any remaining surplus transported out of the reef 
environment and even into the deep sea.  Therefore, not only do coral reefs not import much in the way of 
exogenous sediments, they are actually important exporters of carbonate sediments to other marine 
environments.  Where does this supply of sediment come from and how is it produced? 
 
 

SEDIMENT PRODUCTION ON CORAL REEFS 

The source of sediments produced on a coral reef are the reef organisms themselves, consequently 

the sediments are almost entirely carbonate.  Their mineralogy reflects that of their source organisms, 
hence aragonite produced by corals accounts for more than half of the carbonate, high-magnesium calcite 
from calcareous algae is the next most abundant mineral phase, and low-magnesium calcite is the least 
abundant major carbonate mineral.  Only on fringing reefs do silicate mineral grains from weathered and 
eroded rocks (i.e. quartz and feldspar sand) constitute a significant part of the sedimentary material. 

The carbonate sediment particles themselves are produced by the destruction of reef organisms 

and preexisting reef rock through physical, chemical and biological erosion.  
 
Erosion of coral reefs resulting from physical processes 
 

We consider here the erosion of coral reefs resulting from physical processes in a very broad 

sense to include mechanisms ranging from the mechanical destruction of reefs as a result of storm waves 
to death and disintegration of reef organisms resulting from changes in their physical environment such as 
variations in  temperature.  It is interesting to note that the effect of erosion by physical processes is 
almost always greatest on the shallow reef front and reef flat zones, precisely those zones which have the 
highest overall productivity of calcium carbonate.  As a result these zones should generate proportionately 
more reef sedimentary material than other reef zones. 

Mechanical destruction of coral reefs is one of the most obvious of all of the erosion processes 

that affect reefs.  Even the most cursory survey of a reef following a major storm will usually reveal 
obvious damage as a result of the forces of breaking waves and surging currents.  A hurricane at Belize in 

Copyright 2003.  Walter C. Dudley, KMEC, UHH. 

Mare 461 - Spring 2003 
 
1961 destroyed virtually the entire reef over an area greater than 300 square kilometers.  Entire coral 
colonies were broken in place forming in-situ rubble mounds.  Other coral colonies were washed ashore 
building boulder ramparts and yet other reef material was transported seaward forming debris fans.  
Organisms left in place showed signs of damage caused by the abrasion of moving reef debris.  Studies on 
the Great Barrier Reef (GBR) have shown damage to coral at depths in excess of 20 meters as a result of 
tropical cyclones and studies in Hawaii have shown storm damage to corals to a depth of 27 meters.  
Storm damage can, however, be quite variable depending upon which part of the reef is most exposed to 
the waves.  Storm waves striking the leeward side of an atoll, for example, will be very destructive as the 
reef organisms there are normally adapted to calm, protected sea conditions.  In general the most exposed, 
smallest, and most fragile organisms are those most affected.  Storm waves also move preexisting 
sediment and rubble.  The transportation of this material not only results in additional abrasion but its 
deposition in new areas can smother and kill reef organisms.  Even the ordinary day-to-day mechanical 
erosion produced by normal breaking waves is important.  Portions of coral skeletons are broken off and 
ground against other skeletons producing particles from pebble to sand size.  Sand and gravel are 
constantly moving around the reef forming bars and spits and accumulating in any depression or other 
area of lower energy on the reef flat.  Even minor changes in swell direction can produce a readjustment 
in sediment movement.  The normal bimonthly changes in tide height and tidal current velocity also result 
in a readjustment of sediment motion, especially in areas with large tide ranges such as the GBR.  All this 
sediment motion produces additional abrasion to the reef and further breaks down and rounds the 
sediment particles. 

The most spectacular mechanical damage to coral reefs is that produced by tsunamis.  Though 

relatively rare in the Atlantic Ocean, destructive tsunami waves occur every few years in the Pacific 
Ocean basin.  The presence of a well-developed coral reef off a shoreline appears to have a strong effect 
on tsunami waves.  A reef may serve to absorb a significant amount of the wave energy, reducing the 
height and intensity of the wave impact on the shoreline itself.  Though the impact of tsunamis on reefs is 
not well documented it can be quite dramatic.  The 1883 tsunami caused by the explosion of Krakatoa is 
reported to have cast large blocks from the reef front onto the reef flat.  The 1946 tsunami which 
originated in the Aleutian trench reportedly wrenched five-foot wide pieces of coral from the reef outside 
Hilo Bay, Hawaii and tossed them on the shore to heights more than 15 feet above sea level.  Even more 
impressive is geologic evidence of an ancient landslide-generated tsunami which occurred in Hawaii 
about 100,000 years ago.  Reef debris from this tsunami has been found deposited more than 1000 feet 
above sea level on the island of Lanai. 

Earthquakes can also damage coral reefs.  Though there are few accounts in the literature, off 
Central American an earthquake of Richter magnitude 7.1 is reported to have caused great damage to 
massive corals such as Porities, some of which disintegrated in place, while others were broken from their 
foundations and rolled or slid down slope.  Foliaceous corals and branching corals such as Acropora were 
broken and fragmented because of their resistance to water motion.  Earthquakes can also result in sudden 
changes in elevation, moving a reef up or down relative to sea level.  A 1975 earthquake off the south 
coast of the island of Hawaii resulted in subsidence of more than three meters in the small cove at Halape. 
 Corals and other reef organisms suddenly found themselves in a new environment.  The sudden uplift of 
a reef area would obviously have a more disastrous impact on reef organisms by leaving them exposed 
above water.  Periodic exposure due to normal tides is a regular physical occurrence on reefs, especially 
in areas with high tidal ranges.  However, if very low spring tides happen to coincide with heavy rainfall 
or extremely hot weather, widespread mortality of reef organisms may occur.  Such coincidences may 
occur as the "negative storm surge" of a tropical cyclone is combined with heavy storm rainfall.  
Likewise, the changes in sea level associated with El Nino/Southern Oscillation (ENSO) events are 
accompanied in many areas by unusually warm temperatures.  The narrow temperatures and salinity 
limits to which most reef organisms are adapted make them especially vulnerable to changes in these 
properties.  Fringing reefs tend to be those most affected as they are closest to coastal runoff with its 

 
 

2 

Copyright 2003.  Walter C. Dudley, KMEC, UHH. 

Mare 461 - Spring 2003 
 
potential for perturbing reef water temperature and especially salinity.  Moreover, the high sedimentation 
resulting from coastal runoff as a result of tropical cyclones has been identified as the cause of most short-
term reef destruction. 

In recent years a phenomenon known as "coral bleaching" has been recognized as a special case 

of catastrophic coral mortality.  In coral bleaching the corals lose their symbiotic algae and become white. 
 If the event lasts for weeks or months the corals may actually die.  Coinciding with the severe 1983 
ENSO, a bleaching event occurred in the eastern Pacific killing between 70% and 95% of corals.  The 
exact causes of bleaching are presently under study, but explanations include elevated water temperature, 
increased ultraviolet radiation, and disease.  

Perhaps the most insulting physical causes of high coral reef mortality are those which result 

directly from human activities.  Ironically, boats carrying coral reef enthusiasts to snorkel or scuba dive 
account for significant damage to corals through careless anchoring practices.  Fishing trawls near coral 
reefs stir up fine bottom sediments which are in themselves detrimental to corals.  These same fine 
sediments may also have high organic contents which results in an increased oxygen demand in reef 
waters producing a further adverse impact on the reef.  But pollution may be the human impact which 
most threatens coral reef systems.  Oil and chemical pollution and nuclear weapons testing are the 
obvious cases which come to mind but dredging, mining, land clearance and intensive coastal agriculture 
can have devastating impacts.  Every year sugar refiners wash hundreds of tons of cane leaves and pulp 
into the ocean around islands in the Caribbean Sea and Indian Ocean.  Though ocean dumping of cane 
wastes has long been prohibited in Hawaii, until recently sugar companies continued to dump wastewater 
loaded with fine sediment into coastal waters.  Fertilizer-rich runoff from coastal agriculture and such 
seemingly innocuous activities as seaside golf courses may contribute to nutrient overload of coral reef 
environments.  These excess nutrients may cause an increase in coral competitors such as fleshy algae and 
stimulate phytoplankton productivity.  Increased phytoplankton densities not only reduce light intensity 
levels but may cause subsequent increases in zooplankton and possibly cause overfeeding of corals 
resulting in excess production which is shed as coral mucus.  This mucus can serve as an attractive 
substrate for bacteria which may result in the death of the coral.  Furthermore, some researchers believe 
that population explosions of the crown-of-thorns seastar (Acanthaster planci), which are important 
grazers on corals, may be directly related to phytoplankton blooms. 

An instructive example of adverse human impact on coral reefs is offered by the case of Kaneohe 

Bay, Hawaii.  This bay was once the site of an extensive, well-developed system of coral reefs.  Small 
areas of the reef system were destroyed by dredging during World War II, but a post-war population 
boom had a much greater impact.  Land clearing and urbanization so altered the retention capacity of the 
coastal watershed that by 1965 heavy runoff from storm rainfall resulted in mortality to corals to a depth 
of 1.5 m near streams and to a depth of 30 cm throughout the entire bay.  A sewage outfall entering the 
bay resulted in intense eutrophication producing additional coral mortality.  The combined effect was the 
overall destruction of some 70% of the former reef over a period of less than 30 years. 

All of these physical causes of reef mortality make coral reef organisms more susceptible to 
mechanical disintegration and to bioerosion, a type of erosion produced by organisms themselves.  
Though bioerosion is not as dramatic or easily observed as the physical destruction of a coral reef, it is 
pervasive, persistent, and over the long term may produce even greater affects than physical erosion. 

 

 
 
Bioerosion of Coral Reefs 
 

Organisms erode coral reefs through various chemical and mechanical processes.  This bioerosion 

has two major effects: (1) it creates new cavities in the reef and (2) it produces new sediment through 
excavation of these cavities.  We will discuss bioerosion by first looking at the organisms and their 
 
 

3 

Copyright 2003.  Walter C. Dudley, KMEC, UHH. 

Mare 461 - Spring 2003 
 
activities which produce bioerosion and then at the resulting effects to the reef.  We will also include in 
our discussion the effects of those organisms which alter preexisting sediments on the reef.  Though 
various schemes have been used by different workers, we will divide the bioeroders into grazers, borers, 
and sediment burrowers. 
 
Grazers  

These are organisms which feed on live coral, encrusting coralline algae, and on tufted, 

filamentous and endolithic algae growing on dead reef substrate.  Perhaps most dramatic of the grazers 
are those which attack the coral itself.  Live coral is eaten by various worms, gastropods, sponges, 
nudibranchs, crabs, starfish and some 12 families of fishes.  Though pufferfish (Tetradontids) are known 
to bite off and swallow the tips of growing coral, and surgeonfish (Acanthurids) to scrap the coral surface 
with their teeth, it is the activities of the parrotfish (Scarids) which have attracted the most attention from 
coral reef researchers.  It was none other than Charles Darwin during his voyage on the Beagle who, after 
examining the gut contents of several parrotfish, recognized their role as agents of bioerosion.  Parrotfish 
are now known to feed mainly on soft algae growing on dead coral substrates and less frequently on live 
corals.  But even when feeding on the encrusting layer on dead coral they remove part of the substrate 
beneath it producing new sediment.  Some species have been observed to ingest mostly sand and it has 
been suggested that they merely recycle old reef sediment.  However, the pharyngeal mill of parrotfish, 
like the gizzard of surgeonfish, is very effective at grinding fragments of calcium carbonate into smaller 
sizes.  Also it is likely that some fine CaCO3 sediment particles dissolve while passing through the 
parrotfish gut.  Parrotfish can therefore be considered as significant bioeroders by producing new 
sediment as a result of grazing on both living and dead coral substrates and by reducing the size of 
preexisting sediments they ingest. 

Most of the grazing activities on live coral do not result in the death of the coral colony, there is 
however one major exception, the crown-of-thorns seastar.  These asteroids feed on live coral polyps by 
everting and spreading their stomachs over an area nearly equal to their own diameter.  They then secrete 
digestive enzymes onto the coral tissue, absorb the digested tissue as they withdraw their stomach, and 
leave behind the white skeleton of a dead coral colony.  Population explosions of Acanthaster produced 
widespread mortality on the GBR in the late 1960's and early 1980's.  These dead coral skeletons are then 
readily infested with algae which is in-turn grazed producing additional bioerosion. 

Sea turtles have been observed grazing on algae covering dead coral and in so doing to leave 

characteristic scratches in the substrate.  Gastropods also contribute to bioerosion on coral reefs through 
their grazing activities.  In scraping off epilithic algae (which grows on the surface of the substrate), and 
shallow endolithic algae (which grows just beneath the surface of the substrate) with their radula they 
erode the substrate.  The radula can scrap and scar the coral substrate because it is made of low-
magnesium calcite which is harder than the aragonite of corals or the high-magnesium calcite of coralline 
algae.  Even more abrasive are the teeth of chitons, some of which are composed of the mineral 
magnetite, which readily cuts into the softer reef rock. 

Among all of the grazing bioeroders, it is probably the activities of the echinoids (urchins) which 

are most easily observed.  In many areas, especially in the Caribbean and eastern Pacific, they are 
considered the major agents of bioerosion.  Diadema antillarum feeds on living algae and possibly to a 
minor extent coral.  They rapidly erode the substrate by scraping with the articulated plates of their 
Aristotle's lantern (their teeth) leaving behind characteristic star-shaped marks.  On some reef areas it is 
thought that bioerosion by Diadema may be equal to or greater than carbonate production.  The 
"mushroom" shape of many older coral heads is thought to be the result of the grazing activities of 
Diadema around their bases.  It has also been suggested that the "halo" of bare sand that is often found 
separating reef from sea grass areas is produced by the grazing activities of Diadema.  Like parrotfish, 
these urchins also ingest preexisting sediment but it is thought that some 65% of the sediment they 
excrete is new sediment formed from coral and coralline algae.  In addition to being surface grazers on the 

 
 

4 

Copyright 2003.  Walter C. Dudley, KMEC, UHH. 

Mare 461 - Spring 2003 
 
reef, some echinoids may bore into the reef for protection hence overlapping with our next group of 
bioeroders. 
 
Borers 

These are organisms that bore holes into the reef substrate.  A wide range of different organisms 
including both plants and animals are involved and produce holes ranging in size from a few microns to 
several centimeters in diameter.  The smallest holes, only 1 - 5m in diameter (1m = 1 millionth of a 
meter), are thought to be produced by bacteria and fungi.  Better documented is the boring activity of 
endolithic algae.  Green, red, and blue-green algae (cyanophyta bacteria) are all known to be capable of 
eroding carbonate substrates.  A greenish band, called the "Ostreobium band", visible just beneath the 
surface of the coral substrate, indicates the presence of live endolithic algae.  The blue-green algae are 
known to possess special boring filaments which produce cavities between 5 and 15m in diameter.  The 
micro-boring activity of algae, bacteria and fungi is believed to be accomplished through biochemical 
dissolution of the CaCO3.  As the boring front advances downward into the rock it leaves behind a highly 
porous weakened rind.  Experiments in the Caribbean with a boring green algae, Phaeophila engleri, 
indicate a boring rate of about 20-30 m/year.  Because all boring algae are photosynthetic, their 
distribution is largely controlled by sunlight which usually limits their abundance to waters less than 15 m 
deep. 

As the activity of boring algae decreases with depth the importance of boring sponges as agents 

of bioerosion becomes more important.  Boring sponges are found world-wide, occurring on both 
Caribbean and Indo-Pacific reefs, those of the clonid family being the most important.  Cliona may form 
large chambers with smaller galleries branching off.  The walls have pitted surfaces and the diameter of 
the galleries varies in size.  These sponges bore by chemically etching around a small chip of substrate.  
The chip is then mechanically removed and conveyed out of the sponge through an exhalent canal.  The 
chips range in size from 15 to 80m, making them mostly silt size and therefore easily transported off the 
reef.  Boring rates for sponges have been reported ranging from 1mm to as much as 1.4 cm/yr.  Sediment 
production by sponges in Barbados has been estimated at 5-10 metric tons per hectare per year. 

The activities of boring bivalves are also important agents of bioerosion on coral reefs.  The 

mussel, Lithophaga, bores into both living and dead coral by a combination of chemical dissolution and 
mechanical action.  They apparently secrete acid which softens the coral substrate and then remove pieces 
mechanically by a rocking motion of their shell.  The borings may be as large as 2 cm in diameter, more 
or less straight, and have smooth interior walls.  Some workers believe that bivalves may dissolve as 
much as 40% of some corals with their boring activities. 

Various marine worms including sipunculids (peanut worms) and polychaetes (segmented 

worms) also bore into coral reefs.  Polychaetes produce "U"-shaped tubes from 0.3 to 0.5 mm in diameter 
and are thought to bore by first chemically weakening the substrate and then mechanically removing the 
grains.  Sipunculids, which may grow up to 2 cm in length, produce simple, blind, straight or gently 
curved tubes. 

There are also boring gastropods, barnacles, zoanthids, bryozoans and crustaceans.  Boring 
eunicids are believed to chew their way through the reef substrate using their sharp spade-like lower 
mandibles.  The organisms which produce by far the largest holes are echinoids.  Their boring success is 
thought to be achieved by the rotary action of their teeth and possibly spines.  The urchin Echinometra 
lucunter, in particular, has been shown to produce significant quantities of fine sediment through its 
boring activities.  They typically produce numerous closely-spaced, circular cavities, separated by sharp 
ridges.  The surface of these cavities are usually smooth and barren and they apparently feed on endolithic 
algae and pieces of seaweed that drift into their holes. 
 
Sediment Burrowers  

 
 

5 

Mare 461 - Spring 2003 
 

Reef sediments, whether produced by physical erosion or bioerosion, may be further altered by 

the activities of organisms that burrow in or browse on sediment particles.  Holothurians and herbivorous 
gastropods have acidic intestinal tracks which may result in significant dissolution of carbonate sediments 
that pass through their guts.  As has already been mentioned, parrotfish and some urchins may also alter 
the grain size of sediment particles as they pass through their alimentary track.  Goatfish (Mullids) 
accidentally ingest sediment while searching for invertebrates on the bottom.  This activity along with the 
burrowing of worms, eels, and crustaceans may have little direct effect on the sediment itself but by 
moving the particles may produce additional sediment transport and certainly alter the structure of the 
sedimentary deposit.  The effects of this "bioturbation" will be discussed in more detail later. 
 
Variations in Rates of Bioerosion 

The effects of bioerosion are highly variable on a coral reef.  They vary by area, depth, substrate, 
organism, season and in many other ways.  For example, on newly exposed substrates the types of boring 
activity vary with time showing a succession beginning with fungi and bacteria, and followed by algae, 
all within a few days.  Within a few weeks sponges, and then polychaetes may arrive and commence their 
boring activity.  Finally bivalves, barnacles and sipunculans will establish themselves.  Each individual 
organism may excavate only a few millimeters but in so doing prepare the surface for the invasion of 
other organisms.  However, major differences in this pattern of succession have been observed between 
the Caribbean and the GBR.  In fact, there are major differences in bioerosion between many different 
geographic areas.  Sponges appear to be more important as agents of bioerosion in the Caribbean than on 
the GBR.   Also echinoids are important bioeroders on most Caribbean reefs but have little impact on the 
GBR.  In general, there is a poorer bioeroding fauna on the GBR than in many other areas and this is 
thought to be due to the large tidal range which leaves much of the substrate exposed above water for 
extended periods of time.  Plankton productivity has also been considered as another possible explanation 
for some geographic variations in rates of bioerosion.  The number of boring bivalves infesting coral 
heads has been found to be highly correlated with regional plankton productivity, the eastern Pacific 
having the highest densities of boring bivalves, followed by the western Atlantic, the Indian Ocean, and 
finally the western Pacific with the lowest densities of boring bivalves per coral head.  It has been 
hypothesized that growth of these filter-feeding bivalves are stimulated by the increased abundance of 
plankton. 

Bioeroding communities also show variations within a reef system.  A recent study revealed a 

cross-shelf trend in bioerosion on the GBR, where the density of boring organisms in Porites lobata was 
found to decrease with distance from shore.  This is possibly the result of a decrease in the occurrence of 
bioeroding bivalves and sponges with distance from shore and/or the result of an increase in benthic 
grazing fish offshore.  Other studies have shown that sheltered areas tend to have more diverse boring 
communities than fore-reef areas.  In general, however, the intensity of bioerosion appears to be depth 
related, being most intense nearest the surface.  Indeed, many of the major bioeroders such as endolithic 
algae and echinoids are restricted to the shallower parts of reefs.  Clonid sponges have also shown a 
relationship between rates of bioerosion and water depth.  In one study their sediment production ranged 
from 217 gm/m2 per year at 40 meters to 1,806 gm/m2 per year at 15 meters depth.  However, their overall 
effect may be relatively greater at depth due to the decrease in biomass of coral and calcareous algae with 
depth. 

Copyright 2003.  Walter C. Dudley, KMEC, UHH. 

One generalization, which gives an idea of the importance of this erosion process, is that 

bioerosion is capable of reducing a one meter high colony of M. annularis to sediment in only 150 years.  
Various coral reef researchers have attempted to rank the impact of different bioeroding agents by 
calculating their rates of bioerosion.  However, these data should be treated with caution.  Not only are 
the data from studies of limited areas but it should also be noted that bioeroding organisms show annual 
and seasonal variations in recruitment success.  Furthermore larval recruitment of boring organisms may 
be heavily dependent on circulation and orientation of the available substrates on which they can settle.  

 
 

6 

Copyright 2003.  Walter C. Dudley, KMEC, UHH. 

Mare 461 - Spring 2003 
 
In addition, most bioeroding organisms, especially borers, cannot infest a substrate as long as there is a 
layer of living coral tissue.  Mortality to the corals can occur as a result of physical destruction or 
predation at any time of year.  Opportunities for bioerosion are therefore greatly increased following a 
storm or a population explosion of Acanthaster.  Obviously the timing of coral mortality and seasonal 
recruitment of bioeroding organisms will have a major impact on rates of bioerosion.  In spite of the wide 
variations in rates, many coral reef workers agree that bioerosion is probably the most important agent of 
destruction in many reef systems.  Because bioeroding organisms preferentially attack the exposed coral 
skeleton, their penetration is often concentrated around the edges and underneath coral colonies.  Thus the 
foundation of a colony may be gradually weakened by bioerosion until it can no longer resist the shock of 
breaking waves and therefore succumbs to physical erosion.  Skeletal surfaces freshly exposed due to 
physical breakage are attractive targets for new bioerosion, producing a vicious circle of physical and 
bioerosion.  Next, we will examine in more detail these important feedback loops between physical and 
bioerosion in a coral reef system. 
 
Feedback Processes in Coral Reefs Erosion 
 

Feedback from erosion processes can operate to further increase rates of erosion (positive 

feedback) or to inhibit erosion (negative feedback).  An example of a positive feedback loop between 
physical and bioerosion is the increase in surfaces available for bioerosion produced by fragmentation of 
corals due to storm waves.  This same physical breakage of coral colonies also has negative feedback 
loops which help strengthen the reef structure.  For example, freshly broken surfaces may be colonized 
not only by bioeroders but also by larvae of reef building organisms, including corals.  Furthermore, a 
study of storm damage to staghorn coral (Acropora cervicornis) in Jamaica found that many broken and 
toppled colonies had become re-anchored and rapidly regrew.  In addition, it is thought that the main 
means of propagation of this species is through fragmentation and not sexual reproduction.  Hence, its 
dominance of Jamaican reefs may be attributable to storm damage. 

Another example of negative feedback between physical processes and bioerosion was reported 

in a study of the grazing effects of Diadema on Caribbean coral reefs.  These large urchins can be 
dislodged from the reef surface by heavy surf, hence they tend to avoid exposed areas during periods of 
storm wave activity.  As a result bioerosion by Diadema is reduced on the exposed reef front during 
periods of heavy physical erosion there.  The more protected backreef, however, maintains a high 
population of urchins and therefore experiences more constant high rates of urchin bioerosion.  Also, 
increased bioerosion due to urchins is thought to result from reduced predation on the urchins by reef fish. 
 Human exploitation of certain reef fish has consequently been implicated as the cause of increased 
bioerosion on some reefs. 

Grazing by fish has it owns positive and negative feedback loops.  Fish feeding on live coral 

produce a surface upon which boring larvae can settle without being preyed upon by coral polyps, thereby 
further increasing bioerosion (positive feedback).  However, a study in Hawaii indicated that areas that 
were heavily grazed by parrotfish had higher recruitment of coral and coralline algae than areas of low 
fish grazing activity.  This is thought to be the result of parrotfish reducing the abundance of algae which 
might successfully compete with corals for space.  Damselfish (pomacentrids), on the other hand, kill 
corals in their territories in order to cultivate algae which they consume. 

Fish grazing also affects the activities of borers which in turn affect the susceptibility of corals to 

physical destruction.  A study of bivalve boring activity on coral reefs off of Costa Rica revealed that 
trigger fish frequently bite off pieces of live Porites lobata in order to feed on boring mussels underneath. 
 Once the fish expose the bivalves they spit out the coral fragments, some of which are thought to serve as 
nuclei forming new colonies, i.e. both positive and negative feedback.  The effect of the boring bivalves 
(Lithophaga) is, however, purely positive feedback.  A strong relationship was found between the 
abundance of Lithophaga and the strength of P. lobata, with the weakest coral colonies having the highest 
 
 

7 

Copyright 2003.  Walter C. Dudley, KMEC, UHH. 

Mare 461 - Spring 2003 
 
numbers of boring bivalves.  Bioerosion tended to be concentrated near the dead bases of corals, areas 
often killed by sedimentation.  It is the coral bases where the stress from water motion is also 
concentrated, hence the combined effects of sedimentation, bioerosion and physical erosion all act in 
concert to produce broken colonies of P. lobata.  As previously mentioned the abundance of boring 
bivalves appears to be greatest on reefs in areas with high plankton productivity.  There are often areas 
where successful coral growth is already marginal due to high levels of nutrient enrichment and increased 
turbidity due to high plankton densities. 

Boring bivalves are not without their minor negative feedback loops as many secrete calcium 

carbonate linings to their tubes which help cement the reef substrate.  Some endolithic algae also secrete a 
high-magnesium calcite cement which helps bind the reef together.  Bioerosion further promotes reef 
cementation by creating fine sediment particles which are then trapped in the highly porous structure 
created by bioerosion.  The increase in porosity and permeability facilitates the circulation of fluids 
through the reef substrate further increasing cementation of the reef. 

Even the sediment itself is subject to feedback processes. Once sediment particles are perma-
nently buried most micro-boring on them ceases.  However, organisms which re-suspended sediment, 
such as shrimp of the genus Callianassa, keep grains near the surface where micro-boring activity is 
vigorous thereby increasing bioerosion.  On the other hand, thick sediment deposits laid down during 
storms may be subject to relatively little bioerosion, i.e. negative feedback. 

Of course, the most important positive feedback loop is that between bioerosion and mechanical 

breakage of corals.  Not only do heads of P. lobata become more susceptible to physical breakage as a 
result of bioerosion, a study of the Acropora palmata graphically illustrates the impact of bioerosion.  
Stems of A. palmata averaging 13 cm in diameter required a force of up to 60 kg to break, whereas stems 
of the same diameter weakened by bioerosion broke at forces between 23 and 35 kg, well within the range 
of forces found in waves from major storms. 
 
Bioerosion versus the Sorby Principle 
 

Before dispensing with the processes of sediment production we should mention the importance 
of the size and shape of the sediment particles produced on a coral reef.  It is their size, shape and density 
which determine their hydrodynamic properties and hence the extent to which they will be transported 
both on and off the reef.  The size and shape of sediment particles produced on coral reefs is thought by 
many researchers to be largely the result of the size and skeletal structure of the contributing organisms. 
This relationship between the shape and size of grains and the micro-architecture and skeletal structure of 
the organism is known as the Sorby Principle.  For example, some researchers believe that the coral, 
Acropora cervicornis, first fractures into pieces of gravel whose size is determined by the dimensions of 
the branches, and then further degrades into 250 m sand, whose diameter is controlled by the size of the 
aragonite crystal packets.  Halimeda plates generally contribute to 1 to 2mm size part of the sediment, but 
upon disintegration to their aragonite micro-crystals add to the less than 64m carbonate silt-size 
sediments.  Whole foraminifer tests are an important component of many reef sediments, especially on 
beaches, lagoons and reef flats.  Their initial size obviously controls their grain size as a sediment particle, 
with very large foraminifers such as Marginopora adding to the gravel fraction and smaller Aphistegina 
contributing to reef sands.  

The origin of sediment particles smaller than 64m, however, is very difficult to determine.  
Certainly the morphology of many smaller grains is strongly influenced by the crystal structure and 
mineralogy of the original skeleton, but the tiny chips ejected by sponges and the many other products of 
bioerosion also represent an important component of fine reef sediments.  In fact, some researchers 
believe that the breakdown of organic skeletons into particles on both the macro- and micro-scales is 
controlled primarily by bioerosion and wave sorting of the particles and that purely mechanical fracturing 
and abrasion are not important factors under normal wave conditions.  Storm waves can, however, in a 
 
 

8 

Mare 461 - Spring 2003 
 
few hours do the work of years of "normal" mechanical erosion.  The Sorby Principle is, no doubt, a valid 
concept when considering the mechanical breakdown of reef substrates especially in regard to certain 
particular skeletal components of reef sediments.  Bioerosion, on the other hand, should not be underrated 
as a factor contributing to the size and shape of reef sediment particles. 
 
 

Copyright 2003.  Walter C. Dudley, KMEC, UHH. 

SEDIMENT TRANSPORTATION  

AND DEPOSITION ON CORAL REEFS 

 

Earlier we indicated that sediments may actually control the growth and distribution of coral 
reefs.  The preceding discussion on erosion has given you an idea of the numerous ways in which reef 
sediments are produced.  It has been estimated that between 50% and 90% of the annual production of 
calcium carbonate by coral reefs is reduced to sediment.  This may amount to anywhere between 5 and 20 
Kg/m2 per year.  With such large amounts of sediment being produced, why are reefs not buried in their 
own debris?  Actually, some do become buried and cease to be actively growing reefs, but most manage 
to redistribute and/or rid themselves of much of this sediment.  Knowledge of the processes of sediment 
transport and deposition are important if we are to understand reef morphology and development.  To 
better understand sediment accumulation and transport on coral reefs sedimentologists have developed the 
concept of a reef sediment budget.  This can be expressed by the simple equation:  PG - PN = TS, where PG 
stands for the gross carbonate productivity, derived by multiplying the standing crop of reef-building 
organisms times their production rate, and PN is the net carbonate productivity, or in other words the 
carbonate ultimately incorporated in the reef.  The difference, PG - PN, is "excess" carbonate production 
and may be considered to be equal to TS, the sediment transported away from the reef.  In fact, the excess 
carbonate (PG - PN) must be transported off the reef as sediments (TS) or the reef will ultimately be buried. 
 However, studies of some reefs have shown that under normal conditions PG - PN may exceed TS on an 
annual basis, yet these reefs appear to be healthy and not in the process of being buried by their own 
sediments.  The important question is when and how are these excess sediments removed.  Before solving 
this paradox we need to take a more in-depth look at the actual processes of sediment transportation and 
deposition. 

Not only do erosion processes on coral reefs differ from those of virtually all other sedimentary 

systems, but so do the processes of sediment transport and deposition.  Terrigenous sediments usually 
travel large distances from the places where they are eroded before finally being deposited.  During this 
long transport process, the composition, sorting, shape, and size of the original grains is often radically 
altered, with the end product often reflecting more the transport and deposition processes than the source 
material.  The processes of transportation and deposition are almost exclusively physical and dominated 
by water turbulence.  The carbonate sediments of biological origin which dominate coral reefs are in 
contrast almost exclusively produced on the reef itself (endogenous).  Much of the reef sedimentary 
carbonate is deposited in-situ or very near its point of origin, hence the distribution of sediment-producing 
organisms has a major impact on the distribution of reef sediments.  Furthermore, though wave turbulence 
may dominant sediment transport and deposition processes on coral reefs, organisms strongly modify 
sediment deposits and in some cases actually transport sediments. 

On most reefs only a tiny percentage of sediment particles are exogenous.  These include bits of 

pumice and volcanic sand near areas of recent volcanism, the remains of planktonic organisms such as 
diatom frustules, Globigerinoid foraminifer tests and coccoliths, and a small amount of aeolian 
(windblown) dust, which occurs in the finest size fractions.   

The biogenic origin and short transport distances of endogenous reef sediments gives these 

particles a much greater range of density and morphology than typically found in clastic sediments of 
terrigenous origin.  Most grain size and transport relationships are based on studies of terrigenous 
 
 

9 

Copyright 2003.  Walter C. Dudley, KMEC, UHH. 

Mare 461 - Spring 2003 
 
sediments assumed to be quartz sand grains of spherical shape.  Reef sediments have shapes ranging from 
the thin plates of Halimeda, through the blocky shapes of coral fragments, to the spheres and discs of 
many foraminiferal tests, (clearly demonstrating the importance of the Sorby Principle).  Particle shape 
and microstructure has a strong influence on particle settling rates.  Spherical and blocky particles tend to 
settle in a straight path, whereas thin plates and discs are inclined to oscillate while settling.  Settling rates 
are also affected by particle density.  Though the specific gravities of calcite (2.72) and aragonite (2.95) 
are greater than quartz (2.65), the micro-architecture of many reef sediments results in particles with a 
high percentage of pore space and hence a lower bulk density than quartz sand grains.  At large sizes, 
density may be more important than particle shape, causing, for example, Halimeda plates to settle faster 
than more compact but less dense Marginopora tests.  The result is that relationships between grain size, 
shape, and sorting are far more complex on coral reefs than in most other sedimentary environments. 

In general sediment transport on coral reefs is dominated by three often interrelated processes: 1) 

currents generated by waves and tides; 2) gravitational settling; and 3) biological processes. 
 
Physical Processes of Sediment Transport 
 

Under the heading of physical processes which transport sediment we will consider gravitational 

settling as well as sediment transport by waves, tides and ocean currents.  All particles which settle 
through the water column do so in response to gravity which pulls them vertically down toward the 
bottom.  Lateral transport only takes place when some other mechanism, whether physical or biological, 
has displaced sediment particles horizontally.  However, gravity alone rarely acts to produce sediment 
transport except on steep gradients where particles may slip or slide down slope primarily in response to 
gravity.  This may produce sediment "creep", where the grains on the bottom are pushed down slope by 
the impact of other grains striking the bottom, and "slump", where an entire body of sediment moves 
down slope en masse.  It should be noted that a small amount of horizontal transport over steep slopes can 
produce a large movement along the bottom as a result of settling in response to gravity.  Furthermore, 
even after striking the bottom grains may roll some distance down slope in response to gravity before 
finally coming to rest. Consequently the impact of gravitational settling will have a greater impact on 
sediment along the steep slopes of a fore-reef than those of a flat lagoon floor. 

Sediment transport produced by the motion of the ocean can be divided into that which operates 

under normal everyday conditions and that produced by short-term but extreme events, such as hurricanes 
and other violent storms.  Under normal conditions water motion produced as waves pass over a reef will 
put some grains into suspension and move others along the bottom by bouncing, rolling and sliding.  As 
particles are rolled back and forth across the reef, they are abraded and become more rounded, but little 
net displacement may take place as a result of the oscillatory motion of the waves.  However, once this 
oscillatory motion has put the smaller particles in suspension, water movement due to tides or background 
currents are capable of producing net sediment transport, therefore water motion due to passing waves is 
extremely important.  The instantaneous velocities produced by waves decrease dramatically with depth.  
For example, a 1.8 m high wave (7 second period) would produce an instantaneous maximum velocity of 
1.52 m/sec at a depth of 3 m, a velocity of 0.43 m/sec at a depth of 15 m, and a velocity of only 0.13 
m/sec at a depth of 30 m, so obviously wave-induced sediment transport is most effective on the 
shallower parts of the reef.   

The maximum movement of sediment due to waves takes place just seaward of where the waves 
break, usually on the edge of the windward reef.  Waves may lose more than half their energy here which 
often results in the formation of a coarse sediment deposit.  Waves may then reform and travel across the 
reef flat.  Shoaling of these reformed waves produces additional lose of energy resulting in further 
sediment deposition.  These reef flat deposits may ultimately form a cay upon which the reformed waves 
may break.  The importance of water depth in determining both maximum velocity of oscillatory currents 
from waves and the wave break point means that changes of water depth due to tides will have an 
 
 

10 

Copyright 2003.  Walter C. Dudley, KMEC, UHH. 

Mare 461 - Spring 2003 
 
important modulating influence on sediment motion caused by waves.  At high tide, small waves may 
pass over the edge of the reef causing very little disturbance to bottom sediments, whereas these same 
waves are very effective at putting sediment in motion at low tide.  Large storm waves, however, will 
produce maximum sediment transport with minimum energy loss during high tide.  Wave set-up itself 
will increase water depth further influencing sediment transport efficiency.  The bores formed as waves 
break may cause sediments put into suspension by oscillatory waves motion to move lagoonward across 
the reef flat and up surge channels.  

Tidal currents may move already suspended sediment toward the lagoon during flood tide and out 

through reef passes in a seaward direction during the ebb.  Tidal effects will naturally be greater in areas 
with macro-tidal ranges such as the GBR, but even in microtidal areas such as the Caribbean, tides may 
play an important role in both net sediment transport and in modulating wave-induced sediment transport. 
 Sediment transport due to other types of water motion has also been suggested.  Water motion of major 
ocean currents surrounding reefs may produce a background net transport of suspended sediments on 
reefs.  Space photography of the Leeward Hawaiian Islands has clearly shown masses of white, cloudy 
water moving out of atoll lagoons and joining the background flow.  Currents produced by density-driven 
circulation resulting from differences in temperature and salinity have also been proposed, as has water 
motion due to trapped or resonant long period waves with wavelengths of approximately 20 km, but little 
actual data is available on these potential sediment transport mechanisms.   

The efficiency of waves transporting sediments is not only influenced by the depth of water but 
also by the size of the waves.  Wave energy increases as the square of wave height, thus high-amplitude, 
long-period storm waves may have orders of magnitude more energy than everyday wind-generated 
waves.  Most really large pieces of reef debris, such as reef blocks and boulders can obviously only be 
moved by very high energy storm waves, but the impact of storm waves on smaller sediment particles has 
only recently begun to be appreciated.  It is now known that storms may move enormous volumes of 
sediment in a very short time.  Studies in the U. S. Virgin Islands indicate that as much as half of annual 
sediment transport there may take place during as little as two weeks of intense storm activity.  Large 
waves produce high velocity water motion capable of putting and keeping large quantities of sediment in 
suspension.  Wave set-up produced during storms may permit waves to travel across even normally 
shallow reef flats.  Water piled up in lagoons or in estuaries flows out through reef channels and passes 
transporting huge quantities of sediment off the reef into deeper water.  Velocities of such strong seaward 
flow of water off a reef system have been estimated at 0.5-0.8 m/sec and their power was dramatically 
demonstrated in 1979, when water flushed out of the estuary off St. Croix in the U.S. Virgin Islands 
moved the 65-ton Hydrolab.  It has been estimated that major tropical storms may remove the sediment 
stored on a reef during as much as 5 to 10 years.  Following a major storm, sediments will be redistributed 
by the normal processes discussed previously.  Particles too large to be transported by normal conditions 
will be left in place as so-called "lag" deposits.  Finer sediments will be transported to areas of lower 
energy such as lagoons and the deeper water of the seaward slope where they will be deposited to await 
eventual incorporation into reef rock or remobilization by the next major storm.  

A final sediment transport mechanism which operates on coral reefs is sediment movement by the 

wind.  Since most reef studies concentrate on submarine processes wind transport of sediment is often 
neglected, furthermore it may be difficult to differentiate between wind and wave deposited materials.  
Obviously coarse debris such as gravel can only be transported by waves and currents, but fine sand and 
silt is undoubtedly transported from exposed cays into protected lagoons by wind action. The effects of 
wind transport are, perhaps, most obvious on reef cays where boulders and vegetation interfere with and 
dissipate wind energy resulting in deposits of fine and medium-size wind-blown sand which in some 
cases may eventually form dunes.  Hurricane force winds are capable of transporting even coarse sand 
and granules, but such strong winds are usually accompanied by rain which tends to at least temporarily 
stabilize subaerially exposed sediments.   
 

 
 

11 

Mare 461 - Spring 2003 
 
Biologically Mediated Sediment Transport 
 

  Disturbance of sediments by the activity of animals is common in many benthic marine 

environments including coral reefs.  The process of sediment mixing called bioturbation is generally 
caused by animals which burrow in the sediments in search of food.  It is important because it permits 
buried organic matter to reenter the reef food chain.  Moreover, bioturbation also has a major impact on 
reef sediments.  Burrowing organisms such worms and Holothurians take in fresh sediment at one end 
and expel the processed sediment at the other.  As the sediment passes through their gut not only is 
organic matter removed but in some cases the sediment particles are also reduced in size due to chemical 
solution or abrasion.  Some organisms appear to segregate sediments according to size, moving fine-
grained material toward the surface.  Stirring of sediments tends to undermine and bury larger particles 
such as empty shells and pebbles.  This is important because once buried these particles are largely 
protected from both physical and bioerosion.  Experiments have also shown that stirring of sediments by 
organisms tends to leave shells such as those of pelycepods in a concave-up position, whereas wave and 
current action tend to leave shells in a more-hydraulically stable concave-down orientation.  The greatest 
overall effect on the sediment strata, however, is to destroy any internal layered structure by mixing the 
sediments.   

Not only is the internal structure of the sediment altered but the sediment surface is often 

Copyright 2003.  Walter C. Dudley, KMEC, UHH. 

radically modified.  In many sedimentary environments physical processes control the nature of surface 
features such as ripple marks, which are known as "bedforms."  On coral reefs, however, it is biological 
activity which often dominates the configuration of the sediment surface.  Many echinoids and gastropods 
disrupt the sediment surface by crawling over it.   Some herbivorous fish graze on surface algae and eject 
ingested sediment via their gills, whereas goatfish push sediment aside in their search for infaunal 
invertebrates.  These types of crawling and feeding activities are mostly nondirectional processes in that 
on their own they do not transport sediment in any particular direction.  However as already mentioned, 
sediments can be transported significant distances by water currents too weak to initially suspend the 
sediments.  Organisms that throw sediments into suspension may thereby induce significant sediment 
transport via weak currents.  This may be especially significant on deeper parts of the reef where water 
motion due to waves rarely attains sufficiently high velocities to put sediments into suspension.  So-called 
mound building organisms, which include various polychaete worms, garden eels, and shrimp are among 
the most important.  In the normally low-energy backreef lagoon environments of the U.S. Virgin Islands 
the dominant mound builder is the thalassinid shrimp, Callianassa.  Here mound densities in excess of 10 
individuals per square meter have been measured.  These tiny shrimp eject sediment 5 - 10 cm up into the 
water column.  Studies have shown that the activity of Callianassa may suspend as much as 3.9 kg of 
sediment per square meter per day, which once suspended is then wafted along by bottom currents.  
Obviously, in areas of low wave energy this is significant in inducing sediment transport.  Mound-
building organisms may actually produce a local change in the bottom topography which then affects the 
response of the substrate to physical processes.  Callianassa mounds may be as high as 30 centimeters 
and have steep side slopes near the angle of repose of the sediments (i.e. the steepest slope at which the 
sediment will remain stationary without sliding down slope).  This activity may reduce by as much as 
50% the current velocity necessary to suspend and transport sediments. 

Bottom slope and gravitational settling can further enhance biologically-induced sediment 

transport.  The plumes of sediment erupted by mound building organisms are generally ejected perpen-
dicular to the bottom.  On a sloping bottom gravitational settling will therefore result in net sediment 
displacement down slope.  In fact, any biological disturbance of sediments on a steep slope may result in 
some down slope motion contributing to sediment creep.  Even corals may contribute to down slope 
sediment transport.  Most corals have some mechanism for ridding themselves of sediment particles.  
These include action by tentacles, entangling in mucus, distension of polyps by absorption of water in 
order to shed the unwanted particles, and ciliary action.  As corals randomly reject sediment which falls 
 
 

12 

Copyright 2003.  Walter C. Dudley, KMEC, UHH. 

Mare 461 - Spring 2003 
 
on them, a net downward transport is produced and particles are moved from living coral toward sediment 
floored areas.  

Also important on coral reefs is directional transport of sediment by organisms.  Octopods, for 

example, prey on mollusks whose shells accumulate around their lairs thereby concentrating these coarse 
sediment particles.  The sand tilefish, Malacanthus plumieri, lives in burrows on sand flats adjacent to 
coral reefs.  They construct roofs for their homes from coarse coral debris which they carry from the reef 
to the sand flats, producing net transport of coarse debris away from the reef. 

In summary, sediment transport in coral reefs systems is accomplished by a combination of 

physical and biological processes.  Sediments are put into suspension by the rapid oscillation of water 
over the bottom as waves pass and by the activities of a variety of organisms.  Suspended sediments are 
laterally transported primarily by wave surge, and tidal and background currents.  Particles settle in 
response to gravity, which may produce some net sediment transport especially on steep slopes.  Under 
normal, everyday conditions some reefs may accumulate more sediment than they lose due to transport.  
However, violent storms have shown that they are capable of removing enormous quantities of sediments 
from reefs systems, thereby keeping coral reefs from becoming buried in their own sediments. 
 
Deposition of Sediment on Coral Reefs 
 

Before a sediment grain is finally deposited to become a more or less permanent part of the 

structure of a reef system, it may have taken a very circuitous route around and through a coral reef.  A 
sediment particle may originate as a fragment of coral is broken by wave action at the fore-reef and then 
be transported shoreward across the reef flat.  It may be repeatedly transported and temporarily 
redeposited on the reef flat before making its way to the calm waters of the lagoon or another low energy 
area.  It may become a permanent part of lagoon fill or be finally transported seaward off the reef into 
deep water by storm action.  Those sediment particles that do become a more or less permanent part of the 
reef structure require two conditions before final deposition.  First, the energy keeping the particles in 
suspension must be reduced enough to permit gravitational settling of the particles to the reef surface, and 
secondly, the sediment particles must be held in position and stabilized against further transport.   

As discussed above the energy of water motion on a reef system varies enormously between 

prevailing conditions and storm events.  In addition to varying with time it also varies spatially with large 
energy gradients in different directions over surprisingly short distances.  In general, wave energy 
decreases going from shallow to deep water, and from windward to leeward across a reef.  In addition 
there is a more variable decrease in wave energy going from more exposed to less exposed reef edges 
depending on the pattern of refracted waves.  As already mentioned, physical and bioerosion of reef 
material initially produces a large range of different particles sizes.  Large particles normally require high 
energy water motion to stay in suspension, whereas small particles remain in suspension with much lower 
water motion.  The overall reef energy gradient should therefore produce a decrease in grain size from 
shallow to deep water and from windward to leeward on a reef system.  However, the effects of 
bioerosion and the original micro-architecture of biogenic reef sediment particles produces a wide range 
of different particle densities. This results in hydrodynamic properties that deviate from a simple 
size:energy relationship as is often found in clastic sediments of terrigenous origin. Furthermore, the 
complex, irregular topography of a typical coral reef results in important local energy gradients.  In fact, 
many of the particles of diverse sizes and shapes produced by the breakdown of reef skeletal material fall 
directly into cavities within the reef structure.  These cavities, even those just below the high-energy fore-
reef margin, are low-energy micro-environments.  Sediments deposited in-situ like this are sometimes 
referred to as "internal" sediments, in contrast to "external" sediments which have been transported from 
another part of the reef system, and "exogenous" sediments which come from outside the reef system all 
together. 

 
 

13 

Mare 461 - Spring 2003 
 

In addition to internal sediments deposited in cavities in the reef, the irregular surface of coral 

reefs also produces a reduction of water motion known as baffling.  Baffling involves deflecting, 
absorbing and dispersing the energy of waves and currents.  Baffles range in size from the entire reef, 
which serves as a baffle producing the overall leeward gradient in reduction of wave and current energy, 
to individual organisms.  In fact any upright structure or object can serve as a baffle.  Spurs and grooves, 
sand cays, patch reefs, coral heads, and a variety of other organisms may all have baffling effects.  
Baffling structures may cause lateral depressions in the sediment as a result of scouring along their sides, 
but the overall impact is a reduction in current velocity producing increased sediment deposition. 

To keep a sediment particle from being re-suspended and transported by an increase in energy 

due to waves and currents it must somehow become stabilized.  Once again we find that coral reef 
environments are unusual in regard to the impact of organisms on sedimentary processes as they can play 
a major role in the stabilization of sediment particles.  On sand cays sediment deposits may be stabilized 
by terrestrial vegetation.  Underwater the process is more varied.  In some areas the roots of mangroves 
and Thalassia bind sediments on the reef flat.  On flat bottomed areas with fine sediment, the mucus 
secretions of deposit feeders may serve to hold sediment particles in place.  In many areas of sediment 
accumulation on a reef, benthic diatoms, fungi and most importantly mats of filamentous algae serve to 
bind sediment grains.  A study in Cane Bay, St. Croix, U.S.V.I. indicated that sediment movement on the 
fore-reef was largely controlled by the algally-bound surface sediment layer.  The algae was so efficient 
at inhibiting sediment transport that a critical energy velocity sufficient to rip up the algal mat was 
required in order to expose sediment grains and permit their suspension.  The effectiveness of algal mats 
is, of course, dependent on the continuity of the cover, the type of algae and the smoothness of the mat.  
Bioturbating organisms may, however, locally disrupt the mat decreasing its efficiency.  Some bio-
turbating organisms, on the other hand, tend to be sediment stabilizers themselves.  For example, 
chaetopterid polychaete tube worms, common on central Pacific and eastern Australian reefs, stabilize 
sand in constructing their tubes.  In some areas of Hawaii these worms are found at densities of thousands 
per square meter and may have a significant influence on sediment stabilization.  Finally, encrusting algae 
and some sponges may give a protective coating to parts of the reef surface, thereby sealing off sediments 
from future suspension and transport. 

The initial stabilization of sediment particles by biologic or other means allows time for long-

term stabilization through chemical or biochemical cementation which ultimately produces a solid, 
sedimentary reef rock.  Before examining cementation processes, however, let's look at the typical 
distribution of sediments on a coral reef and at variations in sediment distribution among coral reefs in 
different parts of the world. 
 
 

SEDIMENT DISTRIBUTION ON CORAL REEFS 

Copyright 2003.  Walter C. Dudley, KMEC, UHH. 

 

Earlier we stated that the entire coral reef could be considered a sedimentary rock.  We should, 
however, distinguish between two distinct types of deposits which make up a reef:  the rigid framework, 
and the sediments.  The framework is usually composed of interlocking colonies of hermatypic corals and 
encrusting calcareous algae buried in-situ.  Loose sediments which become part of the reef are deposited 
within this framework.  Geologists consider the framework as a type of sedimentary rock, however, here 
we are mainly concerned with the loose sediments and their distribution.  

We'll begin by looking at how sediment grain size and sorting vary on a coral reef system.  In 

general there is a correlation between particle grain size and the prevailing hydraulic energy of the 
sedimentary environment.  Thus we could expect to find the coarsest sediments in those areas with the 
highest energy of turbulent water motion and the finest sediments in those areas with the calmest 
prevailing conditions.  As an approximation this is true on most coral reefs.  Most other sedimentary 
environments also have a strong correlation between turbulent energy and degree of sorting of sediments, 
 
 

14 

Copyright 2003.  Walter C. Dudley, KMEC, UHH. 

Mare 461 - Spring 2003 
 
with high energy beaches, for example, having a high degree of sorting.  In spite of the generally high 
levels of turbulent energy found on coral reef systems, they are notable for their poorly sorted sediments.  
This can be explained by the fact that most reef sediments are organic skeletons which come in a variety 
of shapes and sizes, and many sediments are rapidly deposited near their point of origin without having 
the opportunity to be sorted by turbulent water motion. 

A useful way of conceptualizing reef sediment sorting is to divide the sedimentary deposits into 

three classes: (1) immature, (2) mature, and (3) lag sediments: 
(1) Immature sediments are basically "death assemblages" made up of organic skeletons near their source 
of origin and have their size, shape and sorting determined by that of the original organism (i.e. the Sorby 
Principle).  These are generally poorly sorted, unless strongly dominated by the remains of a particular 
type of organism. 
(2) Mature sediments are those that have been transported from one part of the reef to another and have 
been deposited in energy equilibrium with prevailing conditions of turbulent water motion.  These 
sediments tend to have the highest sorting found among reef sediments. 
(3) Lag deposits are normally made up of sediments transported to the site of deposition under high-
energy storm conditions, and which are too large and/or dense to be further transported by the normal, 
prevailing hydraulic energy of the environment.  They may also include coarse sediment formed in place 
by large organisms. 

Most reef sediments are mixtures of these three sediment classes.  The proportions of the 

sedimentary mixture are partly determined by the energy of the environment and partly by the ecology of 
the environment.  Areas with low hydraulic energy may not have enough turbulence to remove even fine 
particles and produce significant sorting, hence they may be dominated by immature sediments with 
additional fine sediments transported to and settling out at the site.  Areas with high turbulent energy may 
be dominated by coarse sediments of local origin as well as those transported to the site.  Fine sediments 
will generally be absent and sorting will be better than for many low energy areas.  The reason it is so 
difficult to make firm rules governing reef sedimentary processes is that reefs are subject to quite 
dramatic variations in energy conditions.  A storm may quickly change the sediment grain size and degree 
of sorting of a particular site.  Following a storm, prevailing conditions will begin to redistribute the 
sediments but leave lag deposits behind.  Lag deposits will produce poor sorting in a normally well-sorted 
area of moderately low energy.  Calm weather conditions and their low energy levels will permit locally 
produced fine sediments to remain in normally high energy environments producing poor sorting there.   
To further complicate matters, the important process of bioerosion normally produces sediments 

with a bimodal grain size distribution.  The smaller particles are made up of tiny fragments such as minute 
sponge chips excavated by bioeroders.  The larger particles are fragments of coral skeletons so weakened 
by bioerosion as to collapse.  Bioerosion therefore has a strong influence and in some cases may even 
control sediment sorting. 
 
Reef Zones 
 

In spite of the complexity described above, it is still possible to recognize sedimentary assem-
blages characteristic of particular zones of a coral reef.  This is true because the relative importance of 
sediment formation, transportation and deposition processes vary between zones.  Wave sorting will 
dominate in some areas, whereas gravitation settling will be significant in others, and still others will be 
largely dominated by biological processes.  As we discuss each reef zone, bear in mind that hydraulic 
energy usually decreases in both landward (lagoonward on atolls) and seaward directions from the edge 
of the fore-reef zone. 
 
Reef Front zone  

 
 

15 

Mare 461 - Spring 2003 
 

As you will recall the reef front zone extends seaward from the algal ridge, through a system of 
spurs and grooves, and often terminates with steep seaward slopes in relatively deep water.  Because of 
the change in depth from algal ridge to the deep seaward edge of the reef front, there is a wide range in 
available hydraulic energy.  This often produces a bathymetric gradient in grain size going from large 
blocks and boulders below the reef crest, through coarse fragments of coral and Halimeda sand at 
intermediate depths, to fine sand and silt near the deep water boundary of the reef.  Much of the fine 
sediment may have been transported from the lagoon by currents during periods of increased wave 
activity to settle out in the calm waters at the base of the reef front.  The seaward-most area of fine 
sediment may also contain a minor amount of fine pelagic particles such as tests of globigerinoid 
foraminifers and coccoliths, as well as siliceous sponge spicules of reef origin.  In some areas the fine-
grained sediments may be poorly oxygenated and partially anaerobic, containing a relatively high amount 
of organic matter. 

There is also a general decrease in sediment transport rates with depth across the reef front as the 

energy of water motion decreases.  However where steep seaward slopes occur, gravitational and 
biologically-induced gravitational transport processes are intensified.  Finally on the deepest parts of the 
reef front biologically-induced processes may completely dominate sediment transport. 

Particle sorting also tends to decrease with depth in response to decreasing hydraulic energy and 

addition of immature sediments which add larger particles to the fine sediments accumulating in low 
energy areas.  In contrast, there is almost no net accumulation of fine material in the shallowest areas, 
where sediments typically form coarse-grained coral-Halimeda conglomerates.  The floors of grooves 
along the reef front buttress zone are usually covered with a mixture of poorly sorted coarse sand and 
pieces of larger rubble. 

Copyright 2003.  Walter C. Dudley, KMEC, UHH. 

A comprehensive study of sedimentation on a Caribbean coral reef showed the expected decrease 
in grain size going from shallow to deep water in the reef front zone with three distinct modes occurring: 
granules, sand, and silt.  Each mode had its own distinct composition.  The granules were almost 
exclusively Halimeda plates.  The sand was composed of fragments of coral, coralline algae, mollusks, 
and benthic and pelagic foraminifers, and the silt was made up of fine carbonate particles with an 
abundance of sponge chips. 

Some studies have attempted to identify sediments from different zones of a reef by using special 
indicators.  In some areas deep reef front sediments have been distinguished from shallow reef sediments 
through the dominance of deeper growing species of Halimeda in the sand fraction.  A study at Moorea in 
French Polynesia found that different species of foraminifera could be useful in differentiating shallow 
reef front sediments from lagoon sands and sediments occurring on the reef flat.  The shallow reef front 
assemblages of foraminifers were dominated by large (> 500), hermatypic species such as Amphistegina, 
whereas assemblages in reef flat and lagoon sand areas were dominated by small, agglutinated species 
living embedded in cavities hollowed in sediment particles. 
 
Reef Flat 

The reef flat zones extends from the algal pavement through the an area of boulders, rubble and 
shingle to a sub-zone of coral, and finally to the sanded reef flat adjacent to the lagoon.  In general, the 
reef flat has mixed assemblages of mature and immature sediments, though on some reef flats a 
concentric zonal arrangement in grain size can be found going from coarse behind the high turbulence 
algal ridge to fine nearest the lagoon.  Gravity and bio-induced gravity transport are negligible on the reef 
flat because it is normally almost horizontal.   

In shallow grooves on the pavement and extending across the boulder zone are found very coarse 

sediments consisting of coral fragments, gastropod shells, and whole tests of foraminifers, such as 
Homotrema.  Sands occurring in the coral and sanded reef flat areas are frequently composed of smaller 
fragments of coral and coralline algae, Halimeda plates, broken echinoid spines and plates, and 
foraminifers, such as Gypsina.  Where low turbulent energy allows the deposition of silt, sponge chips 

 
 

16 

Mare 461 - Spring 2003 
 
and other fine carbonate debris dominate.  On some reefs there is a tendency for sands nearest the algal 
ridge to be composed largely of tests of foraminifers because of the abundance of these organisms living 
in this zone.  The composition gradually changes through the coral zone to sands dominated by Halimeda 
plates as the abundance of living Halimeda increases in this area. 

Copyright 2003.  Walter C. Dudley, KMEC, UHH. 

Sediments from the reef front and seaward parts of the reef flat may move leeward and 

accumulate in bars which may develop into sand cays.  These cays are highly unstable and migrate across 
the reef flat ultimately delivering their sediment to the lagoon.  In the meantime they serve as repositories 
of surplus reef sediment and under some conditions, with sufficient vegetation and cementation, may 
become at least temporarily stabilized.  These reef flat cays and their beaches are composed almost 
entirely of transported assemblages of mature sediments and totally dominated by wave-induced physical 
processes.  Though some subaerial cay sediments may be transported by the wind, almost all beach 
sediments are lifted into turbulent suspension by breaking waves and transported laterally by beach drift 
and longshore currents.   

Coral reef beaches are usually very steep and composed of large size particles.  Windward 

beaches may be made of boulders or shingle, and even leeward reef beaches are no finer than coarse to 
medium sand.  It is the large grain size which is responsible for the steep beach slopes due to the high 
rates of percolation into coarse sediments.  This produces a weaker wave backwash than up rushing swash 
which gradually carries sediments further and further up the beach face until a steep angle is achieved.  
During storms some beach material may be pushed over the beach berm toward the lagoon as overwash 
deposits or held in turbulent suspension and lost from the reef to deep water.  Since coral reef beaches are 
composed of carbonate sands which are less resistant to abrasion than silica sands, the grains undergo a 
significant mechanical reduction in size even under normal wave conditions.  Eventually the particles 
become small enough that they will remain in suspension and be transported into the lagoon or carried out 
of the reef system entirely. 

On many coral reefs the reef flat has the most complex sedimentology of all the zones.  The 

energy regime is constantly changing in response to minor variations in the size and direction of ocean 
swell and local wind-generated waves.  Tidal changes often further complicate the picture.  On parts of 
the GBR for example, the highest winds and hence strongest locally-generated waves usually occur at the 
same time each day, however, the timing of high and low tide is continually changing.  At low tide small 
waves are efficient at putting sediments into suspension and washing them toward the lagoon.  By 
contrast during very high water refracted waves may bend by as much as 180 and actually break on thte 
lee side of some reefs and cays.  In spite of their high variability, reef flats do serve as important energy 
buffers in the reef system by absorbing wave energy and leaving a relatively calm lagoon in their lee. 
 
Lagoon Zone 

For virtually all reefs which have lagoons, they serve as the most important sediment sink.  

Lagoons collect sediment washed from the neighboring reef flat as well as from patch reefs within the 
lagoon itself.  On some reefs prograding sheets of sand can be seen sloping down into the lagoon from the 
adjacent sanded reef flat.  Not only do sediments move from windward reef areas into the lagoon but in 
some lagoons may continue moving across the lagoon toward leeward reef areas. 

Lagoon sediments are typically medium size sands but may show a grain size zonation by depth 
with finer sediments in deeper water.  Only the very deepest lagoons however accumulate sediments as 
fine as silt.  Sorting tends to be poor often showing a bimodal grain size distribution due to the mixing of 
mature, fine sediments transported into the lagoon with coarse, immature sediments produced on local 
patch reefs.  In fact, local production of sediment within some lagoons actually produces a zonation 
depending as much on the abundance of contributing organisms as on water depth. 

The sedimentary environment of the deep reef front zone and the lagoon are similar in a number 

of ways.  Both have less hydraulic energy and are deeper than the reef flat and both may have large 
amounts of fine sediments which, due to low water motion, may become poorly ventilated and partially 

 
 

17 

Copyright 2003.  Walter C. Dudley, KMEC, UHH. 

Mare 461 - Spring 2003 
 
anaerobic with high concentrations of organic matter, thereby supporting a dense population of infaunal 
deposit feeders.  Both zones also have lower ambient light levels than other parts of the reef.  This is due 
to water depth on the deep reef front and, in the lagoon, is a result of high turbidity from suspended 
material.  Biologically-induced sediment transport processes are also extremely important in the lagoon.  
Currents in most lagoons are insufficient to erode sediment particles, however, high rates of sediment 
suspension may be produced by mound builders and other organisms.  The normally weak bottom 
currents may be capable of transporting these suspended sediments for significant distances before they 
settle out again.  Baffling by sea grasses also occurs in some lagoons which is important in stabilizing 
sediments. 

The general windward to leeward decrease in grain size found in some lagoons may be largely the 

result of short-term high-energy storm events such as hurricanes and typhoons, which are capable of 
producing high hydraulic energy even in protected lagoon environments. 

The occurrence of patch reefs in many lagoons has a major impact on lagoon sediment distribu-

tion.  They do this in two ways.  First patch reefs modify the circulation in lagoons by serving as 
obstacles to current flow.  The protected down-current side usually builds up a tail of deposited 
sediments.  Secondly, patch reefs add immature sediments to the lagoon thereby introducing coarse 
material.  Some researchers believe that the accumulation of coarse reef debris in the energy shadows of 
patch reefs permits colonization and growth of corals and results in the leeward propagation of these 
reefs.  Others argue that the accumulation and shifting of these sediments restricts the substrate suitable 
for coral colonization and reef growth. 

Even the accepted role of lagoons as the reef's most important sediment sink has been questioned 

by researchers.  It may be in some cases that as a lagoon becomes filled up it changes from being a 
sediment sink to a sediment source, with fine material actively winnowed and transported out of the 
lagoon and off of the reef system into deep water. 

 

 
Geographic variations in Coral Reef Sedimentology 
 

The sedimentology of coral reefs in different geographic areas varies due to differences in the 

importance of physical and biological processes and in the availability of various sediments.  One of the 
most fundamental differences in reef sediments is found between oceanic reefs far from land and coral 
reefs that lie adjacent to continents, subcontinents, or large volcanic islands.  In general, the sediments on 
oceanic reefs are almost entirely composed of calcium carbonate of local origin with only a very minor 
addition of pelagic carbonates, siliceous sponge spicules and diatom frustules, and aeolian dust of 
terrigenous origin.  However,  reefs near continents such as Australia and Africa or subcontinents like 
New Guinea and Madagascar may have a significant amount of terrigenous input.  In the giant lagoon of 
the GBR, for example, the carbonate to non-carbonate ratio is probably the most important parameter in 
explaining sediment distribution.  There tends to be a very abrupt change from carbonate-poor to 
carbonate-rich sediments going from shore toward the barrier reef.  This is not only due to the location of 
the source areas but also no doubt largely due to the ineffectiveness of physical processes in redistributing 
sediments through the deep water of the lagoon.  The picture is, however, complicated by the occurrence 
of relict sediments and by the effects of rising sea level since the last ice age.   

The influence of volcanic islands is demonstrated in studies of coral reef sedimentology 

in French Polynesia.  Inside the barrier reefs in Tahiti sediments off the mouths of rivers contain more 
than 75% terrigenous material whereas near the reef the lagoon sediments are more than 60% calcium 
carbonate.  Where the central island is much smaller, such as at Bora-Bora, the lagoon sediments are 98-
100% calcium carbonate in spite of the remanent volcanic structure, and in atoll lagoons sediments are 
>99% carbonate.  These sediments are dominated by fragments of coral and coralline algae, foraminifers, 
bryozoans and Halimeda. 
 
 

18 

Copyright 2003.  Walter C. Dudley, KMEC, UHH. 

Mare 461 - Spring 2003 
 

On the GBR even the distribution of carbonate-rich sediments is related more to source than 
physical processes.  One study found that the distribution of the five most abundant sediment compo-
nents, which together made up more than 90% of the reef sediments, was controlled primarily by the 
distribution of organisms which produced the particles and only secondarily by sediment transport due to 
wave and tidal currents.  For example, echinoderms make a significant contribution to sediments only in 
the muddy areas which echinoids favor.  Halimeda flakes, on the other hand, are a significant component 
of sediments only near the reef and decline to <1% on the shelf away from the reef.  The distribution of 
sediments from encrusting coralline algae are similar to that of Halimeda only more restricted.  This is 
probably because the encrusting coralline algae are thought to be more resistant to erosion than either 
coral or Halimeda and on the GBR may furnish a smaller supply of sediment than less erosion-resistant 
corals.  In other reef areas, however, encrusting calcareous algae contribute large amounts of sediment 
due to their high growth and turnover rates in spite of a sometimes deceptively small standing crop.  The 
distribution of the coral component of the sediments on the GBR is remarkably similar to that of 
Halimeda.  It has even been suggested that the abundance of Halimeda sediments could be used as an 
index of reef influence on the overall sedimentology.  Halimeda is, in fact, one of the most important 
sediments on many reefs worldwide and as such merits a closer look.  

There are three genera of codiacean green algae which are of special importance in modern reef 
sediments.  Penicillus, called the merman's shaving brush, produces extensive meadows in the Caribbean 
and may also make a significant contribution to sediments on the GBR.  Tydemania has been found 
growing abundantly in shallow areas of Indonesian reefs and was found to be common at depths below 8 
meters in the lagoon at Enewetak in the northwest Pacific.  Though once thought to be rare, this genus is 
now believed to be an important sand former on some Indo-Pacific reefs.  Only Halimeda, however, has 
truly global importance in tropical seas.  This genus, which superficially resembles a tiny cactus, appears 
to be able to colonize most zones of a coral reef due to its ability to survive in shallow, high energy 
environments as well as in deep, low light regimes.  There are, however, three reef areas where Halimeda 
populations tend to be especially large: in sand areas of the reef flat and lagoon, in the area just behind the 
algal ridge, and in the reef front zone.  On the seaward fore-reef slope at Enewetak, living Halimeda was 
found to cover from between 10% and 50% of the substrate down to depths greater than 110 meters, 
before finally disappearing at 140 meters.  It has been observed growing as deep as 150 meters in the 
Bahamas, much deeper than hermatypic corals. 

On many reefs Halimeda sediments are quite abundant even though the standing crop of living 

Halimeda appears to be relatively small.  This is because of the high growth and turnover rate of 
Halimeda as compared to coral and encrusting coralline algae.  Halimeda can shed and regrow fronds at 
an astonishing rate, with an individual plant producing a new segment every three or four days.  In the 
central GBR it has been estimated that Halimeda biomass can double in only 15 days, with an average 
production of 7 grams of CaCO3 produced per meter square each day.  Calculations have shown that this 
rate of production could equate to a lagoon sedimentation rate for Halimeda flakes of as high as 14 cm 
per 1,000 years. 

Halimeda forms both coarse sand and fine silt size sediment grains in the following manner.  

Breakdown of the plant's binding organic matter causes the shedding of individual lobes.  The lobes may 
then separate along the axial void into two halves of approximately equal size.  Pores, called utricles, 
which occur perpendicular to the surface of the segments, permit breakdown into fine sand and eventually 
silt-sized needles of aragonite. 

The importance of Halimeda in Caribbean and Bermuda coral reef sediments cannot be 

overstated.  In many West Indies sediments most sand larger than 1mm is produced by Halimeda and in 
many areas it constitutes more than 50% of all sediment.  Other common constituents to the coarse sand 
fraction of Caribbean reef sediments are coral and molluscan shell fragments, coralline algae, and the red 
sessile foraminifera Homotrema rubrum.  The fine fraction contains much unidentifiable carbonate silt, as 
well as sponge chips, sponge, holothurian and gorgonia spicules, and aragonite needles from Halimeda 

 
 

19 

Mare 461 - Spring 2003 
 
and Penicillus.  Aragonite needles in different areas of the Caribbean may have different origins.  In 
Florida Bay and the Bahamas they are produced by the codiacean green algae, whereas off Andros Island 
they appear to be produced by inorganic precipitation.  Other non-skeletal carbonates such as ooids and 
pellets are found in the Caribbean. 

On many reefs in Jamaica, Halimeda is the largest single component of the total carbonate 

Copyright 2003.  Walter C. Dudley, KMEC, UHH. 

produced, accounting for up to 80% of the sediment!  Jamaican reefs are of the fringing type, and like all 
fringing reefs most of the sediments must be transported seaward to keep from burying the reef from 
behind.  Here many reefs contain v-shaped chutes through which dammed-up sediments pour out onto the 
fore-reef producing detritus cones on the seaward slope.  These sediments are highly unsorted with large 
amounts of fine material.  Sediment transport through these chutes is thought to be most active during 
major storms. 

As a gross generalization, we can say that we generally find Halimeda and coral fragments to be 

more important in Caribbean reef sediments than in those of Indo-Pacific reefs, where encrusting coralline 
algae fragments and benthic foraminifers may dominate sediments. 
 
 

CEMENTATION, DIAGENESIS, AND BEACHROCK 
The internal structure of a coral reef is composed of the skeletons of in-place primary and 

 

secondary frame-building organisms, of loose sediments, and of cavities ranging from large voids beneath 
organisms to small pores in the skeletons of organisms.  With time this structure may be changed into a 
firm sedimentary rock, known as reef rock, and eventually into a dense, solid limestone.  This transition 
from reef skeletons to limestone can be divided into phases of binding, cementation, and finally 
diagenesis.  
 
Cementation 
 

The first phase in the consolidation of the reef material is binding of the corals and other primary 

frame building organisms together by so-called secondary frame builders.  The encrusting calcareous 
algae are perhaps the most important group of organism in binding the underlying reef material, as they 
cover the coral framework with a tough resistant calcareous skin.  On those parts of the reef most exposed 
to wave energy, lithothamnoid algae are important binding organisms especially on Indo-Pacific reefs.  In 
the Caribbean, Milleporina may play a major role as a reef binder on the reef crest and outer reef flat.  On 
the deeper fore-reef the colonial foraminifera Gypsina and encrusting red algae are important in 
contributing to binding and initial cementation. 

Bioeroding organisms also contribute to initial cementation and binding by boring holes into the 
reef substrate which fill with sediments that then may become cemented in-place.  In this manner some of 
the primary framework is gradually replaced by cemented sediments. 

Cements are also precipitated in cavities within skeletons, between loose sediments, and within 

sediment particles.  This process may begin very early with inorganic crystal growth having been 
observed just beneath the surface of living coral and calcareous algae.  Cements vary widely in 
composition and crystal form from pore to pore within the reef.  The most common cements are aragonite 
and magnesium calcites, which show diverse textures and fabrics (i.e. crystal orientation and packing), 
and may be present in both voids between skeletons and in internal skeletal pores.  A detailed study of 
cementation on the GBR found a significant cross-reef trend with the degree of cementation increasing 
from the inner to the outer shelf. Seaward reef margins were reasonably well cemented whereas leeward 
areas showed little inter-skeleton cementation and only rare cementation of unconsolidated sediments.  
This was related to two other cross-shelf trends on the GBR: (1) the percentage of loose sediment, and (2) 

 
 

20 

Copyright 2003.  Walter C. Dudley, KMEC, UHH. 

Mare 461 - Spring 2003 
 
the level of hydraulic energy.  Reefs near the outer edge are 80-90% primary or secondary framework as 
opposed to reef along the inner edge which are only 18-30% framework, the remainder being 
unconsolidated sediments.  Submarine cements were only rarely found within the pores of loose 
sediments, which is thought to be related to their high porosity and permeability.  It is possible then that 
the decrease in cementation from outer to inner shelf is related to the increase in loose sediment.  The 
distribution pattern of sediments is, of course, related to the hydraulic energy, but the formation of 
submarine cements has also been directly related to the hydraulic energy of the environment.  It is 
believed that large volumes of seawater must be pumped through a coral reef in order to precipitate 
substantial amounts of carbonate cements. Efficient pumping may be the result of pressure gradients 
produced by the build up of oceanic water against the seaward edge of the reef.  This could be accom-
plished by tidal processes and/or by wave action.  Tides could renew pore fluids with each tide cycle and 
on reefs with restricted lagoonal circulation, tides could also produce a hydraulic head between the outer 
reef and the lagoon.  Large surf would produce a hydraulic head with each breaking wave and as a result 
of overall wave set-up. 

A trend in degree of cementation similar to that of the GBR has been reported in Belize.  Other 
reef studies in the Caribbean have, however, found no clear zonation in degree of cementation and much 
work remains to be done to clarify reef cementation processes.  To further complicate matters, on fringing 
reefs and barrier reefs adjacent to continents or large islands, cementation may be related to ground water 
diffusing through subtidal portions of the reef.  It has also been suggested that the daily change in pH 
produced as a result of daytime photosynthesis and the night-time surplus of CO2 from respiration could 
result in cycles of dissolution and precipitation of cement in some reef micro-environments.   
 
Diagenesis 
 

Binding and initial cementation result in a highly porous, poorly consolidated, partially cemented, 
reef rock.  The process of diagenesis produces a more compacted, less porous, better cemented limestone. 
 This occurs mainly through repeated solution and reprecipitation of the reef carbonates.  Much of this is 
believed to be related to exposure to meteoritic waters (i.e. of rain water origin) and thought to take place 
in the vadose and phreatic environments.  The vadose zone lies above the water table and is characterized 
by slowly percolating fresh water.  The phreatic zone lies beneath the water table and though processes 
here are poorly understood it is thought to be an area of rapid chemical solution and reprecipitation.  
Reefs may be exposed to meteoritic waters at present as the fresh water table is known to extend below 
sea level beneath many reef islands.  But probably more significantly, most reefs have been exposed to 
meteoritic waters as a result of the lowering of sea level during the Pleistocene ice ages. 

The overall process of reef rock diagenesis is one of solution of the original skeletal carbonates 

and precipitation of low-magnesium calcite, but is much more complicated in its details.  For example, the 
carbonate mineral deposited by foraminifers and coralline algae is usually high-magnesium calcite.  It is 
more soluble than the aragonite of corals and mollusks and is therefore more rapidly replaced by low-
magnesium calcite.  The chemical replacement of corals is generally slower but can occur at varying rates 
which have different results.  Slow movement of fresh water through the reef rock can cause solution and 
reprecipitation on a small scale which preserves much of the fine structure of the original skeleton.  Rapid 
movement of fresh water, on the other hand, may quickly dissolve the entire coral structure leaving a void 
which will only later be filled with coarse calcite crystals.  To further complicate matters, different 
species of coral have different rates of alteration. 
 
Beach Rock 
 

 
 

21 

Copyright 2003.  Walter C. Dudley, KMEC, UHH. 

Mare 461 - Spring 2003 
 

Another type of sedimentary rock commonly found associated with but not unique to coral reef 
environments is beach rock.  The term has been used rather loosely to describe limestones with different 
morphologies, structures and cements, but of which all form in the intertidal zone.  The sediments which 
make up the rock are dominantly carbonate, but can range in size from boulders to fine sand.  It was once 
thought that beach rock was formed by meteoritic waters percolating through carbonate beach deposits, 
but the presence of beach rock on arid atolls with no fresh water indicate that there may be a variety of 
different mechanisms and cementation processes, including aragonite cements forming from seawater.  
Whatever the process or processes they appear to be related to tidal wetting during high water and drying 
during low tide which produces partial dissolution and reprecipitation of enough calcium carbonate to 
cement the beach deposits in place.  The thickness of the cemented strata tends to correspond to the tidal 
range, with only very thin deposits occurring in microtidal areas and deposits up to 3 meters thick found 
on the GBR.  In some areas beach rock appears to form quite rapidly, with soft drink cans and World War 
II artifacts having been found surrounded by deposits.  More precisely, beach rock has been reported to 
have formed within two years at Dry Tortugas in the Caribbean and in only six months at a site on the 
GBR.  In spite of the apparent rapid rate of formation, it is usually absent from highly mobile beach areas 
such as spits on the ends of cays. It has been suggested that vegetation may play a role in temporarily 
stabilizing cays long enough for beach rock to form.  Once formed, however, the beach rock armors sand 
cays and helps them resist erosion.  The presence of beach rock has been used in coral reef studies to 
indicate recent changes in the trend of the coastline and to mark the positions of older sea levels. 
Like other reef substrates beach rock is subject to both physical and bioerosion. Regional 

differences in beach rock bioerosion can be found.  In the Caribbean there is a rich and varied fauna of 
bioeroders made up of large numbers of boring and grazing organisms.  These organisms show a vertical 
zonation, with grazing species occupying the higher tidal positions.  Studies of the vertical zonation of 
bioerosion on raised beach rock have been used to estimate levels of ancient tides.  On the GBR, 
however, few boring organisms are present and grazing forms dominate bioerosion processes on beach 
rock.  This is thought to be related to the much greater tidal range of the GBR, which would leave less 
mobile boring fauna stranded for long periods.   

Beach rock, reef rock, and even well-consolidated reef limestones are all subject to erosion 

processes when raised above sea level.  The results of this erosion in a coral reef environment are rather 
unique and merit discussion.  One such product, called simply "guano", has been of important economic 
value for use as fertilizer.  It is, in fact, a deposit of calcium phosphate rock and was collected extensively 
from coral atolls during the last century.  One scenario for its formation is as follows:  Humus 
accumulating under trees is very acidic.  Bird dropping have a pH ranging from 6 - 7, and rain water is 
also slightly acidic.  As bird guano is washed by rain water and acidified by humus any phosphate goes 
into solution.  As this acidic solution seeps through the calcium carbonate reef rock, the calcium 
carbonate is dissolved and replaced by calcium phosphate, leaving behind a deposit of phosphate rock. 

In general emerged islands of reef limestone tend to be readily corroded by both rain and sea 
water.  The deeply etched, topography is termed "karst" by geologists and on land is characterized by 
solution features such as caves and sink holes.  A study of the shores of reef islands reveals three board 
categories of geomorphic features as you pass through the intertidal zone: 
(1) A supralittoral zone which is marked by pits, pans, pinnacles and honeycomb structures.  These are 
formed by both rain water and the chemical effects of the expansion of salt crystals from sea spray.  In 
addition, lichen roots, algae, grazers and mobile borers leave their impact. 
(2) A mesolittoral zone, which corresponds to the site of maximum wave action, is marked by overhangs 
with one or more undercut notches.  Erosion is both physical and biological, including mechanical 
abrasion by sand, hydraulic pressure from waves, chemical solution, and bioerosion. 
(3) An infralittoral zone lies just below the low tide line and may be marked by submerged undercut 
notches.  These features may be the result of abrasion by sand confined to narrow channels or simply be 
karst features inherited from a low stand of sea level. 

 
 

22 

Mare 461 - Spring 2003 
 
 
 

Copyright 2003.  Walter C. Dudley, KMEC, UHH. 

 
 

23 

