Overview of
Renewable Energy Potential of India

October 2006

Peter Meisen
President, Global Energy Network Institute (GENI)
www.geni.org
peter@geni.org (619)595-0139
Eléonore Quéneudec
Research Associate, Global Energy Network Institute (GENI)
leoqueneudec@hotmail.com
1

Table of Contents
Abstract
Introduction
I) General Information: Historic and current energy situation
a) Energy consumption and production up to 2005
b) Energy sources of power production in 2005
c) Localization of the different kinds of plants and transmission lines
d) India Energy grid

II) Sources of available renewable energy in India
a) Hydro power
b) Solar Energy
c) Wind Energy
d) Biomass energy

III) Forecasts and predictions for the coming decades
a) The position of India in the world of potential renewable energy
b) The electricity consumption forecasts for India as part of the emerging economies
c) The electricity generation capacity forecasts for India as part of the emerging economies
d) Projected energy consumption of India to 2030.

IV) Government commitment to renewable energy
a) Financing Sources and Incentives
b) Environmental Legislation

Summary and Conclusion: Could India meet its energy needs with renewable energy?
Bibliography

2

ABSTRACT
India has a vast supply of renewable energy resources, and it has one of the largest
programs in the world for deploying renewable energy products and systems. Indeed, it is the
only country in the world to have an exclusive ministry for renewable energy development, the
Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources (MNES). Since its formation, the Ministry has
launched one of the world’s largest and most ambitious programs on renewable energy. Based
on various promotional efforts put in place by MNES, significant progress is being made in
power generation from renewable energy sources. In October, MNES was renamed the Ministry
of New and Renewable Energy.
Specifically, 3,700 MW are currently powered by renewable energy sources (3.5 percent
of total installed capacity). This is projected to be 10,000 MW from renewable energy by 2012.
The key drivers for renewable energy are the following:
o The demand-supply gap, especially as population increases
o A large untapped potential
o Concern for the environment
o The need to strengthen India’s energy security
o Pressure on high-emission industry sectors from their shareholders
o A viable solution for rural electrification
Also, with a commitment to rural electrification, the Ministry of Power has accelerated
the Rural Electrification Program with a target of 100,000 villages by 2012.

The Ministry of Power has set an agenda of providing
Power to All by 2012. It seeks to achieve this objective
through a comprehensive and holistic approach to power
sector development envisaging a six level intervention
strategy at the National, State, SEB, Distribution, Feeder
and Consumer levels.

Introduction
In recent years, India has emerged as one of the leading destinations for investors from
developed countries. This attraction is partially due to the lower cost of manpower and good
quality production. The expansion of investments has brought benefits of employment,
development, and growth in the quality of life, but only to the major cities. This sector only
represents a small portion of the total population. The remaining population still lives in very
poor conditions.
India is now the eleventh largest economy in the world, fourth in terms of purchasing
power. It is poised to make tremendous economic strides over the next ten years, with significant
development already in the planning stages. This report gives an overview of the renewable
energies market in India. We look at the current status of renewable markets in India, the energy
needs of the country, forecasts of consumption and production, and we assess whether India can
power its growth and its society with renewable resources.
3

I) General Information: What are the energy trends in India?
To better understand the current situation in India and the future of the renewable
energies market, it is important to look at the trends in energy consumption, growth of the
current grid, and the availability of transportation and equipment used there.

Since thermal generation is based on burning coal or oil, increases in CO2 emissions, which
damage the environment and affect global warming, accompany this growth. As the graph
below shows, it also increases the dependence on imports, which will continue into the future
unless the policy changes.
a) Energy consumption and production up to 2005
Since the 1980’s, and still currently, India has encountered a negative balance in overall
energy consumption and production. This has resulted in the need to purchase energy from
outside the country to supply and fulfil the needs of the entire country. As we will demonstrate
later, the Government is more sensitive to renewable energy potential and has started to put
reforms and projects, incentives and legislation in place to convince investors and companies to
make the shift. These will be discussed in a later section.

India has had a negative Energy Balance for
decades, which has forced the purchase of energy
from outside the country.

b) The breakdown of energy sources for power production of India in 2005
India is a large consumer of coal, which makes up more than 57% of its total consumption.
However, more than 1/3 of energy consumed comes from renewable resources, predominantly from
large hydropower.

4

India relies heavily on coal energy to produce electricity. A strong second is hydro power,
followed by natural gas. The consumption of all renewable energies represents fully one third of
the total consumption. This is a significant figure, and we will see later that this sector has a
great future.
Following is a table of the actual plants and installations for producing power based on to
renewable energies. We will show that only a small fraction of the potential capacity of
renewable energies is currently being tapped.
ACTUAL INSTALLED
RENEWABLE - BASED PLANTS IN INDIA
Source
Windfarms
Windpumps
Small Hydro
(upto 3 MW)
Biomass Gasifiers
Solar PV

Units
MW
Nos

Installed
557
3289

MW

122

X 10 6
kW

2.12
825

Capacity exists to shift towards more
renewable energy, since only a fraction of the
available renewable energy potential has been
tapped.
Source: www.greenbusinesscentre.com

c) Distribution of the different kinds of plants and lines of transportation
As mentioned, India relies principally on coal for 57% of total energy consumption. As
we can see on the map, coal production is extensive and is located in central and north-eastern
parts of the country. Hydro power plants are distributed along the west coast from the southern
tip to about ¾ the way up the coast, in the extreme north, and some in the east from rivers
flowing from the Himalayas.

5

Except for the fact that the gas and products line don’t extend, the country has the largest
railway network in Asia and the second largest in the world under a single management. Roads
are taking developmental changes to the most remote corners of the country.

Source: http://www.eia.doe.gov/emeu/cabs/india/indiamap.htm

d) India Energy grid

6

Nearly 85% of the villages have been electrified, and there is a nationwide grid for the
transmission and distribution of power.

Source: www.geni.org
The electric network is extensive throughout India with 440 kW or 750 kW power lines.
The main power grid is still concentrated in the north on a north-west/south-east axis, from
7

Afghanistan to the Bay of Bengal and on a second axis from Bombay on the central west coast
to the north-east of India, through Bhutan.
The above map indicates that new 440kW power lines have been approved or proposed to
expand the network further. Those proposed lines will be located mainly on the east coast.

II) Sources of renewable energy available in India: What renewable energies are in the
Indian market?
We know where the non renewable energies – coal, oil and gas – are located and how
these fuels are transported, combusted, and the power transmitted throughout the country over
the power grid. Now, let’s look at the renewable energies – hydro, solar, wind and biomass – and
see where they are found.
a) Hydro power
The hydroelectric power refers to
the energy produced from water
(rainfall flowing into rivers, etc).
Consequently, rainfall can be a good
indicator to investors looking for a
location to implement or build a new
hydroelectric power plant in India.
It is, in fact, the case, if we
compare the map of Annual Rainfall
and the “Energy Map of India” on
page 6, that hydropower plants are
situated in regions of the major
rainfall.
The dominant annual rainfall is
located on the north/eastern part of
India: Arunachal Pradesh, Assam,
Nagaland, Manipur and Mizoram,
and also on the west coast between
Mumbai (Bombay) and Mahe.
Source: http://www.mapsofindia.com/maps/india/annualrainfall.htm
India utilizes twelve
8

primary hydroelectric power plants: Bihar (3), Punjab, Uttaranchal, Karnataka, Uttar Pradesh,
Sikkim, Jammu & Kashmir, Gujarat, and Andhra Pradesh (2).
If we consider the annual rainfall of Bangalore (central south), we see that most of the
rainfall occurs from May to November. Consequently, we can predict that hydro energy could be
harnessed during the rainy season. Good water management and storage allows for continuous
electrical generation throughout the year.

Annual rainfall in Bangalore

Source : http://www.globalsurfers.com/Weather/India.gif
Advantages of Hydro power
In India, small hydro is the most utilized renewable energy source for energy production.
Some key figures concerning small hydro in India:
•
•
•
•
•
•

•

Less than 25 MW is in the “small hydro” designation
There is a potential of 15,000 MW
Installed is 1,520 MW to date
4,096 potential sites have been identified
Technology is mature and reliable
Two types of technology are used:
o High-head systems
o Low-head systems
Ministry of Non-conventional Energy Sources is focused on:







nation-wide resource assessment
setting up of commercial projects
renovation and modernization
development and up-gradation of water mills
industry based research and development

b) Solar Energy
9

Because of its location between the Tropic of Cancer and the Equator, India has an average
annual temperature that ranges from 25°C – 27.5 °C. This means that India has huge solar
potential. The sunniest parts are situated in the south/east coast, from Calcutta to Madras.
Solar energy has several applications: photovoltaic (PV) cells are placed on the roof top of
houses or commercial buildings, and collectors such as mirrors or parabolic dishes that can move
and track the sun throughout the day are also used. This mechanism is being used for
concentrated lighting in buildings.
Photovoltaic (PV) cells have a low efficiency factor, yet power generation systems using
photovoltaic materials have the advantage of having no moving parts. PV cells find applications
in individual home rooftop systems, community street lights, community water pumping, and
areas where the terrain makes it difficult to access the power grid. The efficiency of solar
photovoltaic cells with single crystal silicon is about 13 % - 17%. High efficiency cells with
concentrators are being manufactured which can operate with low sunlight intensities.

Source: http://www.mapsofindia.com/maps/india

Annual temperature in Bangalore
10

Source : http://www.globalsurfers.com/Weather/India.gif
India has an expanding solar energy sector: 9 solar cell manufactures, 22 PV module
manufactures, and 50 PV systems manufacturers. Therefore, technology resources exist in
country and a growing market would lead to job growth in country.
b) Wind Energy
India is surpassed only by Germany as one of the world's fastest growing markets for wind
energy. By the mid 1990s, the subcontinent was installing more wind generating capacity than
North America, Denmark, Britain, and the Netherlands.
The ten machines near Okha in the province of Gujarat were some of the first wind turbines
installed in India. These 15-meter Vestas wind turbines overlook the Arabian Sea. Now, in
2006, there is an installed capacity of 4,430 MW; however, ten times that potential, or 46,092
MW, exists. (see page 12)
Wind Energy in India

Source : http://www.cwet.tn.nic.in/html/departments_wpdmap.html#
11

Advantages of Wind Power:
•
•
•
•
•
•

It is one of the most environment friendly, clean and safe energy resources.
It has the lowest gestation period as compared to conventional energy.
Equipment erection and commissioning involve only a few months.
There is no fuel consumption, hence low operating costs.
Maintenance costs are low.
The capital cost is comparable with conventional power plants. For a wind farm,
the capital cost ranges between 4.5 crores to 5.5 crores, depending on the site and
the wind electric generator (WEG) selected for installation.

Estimated Wind Power Potential in India

State
Andhra Pradesh
Gujarat
Karnataka
Kerala
Madhya Pradesh
Maharashtra
Orissa
Rajasthan
Tamil Nadu
West Bengal
TOTAL
Total No. of Stations in operation at the
end of February 2006
Total No. of Stations closed down in
March 2006
Total No. of Stations Commissioned in
March 2006
Total No. of stations in operation as on
31st March 2006

Gross
Potential
(MW)
9063
7362
7161
1026
4978
4519
1520
6672
4159
32
46,092

The wind power potential on a national
level, base data collected from 10 states
considering only 1% of land availability, is
around 46,092 MW.

59
1
1
59

12

Comparison between Fossil Fuels and Wind

Wind
Availability

Usable as it exists

Limitation on
availability

Inexhaustible resource

Transportation

Used where it is available or
transported where needed

Environmental
effect of use

Zero emission
Reduces our reliance on oil,
safeguarding national security.
Allows for self sufficiency.

Geo-political
implications

There is no adverse effect on
global environment. The whole
system is pollution free and
environment friendly.

Fossil Fuel
Have to be procured and made usable through
laborious and environmentally damaging
processes
Limited in reserves, expected to be completely
exhausted in the coming 60 years
Has to be transported from its source site for
further processing, exposing the environment to
pollution from accidents
Used in producing electricity, releasing green
house gasses

Over-reliance on oil as a resource has
undermined India’s energy security, e.g. OPEC
crises of 1973, Gulf War of 1991 and
the Iraq War of 2003.

The pollution saving from a WEG
With an average output of 4,000 kWh per year, savings have been estimated as follows:
•
•
•
•

Sulphur - dioxide (SO2): 2 to 3.2 tonnes
Nitrogen - oxide (NO) ; 1.2 to 2.4 tonnes
Carbon - dioxide (CO2) : 300 to 500 tonnes
Particulates: 150 to 280 kg.

The essential requirements for a Wind farm
An area where a number of wind electric generators are installed is known as a wind farm.
The essential requirements for establishment of a wind farm for optimal exploitation of the wind
are the following:
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

High wind resource at particular site.
Adequate land availability
Suitable terrain and good soil condition
Maintenance access to site
Suitable power grid nearby
Techno-economic selection of specific turbines
Scientifically prepared layout

Wind energy generation has limitations which will influence the extent and type of role it will
ultimately play in overall generation of electricity in India.

13

Limitation of a Wind farm
•
•

•
•

•
•
•

Wind machines must be located where strong, dependable winds are available
most of the time.
Because winds do not blow strongly enough to produce power all the time.
Energy from wind machines is considered "intermittent," that is, it comes and
goes. Therefore, electricity from wind farms must have a back-up supply from
another source.
As wind power is "intermittent," utility companies can use it for only part of their
total energy needs.
Wind towers and turbine blades are subject to damage from high winds and
lighting. Rotating parts, which are located high off the ground can be difficult and
expensive to repair.
Electricity produced by wind power sometimes fluctuates in voltage and power
factor, which can cause difficulties in linking its power to a utility system.
The noise made by rotating wind machine blades can be annoying to nearby
neighbors.
Some environmental groups have complained about aesthetics and avian
mortality from wind machines

d) Biomass energy
Biomass includes solid biomass (organic, non-fossil material of biological origins),
biogas (principally methane and carbon dioxide produced by anaerobic digestion of biomass and
combusted to produce heat and/or power), liquid biofuels (bio-based liquid fuel from biomass
transformation, mainly used in transportation applications), and municipal waste (wastes
produced by the residential, commercial and public services sectors and incinerated in specific
installations to produce heat and/or power).
The most successful forms of biomass are sugar cane bagasse in agriculture, pulp and
paper residues in forestry and manure in livestock residues. It is argued that biomass can directly
substitute fossil fuels, as more effective in decreasing atmospheric CO2 than carbon
sequestration in trees. The Kyoto Protocol encourages further use of biomass energy.
Biomass may be used in a number of ways to produce energy. The most common
methods are:
 Combustion
 Gasification
 Fermentation
 Anaerobic digestion
India is very rich in biomass. It has a potential of 19,500 MW (3,500 MW from bagassebased cogeneration and 16,000 MW from surplus biomass). Currently, India has 537 MW
commissioned and 536 MW under construction. The facts reinforce the idea of a commitment by
India to develop these resources of power production.
Following is a list of some States with most potential for biomass production:
 Andhra Pradesh (200 MW)
 Bihar (200 MW)
 Gujarat (200 MW)
 Karnataka (300 MW)
14






Maharashtra (1,000 MW)
Punjab (150 MW)
Tamil Nadu (350 MW)
Uttar Pradesh (1,000 MW)

The potential available and the installed capacities for Biomass and Bagasse
Source
Biomass
Bagasse (Cogeneration) in existing
sugar mills

Potential
16,000 MW

Installed
222 MW

3,500 MW

332 MW

Source: http://www.greenbusinesscentre.com/renenbio.asp

III) Forecasts: What are the general forecasts for the next decades?
Around the world, a growing number of nations have recognized the economic, social,
and environmental benefits of renewable energy and are enacting tax incentives and other policy
measures favorable to renewable technologies. In Germany, Japan, Spain, and a handful of other
countries, clear government commitments to renewable energy and strong, effective policies
have overcome barriers and created demand for these technologies, leading to dramatic growth
in renewable industries and driving down costs.
a) The position of India in the world potential renewable energy

Thanks to its location and geography, India enjoys abundant potential to all of the
renewable energies.

15

b) The electricity consumption and generation forecasts of India as part of the
emerging economies.
Growth in net electricity consumption is expected to be most rapid among the emerging
economies of the world, including India. According to the EIA, the annual average increase will
be about 4.0 percent from 2002 to 2025.
Emerging economies are projected to more than double their net electricity consumption,
from 4,645 billion kilowatt hours in 2002 to 11,554 billion in 2025. The projected growth in net
electricity consumption for emerging market economies is driven in large party by gross
domestic product (GDP) and population growth assumption.
Because of the links between reliable electricity supply, GDP growth, and living
standards, many of the nations with emerging economies are attempting to increase access to
reliable electricity supply.

16

d) Projected energy consumption of India for 2030
Currently, 45 percent of households in India do not have access to electricity. New
legislation has set a target of electrifying all households by 2010. As in the past, the ongoing
challenge in providing electricity is the ability of the poor to pay. India announced plans in
March, 2005, to continue subsidizing electricity consumption for rural and poor households that
use less than 30 kilowatt hours per month.

Estimates of Potential Capacities from Renewable Energy Sources (in MWs)
Source
Approx. Potential
Biomass energy
19,500
Solar energy
20,000
Wind energy
47,000
Small hydropower
15,000
Ocean energy
50,000
Source: India Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources
17

The sum of these renewable resource potentials, 152,000 MW, is greater than the current
total installed energy generating capacity of India.

IV) GOVERNMENT REGULATIONS: What is the current commitment of the
government regarding renewable energies?
India is one of the countries most involved in developing the use of renewable energies
and is trying to make the opportunity for investors more attractive than costly.
a) Financing Sources and Incentives
To promote renewable energy technologies in the country, the government has put in place
some subsidies & fiscal incentives. The Indian Renewable Energy Development Agency has
been set up under Ministry for Non-Conventional Energy Sources and is a specialized financing agency
to promote and finance renewable energy projects. Following is a short list of new measures:
• Income tax breaks
• Accelerated depreciation
• Custom duty/duty free import concessions
• Capital/Interest subsidy
• Incentives for preparation of Detailed Project Reports (DPR) and feasibility
reports
More details are as follows:









100 percent income tax exemption for any continuous block of power for 10 years in the
first 15 years of operations
providers of finance to such projects are exempt from tax on any income by way of
dividends, interest or long-term capital gains from investment made in such projects on or
after June 1, 1998 by way of shares or long-term finance
accelerated 100-percent depreciation on specified renewable energy-based devices or
projects
accelerated depreciation of 80 percent in the first year of operations
interest rate subsidies to promote commercialization of new technology
lower customs and excise duties for specified equipment
exemption or reduced rates of central and state taxes.

Ministry for Non-Conventional Energy Sources mix of fiscal and financial benefits:






2/3rd of the project cost subject to a maximum of Rs. 2.00 crore per 100 KW for
procurement of modules, structures, power conditioning units, cabling etc. to the
implementing agency. The balance cost on land, extension of grid lines, transformers, civil
works, foundation and erection and commissioning, etc. is met by the implementing
agency.
Up to Rs.1.0 lakh for the preparation of Detailed Project Report (DPR) for the grid
interactive SPV power projects.
2.5 percent of its share of project cost, subject to a maximum of Rs.5 lakhs for performance
evaluation, monitoring, report writing, etc. to the State Nodal Agency.
Interest subsidy of up to 4 percent to Financial Institutions including IREDA, Nationalized
Banks etc. for captive power projects of maximum capacity 200 KW by industry.

18

b) Environmental Legislation
2001 Energy Conservation Act







Focus on energy efficiency
Standards and labeling
Designated consumers requirements
Energy conservation building codes
Energy conservation fund
Bureau of Energy Efficiency

2003 Electricity Act






Combined several existing pieces of legislation
Intended to accelerate growth of power sector
Targets additional 10 percent from renewable by 2012 (1000 MW/year capacity)
Competitive market-based
Features include:
o National Electricity Policy
o Delicensing of generation and captive generation
o Public ownership of transmission companies
o Open access in transmission
o Freedom for distribution licenses
o Establishment of State Electricity Regulatory Commissions
o License-free generation and distribution in rural areas

Provisions and activities impacting the power sector:





Elimination of ceiling on foreign equity participation
Streamlining the procedure for clearance of power projects
Establishment of the Central Electricity Regulatory Commission
Formulating an action plan to set up the National Grid

State reforms impacting the power sector:








unbundling the State Electricity Boards (SEB) into separate generation, transmission and
distribution companies
privatizing the generation, transmission and distribution companies
setting up independent state electricity regulatory commissions
making subsidy payments for subsidized categories of customers by state governments
making tariff reforms by state governments
enabling legislation and operational support extended to the SEB/utility
improving operations of SEBs, particularly with regard to better management practices,
reduction of transmission and distribution losses, better metering and reduction of power
theft

Summary and Conclusion: Could India meet all energy needs with renewable energy?
India is a nation in transition. Considered an "emerging economy," increasing GDP is driving
the demand for additional electrical energy, as well as transportation fuels. India is a nation of
extremes. Poverty remains in areas with no energy services, while wealth grows in the new
business hubs.
Coal fired generation currently provides two thirds of the generation capacity, and hydropower
supplies the other third. Yet, India is blessed with vast resources of renewable energy in solar,
wind, biomass and small hydro. In fact, the technical potential of these renewables exceeds the
present installed generation capacity.
Unique in the world, India has the only Ministry that is dedicated to the development of
renewable energies: the Ministry of New and Renewable Energy. This bodes well for the
acceleration of renewable development throughout the nation -- both to meet the underserved
needs of millions of rural residents and the growing demand of an energy hungry economy.
19

The development and deployment of renewable energy, products, and services in India is
driven by the need to
• decrease dependence on energy imports
• sustain accelerated deployment of renewable energy system and devices
• expand cost-effective energy supply
• augment energy supply to remote and deficient areas to provide normative
consumption levels to all section of the population across the country
• And finally, switch fuels through new and renewable energy system/
device deployment.
In a report on the Indian economy by Deutsche Bank, in which countries were ranked by
attractiveness for outsourcing and off-shoring, India came in #1, well ahead of China.
India is currently experiencing strong economic growth, while at the same time attempting to
extend modern power services to millions still in poverty. Expanding electrical capacity is
essential. Renewable energy remains a small fraction of installed capacity, yet India is blessed
with over 150,000MW of exploitable renewables.
It makes sense to the authors that all efforts and investment should consider accelerating these
sustainable energy resources before committing to the same fossil fuel path as western nations.
The fossil fuel strategy will surely bring price volatility from dwindling supplies and added
pollution from carbon combustion.
Tapping India's wind, solar, biomass, and hydro could bring high quality jobs from a domestic
resource. Extending the electric grid between all states, and ultimately between neighbor nations
will expand international trade and co-operation on the subcontinent.
This report is meant only as an overview in hopes that it will encourage even more rapid and
extensive development of the renewable energy resources on the Indian subcontinent.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
• India Ministry of Non-Conventional Energy Sources (MNES)
http://mnes.nic.in/
www.presidentofindia.nic.in
• The President of India
• The Energy & Resources Institute (TERI) http://www.teriin.org/
• Trade Team Canada Environment (TTC Environment)
http://strategis.ic.gc.ca/epic/internet/inenva.nsf/en/h_eg02268e.html
• Maps of India http://www.mapsofindia.com
• U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA)
• http://mospi.nic.in/mospi_energy_stat.htm
www.geni.org
• Global Energy Network Institute (GENI)
• Canada India Business
http://canadaindiabusiness.ca/gol/cib/cib.nsf/en/ci00109.html
• ZenithEnergy http://www.zenithenergy.com/index.HTM
• Confederation of Indian Industry (CII)
http://www.greenbusinesscentre.com/renenegy.asp
• Centre for Wind Energy Technology www.cwet.tn.nic.in

20

