siemens.com/ruggedcom

Performance of the Rapid
Spanning Tree Protocol in
Ring Network Topology

 Michael Pustylnik, Mira Zafirovic-Vukotic, Roger Moore

White Paper | 2007

White Paper | RUGGEDCOM Performance of the RSTP in Ring Network Topology | 2007

Contents

03 

04

06

16

17

18

19

20

(1) Introduction

(2) Brief history of STP and RSTP
(2.1) Background
(2.2) Brief History of STP and RSTP

(3) Typical architectures in industrial networks
(3.1) Symbols and assumptions
(3.2) Derivation of a single link failover time
(3.3) Derivation of a root bridge failover time
(3.4) Link and root bridge recovery

(4) Detailed examples of the failover
and recovery process
(4.1) Single link failure
(4.2) Root bridge failure

(5) Empirical performance data

(6) Comparison of STP, RSTP, and eRSTP
with proprietary solutions

(7) Conclusions

(8) References

 Siemens AG 2014. All rights reserved

2

White Paper | RUGGEDCOM Performance of the RSTP in Ring Network Topology | 2007

(1) Introduction

Mission critical industrial automation applications require
a robust communications network that can recover quickly
from cable and equipment failures. The use of Ethernet
and IP based fieldbus protocols is growing rapidly and users
are gaining confidence. Modbus-TCP, Profinet, Ethenet/IP,
DeviceNet, IEC 61850, DNP, and IEC 60870-5-104 are just
some of the protocols being used today to interconnect
programmable logic controllers (PLCs), intelligent electronic
devices (IEDs), and sensors to each other and to central
control computers. Applications ranging from motion
control, process control, discrete manufacturing, and
the electrical utility SmartGrid have one need in common:
ensure high availability of the Ethernet network.

There are several approaches to providing high availability;
the ring based network topology is the simplest and most
pervasive. There are numerous proprietary ring-based
protocols available today from several vendors; these
methods do not interoperate with each other and lack
the scrutiny of an open standard. The Rapid Spanning Tree
Protocol as defined by IEEE 802.1D-2004 has equal if not
better performance than such ring protocols and provides
other benefits such as the ability to support any network
topology. Unfortunately, most public information regarding
RSTP performance is out of date and misleading as it is based
on older version of RSTP. This paper will provide an in depth
analysis of RSTP performance along with simple equations
for estimating network failover and recovery times so that
informed decisions can be made about its efficacy for a given
industrial network application. For a ring of twenty switches,
worse case failover times on the order of 100 milliseconds is
quite realistic which makes RSTP effective for all but the most
demanding of applications.

 Siemens AG 2014. All rights reserved

3

White Paper | RUGGEDCOM Performance of the RSTP in Ring Network Topology | 2007

(2) RSTP operation  IEEE 802.1D-2004

2.1 Background
Ethernet switches operate by storing and forwarding traffic
between their ports. The switch examines each Ethernet
frame and records the MAC source address and the port on
which it resides. Subsequently, when a frame arrives for a
given MAC destination address, the switch knows on which
outgoing port to send the frame. If a frame arrives and
its destination MAC address is unknown or is a multicast
address, the switch will flood the frame out all of its ports.
If switches in an Ethernet network are connected in a loop a
broadcast storm will ensue where a single broadcast frame
will circulate endlessly. This condition consumes all available
bandwidth on the loop making the network unusable. The
Spanning Tree Protocol (STP) allows the physical network to
contain loops by forcing some links into a hot standby mode.

2.2 Brief history of Spanning Tree Protocol (STP)
and Rapid Spanning Tree Protocol (RSTP)

2.2.1 STP [1]
The Spanning Tree Protocol was defined in the IEEE Standard
802.1D editions prior to year 2004. It was designed to solve
the fundamental problem of traffic loops and prevent acci-
dental loops in poorly structured and managed wiring clos-
ets. The key idea in STP is to force some links into a hot
standby mode in order to reduce the network topology to
that of a tree. The resulting tree spans (i.e. connects) all
switches, but eliminates loops. The steps in order to best
accomplish this process are:

1. Allow all switches to send messages to each other that

2.

3.

4.

convey their identity and link cost.
Elect a single switch, among all the switches in the net-
work to be a root, or central switch.
Let all other switches calculate the direction and cost of
the shortest path back to the Root using messages re-
ceived from switches closer to the root. Each switch must
have only one best way to forward frames to the Root.
If two switches servicing the same LAN exchange mes-
sages with each other, the one with the lowest cost to
the Root will service the LAN. The other switch will dis-
card all frames received from that LAN, thus opening the
link and blocking a traffic loop.

STP introduced a few terms which are frequently used below
in this paper:

Bridge Protocol Data Unit (BPDU): a specially formatted
Layer 2 frame used by STP to exchange information between
switches.

Bridge diameter: the maximum number of switches be-
tween any two end stations.

Root port: the port that offers the lowest cost path to the
root bridge.

Designated port: the port that propagates Root information
to the attached network segment.

Alternate port: the port that offers the next best cost path to
the root bridge and will become Root Port, if the current Root
Port loses connectivity with the root bridge.

Discarding port state: the state in which the port is only
sending and receiving STP BPDUs while blocking any regular
network traffic.

Forwarding port state: the state in which the port is sending
and receiving both STP BPDUs and regular network traffic.

2.2.2 RSTP  IEEE 802.1w [2]
The STP protocol was first published in the IEEE 802.1D-1990
standard and has proven to be a reliable method for provid-
ing path redundancy while eliminating loops. However, STP
was not originally designed for speed; when a link fails or a
failed link returns to service, STP requires at least 30 seconds
to restore network connectivity. RSTP is an evolution of STP. It
was introduced in the standard extension IEEE 802.1w, and
provides for faster spanning tree convergence after a topolo-
gy change. The 802.1D terminology remained primarily the
same, and most parameters have been left unchanged. How-
ever, RSTP uses several new concepts:

Taking advantage of physical link failure/recovery detec-
tion: while STP was passively waiting for a timer to expire to
react to a change in a link state, RSTP may act immediately
upon a link failure/recovery detection.

Proposal-agreement mechanism: this is a feedback mecha-
nism that takes place between RSTP-compliant bridges. While
STP was passively waiting for the network to converge before
turning a port into the forwarding state, RSTP is able to ac-
tively confirm that a port can safely transition to forwarding
without relying on any timer configuration. This leads to a
faster convergence.

Edge ports: all ports that have been configured as edge ports
are placed in forwarding state without checking for loops.

The new enhanced mechanisms allow RSTP to reduce failover
and recovery times to just a few seconds.

 Siemens AG 2014. All rights reserved

4

White Paper | RUGGEDCOM Performance of the RSTP in Ring Network Topology | 2007

2.2.3 Enhanced RSTP (eRSTP)
Although RSTP offered a significant performance
improvement compared to the legacy STP, it still
had several weaknesses:

1. Even the failover and recovery time of a few seconds was

not good enough for mission critical industrial Ethernet
applications

2. RSTP doesnt support LANs with a bridge diameter greater

than 40

Siemens Ruggedcom developed an enhanced version of the
RSTP algorithm referred to as eRSTP which is fully compatible
with the IEEE 802.1w RSTP protocol while enhancing it in
several aspects:
 eRSTP reduces failover and recovery times to just a few

milliseconds (5ms per a pair of bridges involved in the to-
pology change)

 eRSTP is able to operate in larger LANs with a bridge di-

ameter greater than 20

Being a proprietary enhancement, the eRSTP algorithm was
never published.

2.2.4 RSTP  IEEE 802.1D-2004 [3]
The IEEE Standard 802.1D-2004 edition is a very important
step in the STP/RSTP evolution because it:
 Obsoletes the legacy STP.


Addresses weaknesses of the IEEE 802.1w RSTP and
defines a significantly revised and highly optimized
version of RSTP. The new RSTP provides for very
short failover and recovery times (identical to those
of eRSTP).

Although not adopted yet by most networking equipment
vendors, the optimized RSTP seems to exceed the perfor-
mance of different proprietary solutions.

NOTE: Siemens Ruggedcom eRSTP has been enhanced to
incorporate the strengths of the optimized IEEE 802.1D-2004
RSTP, while still supporting 4 times longer bridge diameters
than those supported by a standard implementation.

 Siemens AG 2014. All rights reserved

5

White Paper | RUGGEDCOM Performance of the RSTP in Ring Network Topology | 2007

(3) Analytical Method for Calculating

Ring Failover Times

RSTP is a complicated protocol as it allows for any network
topology from a ring to a full mesh. Analytical determination
of the failover and recovery performance for an arbitrary
network and fault scenario is a non trivial exercise. However,
a ring topology is simple enough to perform such analysis
which is detailed in the rest of section 3 and the final result is
summarized here. The worst case ring network failover time
in case of a single link failure can be calculated using the
following formulae:

TL + (N - 3)*TPA , if N is even

TL + (N - 2)*TPA , if N is odd

where:

3.1 Symbols and assumptions
The symbol legend defined in the IEEE 802.1D standard
will be used in network diagrams to help illustrate
the state transition changes incurred by RSTP during
a topology change

Legend

Port Role

Designated

Root

Alternate

Port State

Forwarding

Discarding

Forwarding

Discarding

N

TL

-  Number of switches in the ring

-  Time required by a switch to detect a link failure

TPA -  Time required by a pair of switches to perform RSTP
Proposal-Agreement handshaking; equal to the sum
of the BPDU processing times in both switches of
the pair.

Transmitted BPDU

Legend

Designated Proposal

Root Agreement

The worst case failover time in case of a root bridge failure
can be calculated using the formulae:

Root with TC

TL + (2*N - 5)*TPA , if N is even

TL + (2*N - 4)*TPA , if N is odd

However, the worst root bridge failure case can be easily
avoided by adjusting some RSTP management parameters
and thus the failover time can be reduced to a value identical
to that of the single link failure case.

TL and TPA values may differ from vendor to vendor, from
product to product, and for different port types. For
RUGGEDCOM products, these values are:

TPA =  5 ms

TL

=  4-6 ms for 100Base-TX and 100Base-FX links

=   20 ms for 1000Base-X links

=   700 ms for 1000Base-T links (defined by the IEEE
Standard 802.3)

For the matter of our analysis we use the following
assumptions:

1. The ring contains an even number of switches N = n*2.

Derivation of the formulas for an odd number of switches
is very similar and, therefore, is omitted.

2. Links are not longer than a few kilometers, so BPDU frame
propagation time on the wire can be completely ignored.

A time variable TTC is used in the analysis. It is the time
required by a pair of switches to deliver a Topology Change
notification from one switch to another. As BPDU carrying
a Topology Change notification is only propagating in one
direction and no handshaking is involved, TTC is roughly
half of TPA.

 Siemens AG 2014. All rights reserved

6

White Paper | RUGGEDCOM Performance of the RSTP in Ring Network Topology | 2007

3.2 Derivation of a single link failover time

Figure 1 shows a simple ring network with all links intact
in a steady state condition; switch S0 is the root bridge
and switch Sn has one port in the discarding state. In order
to determine the worst case one should perform the analysis
for each possible link failure in the ring. Performing the
 analysis on all possible links would show that the worst
case is: the failed link is the one furthest from the switch with
an Alternate port; in this case, it is the link between
S0 and S1. Similarly, the best case would be the link
between S(n-1) and Sn. The worst case scenario involves
the maximum number of switches required for propagating
and negotiating RSTP information around the ring.

After the link failure, the ring is divided into two segments
S0-S-(n-1) and S1-Sn because connectivity between them
is blocked by the Sns Alternate port Sn-S-(n-1) . (Figure 2)

The following activities are required to restore the ring
connectivity  note that the activities are different for
the two segments:


Segment S0-S-(n-1) does not require any topology recon-
figuration because the old path to the Root is still valid
for all switches in that segment.

 Switch Sn must change its former Alternate port role

to Root and its former Root port to Designated; all other
switches in segment S1-Sn should swap their Designated
and Root port roles.

 Switch Sn must initiate a Topology Change notification
which must be propagated from Sn up to S0 so that S0
will flush its MAC address table on the failed link S0-S1.

Table 1 describes how the above activities will proceed at
different time points.

Figure 1:
Steady state before link failure

Figure 2:
Ring Segments after link failure

 Siemens AG 2014. All rights reserved

7

White Paper | RUGGEDCOM Performance of the RSTP in Ring Network Topology | 2007

Table 1. Time-line of RSTP actions by different switches in the ring (single link failure)

Time
TL

Switch acting
S0
S1

TL + TPA

S2

...

{S3,...,Sn-2}

Sn-1
Sn

Sn-1

...

{Sn-2,...,S2}

S1

S0

TL + (n-2+1)*TPA
+ (n-1)*TTC

Action Description
S0 doesnt do anything because it is the Root.
S1 detects the link failure and immediately ages out its Root info on port S1-S0.
S1-S0 is S1s only path to the Root, so S1 will declare itself as a new root bridge
and start Proposal-Agreement handshaking with S2.
New Root information comes to S2 from its only path to the previous Root, so
S2 replaces the previous Root info with the new one, puts S2-S3 to Discarding
state, sends Agreement BPDU to S1 and starts Proposal-Agreement handshak-
ing with S3.
In a similar fashion, the Proposal-Agreement handshaking will occur on each
hop up to S(n-1).
{S1,...,Sn-1} all agree about recognizing S1 as Root.

Successful Proposal-Agreement continues until Sn is reached. As Sn has a
better Root (S0) information, it turn its Alternate Port into Root Port and reply
with its own Proposal rather than Agreement. NOTE: When changing the
former Alternate port role to Root the switch will put that port to forwarding
and send a Topology Change notification to S-(n-1).
Sn-1 starts Proposal-Agreement handshaking with Sn-2. Also, approximately at
this time Topology Change notification also reaches S-(n-1).
The Proposal-Agreement handshaking occurs on each hop back to S1
(and the Topology Change notification propagates to S0).
All switches agree about the new path to the Root (S0) and all ports are in
Forwarding state.
Topology Change Notification reaches S0 and causes it to flush its MAC
address table on port S0-S1 (this is the purpose of TCN). Network connectivity
restored.

Figure
Figure 3

Figure 4

-

Figure 5

Figure 6

-

-

Figure 7

Figure 8

 Siemens AG 2014. All rights reserved

8

White Paper | RUGGEDCOM Performance of the RSTP in Ring Network Topology | 2007

Figure 3:
S1 declared itself a new route

Figure 4:
S2 agrees about S1 being Root

Figure 5:
{S1,...,S(n-1)} all agree about S1 being Root

Figure 6:
Sn turns its Alternate Port into Root Port
and replies with proper Root (S0) information

 Siemens AG 2014. All rights reserved

9

White Paper | RUGGEDCOM Performance of the RSTP in Ring Network Topology | 2007

Figure 7:
All switches agree about new Root Path

Figure 8:
Steady state after network recovery

So the overall failover time is

TL + (n-2+1)*TPA + max( (n-1)*TTC , (n-2)*TPA )

As we explained above, TPA is significantly longer than TTC,
and then the overall failover time is

TL + (n-2+1+n-2)*TPA = TL + (2*n-3)*TPA = TL + (N-3)*TPA

 Siemens AG 2014. All rights reserved

10

White Paper | RUGGEDCOM Performance of the RSTP in Ring Network Topology | 2007

3.3 Derivation of a root bridge failover time
Failure of the root bridge requires electing a new root bridge
which adds further complexity compared to the single link
failure analysis. Figure 9 shows the network in steady state
before the root bridge fails. After the root bridge failure,
the ring is divided into two segments S-1-S-(n-1) and S1-Sn
because connectivity between them is blocked by the Sns
Alternate port Sn-S-(n-1) (Figure 10). Each switch can have a
different bridge priority configured. Determining the worst
case failover time demands analyzing all cases where the
new bridge could become any one of the switches in the ring.
Repeating the analysis for all switches would show that the
worst case has S1 and S-1 becoming the next best root can-
didates with S1 taking precedence over S-1. Table 2
describes how RSTP will proceed at different points in time
for the worst case.

Figure 9:
Steady state before root bridge failure

Figure 10:
Ring segments after root bridge failure

 Siemens AG 2014. All rights reserved

11

White Paper | RUGGEDCOM Performance of the RSTP in Ring Network Topology | 2007

Table 2. Time-line of RSTP actions by different switches in the ring (root bridge failure)

Time
TL

...

TL + (n-2)*TPA

Switch acting
S-1 and S1

{S2,...,Sn-2} and
{S-2,...,S-(n-2)}
Sn-1 and S-(n-
1)
Sn

Action Description
Each of S1 and S-1 detects the link failure, ages out its Root
info
and advertises itself as a new root bridge.
Proposal-Agreement handshaking occurs in parallel
on each hop in two segments, up to S(n-1) and S-(n-1)

{S1,...,Sn-1} all agree about S1 being Root, while
{S-1,...,S-(n-1)} agree about S-1 being Root

Sn receives proposal BPDUs from Sn-1 and S-(n-1) at virtually the same time.
For the worst case scenario, we assume that the proposal from Sn-1 is re-
ceived and processed first (as you will see below, this case causes certain
network confusion and thus requires more RSTP actions to resolve it).
Since Sn doesnt have any information about the S0 failure yet, it will change
its old Alternate Port role to Root Port and reject the Sn-1s proposal by
sending its own proposal with better but actually obsolete information
about S0. This info will confuse all { Sn-1,...,S1} switches.
Right after that, Sn will process S-(n-1)s proposal about S-1 as Root. As Sn
receives that proposal from its only path to the Root, it immediately ages
out the old Root information and starts Proposal-Agreement handshaking
with Sn-1 again  this time proposing S-1 as Root. The new Proposal is now
fixing the confusion just caused by the previous Proposal about S0.
Sn-1 starts Proposal-Agreement handshaking with Sn-2 about S-1 as Root.

Figure
Figure
11

-

Figure 12

Figure 13

Figure 14

-

-

Sn-1

TL + (n-
2+1+1)*TPA
...

TL + (n-
2+1+1)*TPA + (n-
3)*TPA
TL + (n-
2+1+1)*TPA + (n-
3)*TPA + TPA

{Sn-2,...,S3}

The Proposal-Agreement handshaking occurs on each hop back to S2.

S2

S1

All switches in the ring except S1 erroneously agree about S-1 being Root.
S2 sends Proposal to S1 about S-1 as Root.

Figure 15

Being a better Root candidate, S1 responds with its own Proposal about
itself as Root.

Figure 16

-
Note that in the analysis Topology Change notification was not even mentioned because it propagates along with the initial
round of handshaking, i.e.much before the final topology is achieved.

Final round of handshaking starts from S2 towards S-1  this time for

S2

 Siemens AG 2014. All rights reserved

12

White Paper | RUGGEDCOM Performance of the RSTP in Ring Network Topology | 2007

Figure 11:
S1 and S-1 declare themselves as Root

Figure 12:
{S1,...,Sn-1 } agree about S1, while
{S-1,...,S-(n-1)} agree about S-1

Figure 13:
Sn sends obsolete proposal about S0
being Root

Figure 14:
Sn sends new proposal about S-1
being Root

 Siemens AG 2014. All rights reserved

13

White Paper | RUGGEDCOM Performance of the RSTP in Ring Network Topology | 2007

Figure 15:
All switches except S1 agree about S-1 being Root

Figure 16:
S1 rejects proposal about S-1 and declares
itself as Root

Figure 17:
Steady state after network recovery

 Siemens AG 2014. All rights reserved

14

White Paper | RUGGEDCOM Performance of the RSTP in Ring Network Topology | 2007

So the overall root bridge failover time is:
TL + (n-2+2)*TPA + (n-3)*TPA + TPA + (2*n-3)*TPA = TL +
(4*n  5)*TPA = TL + (2*N  5)* TPA

Please note that the described scenario is an uncontrolled
theoretical worst case. This extensive failover time can be
easily and significantly reduced by taking a controlled case
approach. If Sns Bridge Priority is configured in such a way
that it is the best root bridge candidate after the failed S0,
the scenario gets much simpler. Events in the network will
proceed like in the uncontrolled case until the step in Figure
12, but in the Figure 13 step Sn will advertise itself as a Root
to both half-ring segments, thus starting a final round of
handshaking. So the failover time gets reduced to:

TL + (n-2+1)* TPA + (n-2)* TPA = TL + (2*n  3)* TPA = TL +
(N  3)* TPA,

which is identical to the formula derived for the single link
failure case.

3.4 Link and root bridge recovery
The connectivity recovery mechanism in case of a link or root
bridge recovery is different from the link or root bridge failure
case in the following aspects:

1. Link detection time is not included in the network outage
time  RSTP activities only start after the link is detected
2. All links are available for the Root information propaga-

tion, so multiple reconfiguration of certain network
segments does not occur

As a result, network outage time in the case of a link or root
bridge recovery is always shorter than in the case of a link or
Root Ridge failure. Since only the worst case is of importance,
link or root bridge recovery case analysis is omitted.

 Siemens AG 2014. All rights reserved

15

White Paper | RUGGEDCOM Performance of the RSTP in Ring Network Topology | 2007

(4) Extrapolation to Meshed Networks

As meshed network topology analysis is more complex than
that of a ring, the first impression could be that RSTP perfor-
mance must be always worse in meshed topology compared
to a single ring. However, that is not generally true although
it is in some scenarios.

4.1 Single link failure
A meshed network can be looked as a ring network with
some inter-switch connections which result in shortcuts for
BPDU propagation. Figure 18 presents a simplified example
of this.
Analyzing this network behavior in the same case of the link
S0-S1 failure, shows that RSTP handshaking steps dont have
to go all the way from S1 to Sn. Information about the root
bridge (S0) location can already be obtained from the switch
S(n-2) or S-2 which will make the network recovery faster.
An observation can be made that meshed networks provide
shorter paths for RSTP information propagation which allows
handshaking sequence to complete faster. As a result, a
meshed network single link failover time should be same
or better than the failover time of the largest outer ring in
that network topology (assuming the given topology does
have such an outer ring).

4.2 Root bridge failure
Unfortunately, the additional complexity of meshed topology
causes root bridge failure failover times to increase compared
with the simple ring. The problem of the root bridge failure
scenario is that, after the failure, every switch holding the
obsolete Root information is feeding it back to the network,
thus confusing all other switches and making them reject
the right new Root information. The same problem exists in
the ring topology as well but, due to the topology simplicity,
there are no loops where the obsolete information would
circulate and the confusion is fixed very quickly. This is
not the case in meshed networks.

A meshed network can be looked at as multiple smaller
rings interconnected with each other at multiple points. This
topology allows the obsolete Root information to circulate
multiple times back and forth inside and between the smaller
rings. The network will not be confused forever - according
to the RSTP standard, the old information will be aged out
after it traverses the maximum allowed number of hops
(normally 20). However, the network outage time can last
as long as seconds. It is caused by the fact that multiple
switches in the network are continuously busy with

Figure 18

processing and forwarding contradictory BPDUs being
continuously received on different ports.

Root bridge failure in a meshed network is very hard to
analyze and predict, and a result may be totally different for
every specific topology. The common conclusion is though,
that the root bridge failover time grows exponentially as
more redundant paths are added to the network topology.
The root bridge failure in meshed topology is a well recog-
nized problem. Although some proprietary mechanisms
are offered to indirectly improve the RSTP performance,
no common solution is known for this case. This is the
price paid for the high level of link redundancy provided
by meshed network topology.

 Siemens AG 2014. All rights reserved

16

White Paper | RUGGEDCOM Performance of the RSTP in Ring Network Topology | 2007

(5) Empirical Performance Data

To corroborate the RSTP analysis, testing of failover
performance was done on a test network. The same worst
case setup is used on ring networks with 4 to 40 switches
as illustrated in Figures 1 and 9. The network consists of
RUGGEDCOM RS900 and RUGGEDCOM RSG2100 switches
interconnected with 100Base-TX links. The switches were
using the Rugged Operating System (ROS) v3.4 that has an
IEEE 802.1D-2004 RSTP implementation. A SmartBits Ether-
net packet blaster was used to generate high rates of traffic
and determine the number of dropped frames during the
failover event. 45 Mbps unidirectional traffic was generated.
No other application was running on the network. The
switches were configured in such way that MAC address ta-
bles are not purged by link loss, making the measured failo-
ver times due to RSTP only.

Failover performance was measured for the worst case link
failure and root bridge failure. Link failure was accomplished
by simply disconnecting the cable while root bridge failure
was done by powering off the switch. The failover time was
calculated by multiplying the number of dropped packets
(determined by the SmartBits) by the time between start
of transmission of two consecutive messages (which is a
constant). The measured and analytical failover times are
shown in Figure 19 and Table 3.

The measured failover times in case of a link failure are
smaller than the theoretical upper bound that is analytically
derived in Section 3.2 which is a result of somewhat
conservative choices for the failover equation constants.
Measuring the slope of the measured failover times yields
TP =2.1 ms to give more accurate results from the failover
equation. However, it is prudent to use the more conservative
time constants for any network planning activities.

Figure 19. Measured vs theoretical RSTP Failover
time in ring network if single link fails

Figure 19. Measured vs theoretical RSTP Failover
time in ring network if single link fails

Table 3. Measured vs theoretical RSTP failover time in
ring network if the root bridge fails

Number of
Switches in Ring

40
39
36

35

30

29

26

25

Measured
Failover Time
[ms]
93.50
142.53
244.69

124.53

67.59

100.31

59.85

89.71

Theoretical
Upper Bound [ms]

381
376
341

336

281

276

241

236

 Siemens AG 2014. All rights reserved

17

White Paper | RUGGEDCOM Performance of the RSTP in Ring Network Topology | 2007

(6) Comparison of STP,

RSTP and eRSTP with
Proprietary Solutions.

For many years, there was no standard redundant LAN solu-
tion that would provide short network recovery times suffi-
cient for Industrial Ethernet applications. As a result, some
networking equipment vendors offered different proprietary
protocols designed to solve the problem for ring network
topology. The table on the next page compares some of such
proprietary solutions with STP/RSTP and with each other.

Protocol

Vendor

Can be used in
multi-vendor
environment

STP
RSTP (802.1w)

HiPER Ring [4][5]

IEEE Standard Yes
IEEE Standard
Yes
Hirshmann

No

Turbo Ring [4][6]

Moxa

S-Ring [8]

GarrettCom

RS-Ring [8]

GarrettCom

RapidRing [7]

RSTP (802.1D-2004)

eRSTP

Contemporary
Controls
IEEE Standard

Siemens
Ruggedcom
enhancements
to IEEE Standard

NOTE: Proprietary solutions

No

No

No

No

Yes

No

Max Bridge
Diameter

Topology

Single ring link failover time
(for different number of switches)

40
40

Virtually
Unlimited
Virtually
Unlimited
Data Not
Available
Data Not
Available
50

40

160

Any
Any

Ring

Ring

Ring

Ring

Ring

Any

Any

15

10
>30 s
Several Seconds

20

200-500 ms, independent
of number of switches
<200 ms

<250 ms

<300 ms

<250 ms

<100 ms

<300 ms

<50 ms

<50 ms

<75 ms

<75 ms

<100 ms

<100 ms

 Siemens AG 2014. All rights reserved

18

White Paper | RUGGEDCOM Performance of the RSTP in Ring Network Topology | 2007

(7) Conclusion

RSTP performance is both predictable and repeatable
for failure and recovery of switches and cabling in
a ring topology. Precise equations can be used to
determine the network outage time; for a ring of
twenty switches, worse case failover times on the
order of 100 milliseconds are quite realistic - typical
RSTP performance is much better. Unfortunately, most litera-
ture to date states RSTP failover performance of several se-
conds based on results from the older IEEE 802.1w RSTP. The
analysis in this paper hopefully will put this misconception to
rest and give confidence to designers of such networks; RSTP
is more than capable of being deployed in very demanding
automation networks.

RSTP has other advantages over the ring protocols
such as the ability to support any network topology
including mesh, which allows for an even greater degree of
redundancy. RSTP tends to have faster not slower network
recovery times. RSTP works in a multi-vendor environment
and is supported by all the major switch vendors. Finally,
RSTP was created by and is supported
by an international standards organization, which
ensures scrutiny by peers and future harmony with the myri-
ad of other Ethernet standards under development. RSTP is
an excellent solution for many mission critical
industrial Ethernet applications, which is why it has
seen so much success to date and why it will continue
to be the dominant Ethernet redundancy protocol in
the future.

 Siemens AG 2014. All rights reserved

19

White Paper | RUGGEDCOM Performance of the RSTP in Ring Network Topology | 2007

(8) References

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

ANSI/IEEE Std 802.1D, 1998 Edition

ANSI/IEEE Std 802.1W, 2001 Edition

ANSI/IEEE Std 802.1D, 2004 Edition

High Availability Networks, The Industrial
Ethernet Book

M. Schaub, H. Kell, Redundancy Process
with Hirschmann Switches, ComConsult
Kommunikationstechnik GmbH, 2003

Stay Connected with Turbo Ring, Moxa Technolo-
gies, Inc.

RapidRingTM  Redundancy from Contemporary
Controls, Contemporary Control Systems, Inc., 2004

Secure Web Management User Guide for Magnum
6K family of Switches, Release 3.6, GarrettCom, Inc.

Siemens AG
Industry Sector
Sensors and Communication
Postfach 48 48
90026 NURNBERG
GERMANY

www.siemens.com/ruggedcom
All rights reserved. All trademarks used
are owned by Siemens or their respective owners.
 Siemens AG 2014

 Siemens AG 2014. All rights reserved

20

