SAFETY OF PYRETHRIN AND PYRETHROID PESTICIDES  

USED TO CONTROL ADULT MOSQUITOES 

      Questions and Answers for Public Health Professionals 

 

 

 

Division of Environmental and Occupational Disease Control 
Division of Communicable Disease Control 
California Department of Public Health 
 
1. What is the primary method used to control West Nile virus? 
Mosquito control is the most effective means of reducing the risk of people becoming infected 
with West Nile virus (WNV). Mosquito control targets both the aquatic, immature stages of the 
mosquito and the adult stage (CDHS, 2005a). 

Larval control 

 Control of larval mosquitoes is the backbone of most mosquito control programs in California. 
Pesticides added to the water to kill mosquito larvae are called larvicides. These products may 
be applied by hand, with a power backpack, from all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) or trucks, and in 
very large or inaccessible areas with helicopters and airplanes. Pesticides used for larviciding 
include bacterial products (Bacillus thuringiensis var. israelensis (Bti) and B. sphaericus (Bs), 
surface agents (highly refined mineral oils or monomolecular films that spread across the 
surface of the water), and the insect growth regulators methoprene and dimilin (chemicals that 
are added to the water to disrupt the normal maturation process of mosquito larvae). For more 
information on larvicidal agents, please refer to the fact sheet titled "Pesticides and Mosquito 
Control" (US EPA, 2002). 

Adult mosquito control 

Adult mosquito control is a means to rapidly knockdown biting adult mosquitoes. This can 
become necessary when larval control measures are insufficient or not feasible. Adulticiding 
may be initiated when there is evidence of significant WNV transmission in a region. The most 
common method of adult mosquito control (adulticiding) is ultra-low volume (ULV) spraying. 
ULV spraying (also occasionally called cold fogging) is the process of putting very small 
amounts of liquid (typically one ounce per acre or less) into the air as a fine mist of droplets. 
These droplets float on the air currents and quickly kill mosquitoes that come into contact with 
them. ULV adulticides are applied when mosquitoes are most active - typically early evening or 
pre-dawn.  
 
ULV spraying is usually done over geographic areas consisting of several acres to many 
square miles. Unlike agricultural or structural pesticide applications where the chemical is 

applied directly to a crop or structure, a ULV formulation is sprayed into the air column where it 
can contact and kill active mosquitoes. Aerial movement of the ULV product is an essential 
part of the application. ULV applications are only done during environmental conditions that 
ensure desirable product movement. 

2. What pesticides are most commonly used to control mosquitoes that carry West Nile 
virus? 

In California, two classes of pesticides, each combined with a synergist chemical, are 
commonly used for adult mosquito control. 

Pyrethrins are the active ingredients in pyrethrum, an extract of the African flower 
Chrysanthemum cineriaefolium. Pyrethrins are natural insecticides that act by blocking 
chemical signals at nerve junctions. 

Pyrethroids are synthetic pesticides that are very similar to pyrethrins in their chemical 
structure and mode of action. Permethrin, resmethrin, deltamethrin, and sumithrin (also known 
as D-phenothrin) are pyrethroid insecticides that may be used for adulticiding. Pyrethroids are 
more light-stable and have a longer duration of activity against insects than pyrethrins. 

Piperonyl butoxide (PBO) is a synergist that is usually incorporated with pyrethrins and 
pyrethroids. PBO enhances the effect of these insecticides by inhibiting cytochrome P450, a 
class of enzymes that break the down the pesticides. This allows the insecticides to be 
effective with less active ingredient than would otherwise be required. 

In addition, as with all pesticide formulations, the pesticides used for adulticiding contain 
inactive ingredients, typically petroleum distillates. 

Pyrethrins, pyrethroids, and PBO are widely used for home, garden, agricultural, and structural 
(building) pesticide applications. They are also found in products to control head lice or the 
fleas on pet animals. 

3. How do these pesticides work? 

Both pyrethrins and pyrethroids act on the nervous system of insects by inactivating sodium 
channels in the insect nervous system. Because mammals rapidly detoxify these compounds, 
humans are less susceptible to systemic effects by this mode of action. 

4. Who approves the use of these pesticides? 

The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) approves the use of pesticides nationally and 
the California Department of Pesticide Regulation (CDPR) approves their use in California. 
Before pesticides are registered by US EPA or CDPR, they must undergo laboratory testing for 
acute and chronic health effects. In these tests, laboratory animals are purposely fed a 
pesticide at high doses (usually the pure or technical material) for an extended period of time 

specifically to see if toxic effects occur. These tests help scientists judge how these chemicals 
might affect humans, domestic animals, and wildlife in the case of exposure. 

The US EPA has guidelines that require testing of pesticides for their potential to cause 
cancer. These studies involve feeding laboratory animals large daily doses of the pesticide 
over most of the lifetime of the animals. Based on these tests, as well as any other available 
information, EPA gives the pesticide a rating for its potential to cause cancer in humans. 

5. What are the potential health effects of pyrethrins and pyrethroids?  

Acute  

Pyrethrins 

In acute oral dosing studies with pyrethrins, rats exhibited difficulty breathing, lack of 
coordination, sprawling of limbs, tremors, aggression, sensitivity to external stimuli, twitching, 
and exhaustion (Litchfield, 1985). 

In humans, dermatitis is the most common health effect reported following direct contact with 
pyrethrins. Descriptions range from local erythema to vesicular eruptions (Ecobichon, 1990). 
These dermal effects may be due to allergenic or irritant effects of pyrethrins, or to irritation 
caused by PBO or by petroleum distillates used in the formulation process (O'Malley, 2001). 

Allergic rhinitis, conjunctivitis, and asthma have been reported following human exposure to 
pyrethrins. Rare but potentially severe reactions following direct dermal or respiratory exposure 
to pyrethrins include hypersensitivity pneumonitis, and nonfatal and fatal anaphylactic 
reactions (Carlson, 1977; CDC, 2000; Wagner, 1994; Wagner, 2000; Wax, 1994).The chief 
allergen in unpurified pyrethrins is a lactone compound, pyrethrosin (Penagos et al., 2001). 
Current pyrethrin formulations are purified and theoretically do not contain the lactone 
sensitizer. Sensitization reactions to purified pyrethrin products have not been well 
documented in the recent literature (Penagos et al., 2001). 

Pyrethroids 

Although allergic contact dermatitis and asthma due to pyrethroids have been alleged, they 
have not been well documented (Kolmodin-Hedman, 1982; Wagner, 1994; Penagos et al., 
2001). Unique skin paresthesias, manifested by numbness, itching, burning, tingling, and 
warmth, and often described as a sensation of insects crawling on the skin, have been 
described following exposure to certain pyrethroids. The paresthesias are due to the effects on 
sodium channels of the nerve terminals in skin (Penagos et al., 2001). 

Based on occupational studies, mild acute exposure may result in dizziness, headache, 
nausea, anorexia, and fatigue. At high doses, such as when workers have been soaked with 

concentrated pyrethroids, or after intentional ingestion, the following symptoms have been 
reported: muscular fasciculations, convulsions, pulmonary edema, and coma (He et al.,1989). 

Piperonyl Butoxide 

PBO causes skin irritation in laboratory animals, but no skin irritation was observed in human 
studies (NPTN, 2000; Penagos et al., 2001). No other acute health effects due to PBO alone 
have been reported. This may be partly due to the fact that it is not used alone but in 
conjunction with other pesticides. 

Petroleum Distillates 

The term "petroleum distillate" encompasses a wide variety of petroleum- based compounds. 
In general, this class of compounds may produce eye, skin, and respiratory irritation, and 
symptoms of CNS depression, such as headache, dizziness, nausea, and vomiting. Since the 
components of petroleum compounds are "volatile", they will "evaporate" from any solid 
surface within hours. 

Chronic  

Pyrethrins 

The data on reproductive toxicity of pyrethrins in animals varies by species. Rabbits fed 
moderate doses (up to 90 mg/kg) of pyrethrins during a sensitive period of pregnancy had 
normal litters. There were no birth defects in rabbit litters exposed to pyrethrins. Rats fed very 
high doses (5,000 mg/kg) of pyrethrins for three weeks before their first mating produced a low 
birth weight litter (CDPR, 2005). As is typical for many chemicals, human data on reproductive 
toxicity on pyrethrins are lacking. 

US EPA classified pyrethrins as "likely to be carcinogenic to humans by the oral route" in 1999 
(US EPA, 1999). This evaluation was based on results from standard two-year carcinogenicity 
studies where rats and mice were exposed to high-dose pyrethrins in their diet. In those 
studies, the incidence of thyroid tumors was greater in male and female rats exposed to 
pyrethrins than in untreated control rats. In addition, pyrethrin-treated female rats developed 
benign liver tumors. US EPA re-evaluated pyrethrins in 2004 and classified pyrethrins in the 
group: "Suggestive evidence of carcinogenicity but not sufficient to assess human carcinogenic 
potential" (US EPA, 2004). This category is described as one "which raises a concern for 
carcinogenic effects but is judged not sufficient for a conclusion as to human carcinogenic 
potential." Researchers found that farmers exposed to pyrethrins used for pest control on 
livestock had an increased risk of developing leukemia (Brown et al., 1990). Because farmers 
are exposed to multiple chemicals, these results require further study to evaluate the specific 
effects of pyrethrins. 

 

Pyrethroids 

Rats fed high doses of resmethrin had litters with decreased viability and body weight gain at 
the high dose in rats; rabbits fed high doses of resmethrin showed an increase in abortions 
and fetal resorptions (CDPR, 2005). In one animal study, permethrin impeded fertility but was 
not teratogenic. Permethrin and resmethrin are not mutagenic. 

Specific pyrethroids have been evaluated for their potential to cause cancer. Permethrin has 
been classified by US EPA in the category "Suggestive evidence of carcinogenicity, but not 
sufficient to assess human carcinogenic potential." Other pyrethroids are classified as possible 
human carcinogens (Group C) where US EPA concluded that there was limited evidence of 
carcinogenicity in animals. This category is similar to the "suggestive evidence of 
carcinogenicity" category. Pyrethroids classified as Group C include bifenthrin, tetramethrin 
and cypermethrin. These pyrethroids, which are not commonly used for WNV mosquito 
control, increased incidences of urinary bladder and liver tumors in mice (bifenthrin), testicular 
interstitial cell tumors in male rats (tetramethrin), and lung tumors in female mice 
(cypermethrin). Not all pyrethroid insecticides have been evaluated for cancer risk. For two 
pyrethroids  commonly used for WNV adulticiding (sumithrin and resmethrin), no US EPA 
evaluation is available. 

Some pyrethroids have tested positive in cytogenetic studies. For example, some pyrethroids 
(permethrin, cypermethrin, deltamethrin, and fenvalerate) increased chromosome damage 
(chromosomal aberrations) in bone marrow cells of mice after treatment with the insecticide 
(ATSDR, 2003). There is some evidence that chromosomal aberrations may predict cancer 
risk. 

Pyrethroids may affect endocrine hormone function at high doses. Permethrin was associated 
with gynecomastia (excessive development of the male mammary glands) in male Haitian 
refugees treated with the insecticide in the early 1980's (Brody, 2003). Since then, high dose in 
vitro studies have shown the anti-androgenic activity of several pyrethroids (Eil, 1990). Some 
pyrethroids have been found to be estrogenic in in vitro studies (Kim et al., 2004; Go et al., 
1999; Garey, 1998). However, adverse endocrine disruption effects (anti-androgenic or 
estrogenic effects) were not observed when esfenvalerate, fenvalerate, or permethrin were 
administered at lower doses to rats (Kunimatsu et al., 2002). The clinical implications of these 
findings are unclear and they need to be further investigated in terms of potential effects of 
pyrethroids on the development of both cancer and reproductive toxicity in humans. 

Piperonyl Butoxide 

PBO is not a developmental or reproductive toxicant in animals. 

Two published studies have shown that PBO administered long-term in the diet to male female 
rats and mice produced treatment related increases in liver cancer (Takahashi et al., 1994; 

Takahashi et al., 1997). However, several other studies in rats did not find evidence of 
carcinogenic potential (NTP, 1979; Maekawa et al., 1985; Butler et al., 1998). A more recent 
EPA (1995) review rates PBO as a "Group C (Possible Human Carcinogen"), although this 
classification pre-dates several of the available studies. As stated above, EPA defines Group C 
such chemicals as agents with limited evidence of carcinogenicity in animals in the absence of 
human data. 

6. How safe are these pesticides? 

No pesticide is completely safe. All individuals should take steps to minimize exposure to any 
pesticide. 

While the pesticides used for mosquito control can cause adverse health effects under certain 
circumstances, described above, the available data suggest that they are relatively safe when 
applied by ULV spraying according to label instructions for the reasons below. 

Pesticides are unstable.  Pyrethrins are extremely photosensitive and break down within hours 
in the presence of sunlight and air. Evening applications are likely to degrade by the morning, 
and much of the product does not reach the ground (Moore, 1993; Knepper, 1996). While 
pyrethroids are more stable, this varies with the compound.  Permethrin has a half-life of about 
five days in sunlight and resmethrin is more stable, with a half-life of about 30 days (Beasley, 
2000). The half-life of PBO is about four days in soil and up to two days in water (NPTN, 
2000). 

Very low dosage rates of pesticides are used. Typically less than one ounce per acre is 
applied either by ground or air. An application rate of 0.66 ounces of product per acre (0.0025 
pounds per acre), which is typical for pyrethrin products, equate to 0.000015 ounce per square 
foot, assuming that all of the pesticide reaches the ground. 

Pesticides are poorly absorbed through the skin.  Pyrethrins, pyrethroids, and piperonyl 
butoxide are all poorly absorbed through the skin (Franz, 1996; Wester et al., 1994). When 
applied directly to the scalp of human volunteers, as in shampoo applications, absorption is 
greater (approximately 8%) than when applied to the forearm (approximately 2%), (Wester et 
al., 1994). 

No evidence of exposure following ULV spraying. The only study to quantitate human 
exposure to pesticides following spraying for WNV found that there was no increase in urine 
metabolite concentrations of the metabolites of naled (an organophosphate), permethrin, or d-
phenothrin after ULV spraying compared with baseline (CDC, 2005). Use of sensitive analytic 
methods in these studies indicated that the urine pesticide metabolite concentrations 
measured were low (parts per billion). The concentration of urine metabolites were comparable 
with those measured in the general population (CDC, 2003b; Heudorf, 2001). In certain 

participants, investigators found an association between home and/or work application of 
pesticides and pesticide metabolite concentrations. 

The CDC has detected several permethrin metabolites in urine samples across a broad 
spectrum of the US population, suggesting that in spite of relatively low environmental stability 
and poor skin absorption, human exposures occur commonly (CDC, 2005). CDC did not 
evaluate the reason for permethrin applications or whether applications and exposures 
occurred indoors or outdoors. Indoor pyrethrin and pyrethroid applications are more persistent, 
and therefore indoor exposure levels may be higher than those that occur outdoors. 

Population health effects following spraying.  From 1999-2002, nine states reported 37 cases 
of pesticide illness related to pyrethroids used for WNV control, although the types of illnesses 
were not specified. Pyrethroids, primarily sumithrin, accounted for about 28% of all reported 
cases (CDC, 2003a). In New York City, ULV spraying with pyrethroids was not associated with 
population-level increases in rates of emergency-room visits for asthma in 1999-2000 (Karpati 
et al., 2004). In Sacramento County, aerial ULV pyrethrin applications were not associated with 
emergency department visits for specific diagnoses or cluster of diagnoses (Geraghty et al., 
2013). 

7. What are the health risks of ULV spraying for WNV control? Who is at risk? 

There is a small risk that people who have already been sensitized (are allergic) to pyrethrins 
may have an allergic reaction, such as allergic contact dermatitis or exacerbation of asthma, if 
they are re-exposed. 

There is a small chance that people who are chemically sensitive may experience a worsening 
of their chemically-related conditions if they are re-exposed. 

There is a small chance that people with preexisting asthma or chronic respiratory conditions 
may experience a worsening in these conditions if they are exposed. 

Individuals in higher risk categories like those listed above should contact their local mosquito 
control agency for additional information about local mosquito control activities. 

All individuals, especially pregnant women, should take simple precautions to avoid exposure 
to pesticides, including those used in mosquito control. 

Workers, especially mixers, loaders, and applicators of pesticide formulations, are at greater 
risk for exposure to pesticides than the general public. Workers who are exposed to these 
pesticides as a result of their regular tasks may experience health effects such as nausea and 
skin, eye, and upper respiratory irritation (Gupta et al., 1980). In order to minimize occupational 
exposure, employers should ensure that all precautions specified on the pesticide label are 
followed. 

8. How likely is it that the public will be exposed to pesticides used for WNV 
spraying? 
ULV technology, which uses very low doses of pesticides, and the practice of spraying 
between dusk and dawn, when most people are indoors, help to minimize exposure to these 
pesticides. Since the pesticides used are unstable in sunlight and air, they are rapidly 
degraded and it is unlikely that exposure will occur the day following spraying. Exposure to 
pesticides may occur if people are outdoors in an area while spraying is occurring. 

9. Do the health risks justify ULV spraying with pesticides for WNV mosquito control? 

Although 80% of human WNV infections are mild and often clinically unapparent, illnesses are 
potentially serious. The most common form of illness is WNV fever. The clinical course of WNV 
fever ranges from a mild febrile illness of several days' duration to debilitating fatigue, aching, 
and weakness that may last for weeks or months (Hayes et al., 2005). Approximately 1 in 150 
infections results in severe neurological disease with potential permanent sequelae. 

The spectrum of neurological disease includes meningitis, encephalitis, and paralysis. Of 
these, encephalitis shows a marked predilection for the elderly, while meningitis tends to be 
more prevalent in the young. In 2004, CDC reported 100 deaths out of 2539 cases in the US 
(3.9% case fatality rate) (CDC, 2004). 

Studies evaluating the effectiveness of WNV control have shown that ULV spraying for 
mosquitoes in areas with high rates of human disease results in a decrease in the rates of 
human infection immediately following ULV applications (DeFeyter, 2004; Nasci, 2004, 
Carney, 2011). 

A public health analysis conducted by New York City Department of Health determined that no 
significant adverse public health impacts would be expected from exposure to the adulticides 
when applied for the purposes of mosquito control and that any effects would likely be less 
than those of WNV (NYCDOH, 2001). 

10. How can pesticide exposure be minimized? 

Although mosquito control pesticides and the techniques used pose low risks, exposure to 
pesticides should be minimized. Some common sense steps to help reduce possible exposure 
to pesticides include: 

  Pay attention to the local media for announcements about spraying and remain indoors 

during applications in the immediate area. 

  People who suffer from chemical sensitivities or feel spraying may aggravate a 

preexisting health condition, may consult their physician or local health department and 
take special measures to avoid exposure. 

  Close windows and turn off window-unit air conditioners when spraying is taking place 

in the immediate area. 

  Do not let children play near or behind truck-mounted applicators when they are in use. 

11. Who should be contacted if illness is suspected due to exposure to ULV spraying? 
 
Those who feel they have experienced illness due to pesticides used for ULV mosquito control 
should: 

Call the Poison Control Center for immediate advice: (800) 222-1222. 

Consult their health care providers. Physicians are required to report all suspected pesticide 
illness to the local health officer. Health officers are required to file a pesticide illness report for 
all reported suspected pesticide illnesses, including occupational pesticide illnesses (OEHHA 
2005; CDHS, 2005b). Health care providers are now required to report pesticide illnesses to 
the local health officer using the Confidential Morbidity Report (CDHS, 2005c). State programs 
use these reports to conduct illness surveillance for a variety of conditions. 

Those with concerns about their pets should consult their veterinarian. 

 

California Department of Public Health 
September 2005 (updated June 2008, September 2014) 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

References Cited  

Agency for Toxic Substances Disease Registry (ATSDR). 2003. Toxicological profile for 
pyrethrins and pyrethroids. http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/toxprofiles/tp155-p.pdf 

Beasley V. 2000. Comparative toxicology of mosquito control strategies.  In, R.A. Cook (Ed.) 
Proceedings of the West Nile Virus Action Workshop, hosted by the Wildlife Conservation 
Society, and sponsored by the New York State Assembly. Tarrytown, NY. (January 19-21, 
2000). 

Brody SA, Loriaux DL. Epidemic of gynecomastia among haitian refugees: exposure to an 
environmental antiandrogen. Endocr Pract. 2003; 9:370-5. 

Brown LM, Blair A, Gibson R, Everett GD, Cantor KP, Schuman LM, Burmeister LF,Van Lier 
SF, Dick F. Pesticide exposures and other agricultural risk factors for leukemia among men in 
Iowa and Minnesota. Cancer Res. 1990; 50:6585-91. 

Butler WH, Gabriel KL, Osimitz TG, Preiss FJ. Oncogenicity studies of piperonyl butoxide in 
rats and mice. Human Exper Toxicol. 1998; 17:323-30. 

California Department of Health Services (CDHS). 2005a. Vector-Borne Disease Section. 
Overview of Mosquito Control Practices in California. 
http://westnile.ca.gov/website/mosq_control/Overview_Mosquito_Control_Practices_CA.pdf 

California Department of Health Services (CDHS). 2005b. Surveillance of Occupational 
Disease and Injury. Occupational Health Branch. Occupational Health Surveillance and 
Evaluation Section. http://www.dhs.ca.gov/ohb/OHSEP/Default.htm 
http://www.cwci.org/Graphics/physician.PDF  

California Department of Health Services (CDHS). 2005c. Confidential Morbidity Report. 
http://www.dhs.ca.gov/publications/forms/pdf/pm110.pdf 

California Department of Pesticide Regulation (CDPR). 2005 CDPR Database - Available 
Toxicology Summaries http://www.cdpr.ca.gov/docs/risk/toxsums/toxsumlist.htm 

Carlson JE, Villaveces JW.  Hypersensitivity pneumonitis due to pyrethrum. Report of a case. 
JAMA. 1977; 237:1718-9. 

Carney, R, Ahearn S, McConchie A, Glaser C, Jean C, Barker C, Park B, Padgett K, Parker E, 
Aquino E, Kramer V.  Early warning system for West Nile virus risk area, California, USA. 
Emerg Infect Dis. 2011; 17(8): 1445-1454. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Illnesses associated with use of automatic 
insecticide dispenser units--selected states and United States, 1986-1999. MMWR Morb 

Mortal Wkly Rep. 2000; 49:492-5. 
http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/mm4922a3.htm  

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Human Exposure to Mosquito-Control 
Pesticides -Mississippi, North Carolina, and Virginia, 2002 and 2003. MMWR Morb Mortal 
Wkly Rep. 2005; 54: 529-35. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2003a. Surveillance for acute insecticide- 
related illness associated with mosquito-control efforts--nine states, 19992002. MMWR Morb 
Mortal Wkly Rep. 2003; 52:629-34. 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2003b. Second national report on human 
exposure to environmental chemicals. Atlanta, GA: US Department of Health and Human 
Services. CDC 2003. http://www.cdc.gov/exposurereport  

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). 2004 West Nile Virus Activity in the United 
States. http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvbid/westnile/surv&control.htm 

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Third national report on human exposure 
to environmental chemicals. NCEH Pub. No. 05-0570. 2005. 
http://www.cdc.gov/exposurereport/report.htm 

DeFeyter S. 2004 West Nile Virus Response in Mesa County, Colorado Mesa County Health 
Department, Colorado. Session 6, Sixth National Conference on West Nile Virus in the United 
States San Jose, California February 8-9, 2005. 
http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvbid/westnile/conf/February_2005.htm  

Ecobichon DJ, Davies J, Doull M, et al. Neurotoxic effects of pesticides. In The Effects of 
Pesticides on Human Health. 1990. Baker SR and Wilkinson DF, Editors. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton Scientific Publishing Co. Pages 131-99. 

Eil C and Nisula BC. The binding properties of pyrethroids to human skin fibroblast androgen 
receptors and to sex hormone binding globulin. J Steroid Biochem. 1990; 35:409-414. 

Franz TJ, Lehman PA, Franz SF, Guin JD. Comparative percutaneous absorption of lindane 
and permethrin. Arch Dermatol. 1996;132:901-5. 

Garey J, Wolff MS. Estrogenic and antiprogestagenic activities of pyrethroid insecticides. 
Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998; 251:855-9. 

Geraghty E, Margolis H, Kjemtrup A, Reisen W, Franks P. Correlation between aerial 
insecticide spraying to interrupt West Nile virus transmission and emergency department visits 
in Sacramento county, California. Public Health Reports. 2013; 128:221-230. 

Go V, Garey J, Wolff MS, Pogo BG. Estrogenic potential of certain pyrethroid compounds in 
the MCF-7 human breast carcinoma cell line. Environ Health Perspect. 1999; 107:173-7. 

Gupta SK, Pandya MK, Jani JP, Kashyap SK.  Health risks in ultra-low-volume (ULV) aerial 
spray of malathion for mosquito control. J Environ Sci Health B. 1980; 15:287-94. 

Hayes EB, Sejvar JJ, Zaki SR, Lanciotti RS, Bode AV, Campbell GL. Virology, pathology, and 
clinical manifestations of West Nile virus disease. Emerg Infect Dis. 2005; 11:1174-9. 

He F, Wang S, Liu L, Chen S, Zhang Z, Sun J. Clinical manifestations and diagnosis of acute 
pyrethroid poisoning. Arch Toxicol. 1989; 63:54-8. 

Heudorf U and Angerer J. Metabolites of pyrethroid insecticides in urine specimens: current 
exposure in an urban population in Germany. Environ Health Perspect 2001;109:213-7. 

IARC. Overall Evaluations of Carcinogenicity to Humans As evaluated in IARCMonographs 
Volumes 1-88. http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Classification/index.php (2004) 
http://monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/vol30/volume30.pdf (1983) 

Karpati AM, Perrin MC, Matte T, Leighton J, Schwartz J, Barr RG. Pesticide spraying for West 
Nile virus control and emergency department asthma visits in New York City, 2000. Environ 
Health Perspect. 2004; 112:1183-7. 

Kim IY, Shin JH, Kim HS, Lee SJ, Kang IH, Kim TS, Moon HJ, Choi KS, Moon A, Han SY. 
Assessing estrogenic activity of pyrethroid insecticides using in vitro combination assays. J 
Reprod Dev. 2004; 50:245-55. 

Knepper RG, Walker ED, Wagner SA, Kamrin MA, Zabik MJ.  Deposition of malathion and 
permethrin on sod grass after single, ultra-low volume applications in a suburban 
neighborhood in Michigan. J Am Mosq Control Assoc. 1996; 12:45-51. 

Kolmodin-Hedman B, Swensson A, Akerblom M. Occupational exposure to some synthetic 
pyrethroids (permethrin and fenvalerate). Arch Toxicol. 1982; 50:27-33. 

Kunimatsu T, Yamada T, Ose K, Sunami O, Kamita Y, Okuno Y, Seki T, Nakatsuka I. Lack of 
(anti-) androgenic or estrogenic effects of three pyrethroids (esfenvalerate, fenvalerate, and 
permethrin) in the Hershberger and uterotrophic assays. Regul Toxicol Pharmacol. 2002; 
35:227-37. 

Litchfield, M. L. H. Toxicity to Mammals.  Pp. 114-115 in Leahey, J. P. (Ed.) The Pyrethroid 
Insecticides.  Taylor & Francis, London and Philadelphia. 1985. 440 pp. 

Maekawa A, Onodera H, Furuta K, Tanigawa H, Ogiu T, Hayashi Y. Lack of evidence of 
carcinogenicity of technical-grade piperonyl butoxide in F344 rats: Selective induction of 
ileocaecal ulcers. Food Chem Toxicol. 1985; 23:675-82. 

Moore JC, Dukes JC, Clark JR, Malone J, Hallmon CF, Hester PG.  Downwind drift and 
deposition of malathion on human targets from ground ultra-low volume mosquito sprays. J Am 
Mosq Control Assoc. 1993; 9:138-142. 

Nasci R. Vector control and West Nile virus in Fort Collins, Colorado 2003 Session 6 Fifth 
National Conference on West Nile Virus in the United States Denver, Colorado February 3-
5,2004. http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/dvbid/westnile/conf/February_2004.htm  

National Toxicology Program (NTP). Bioassay of Piperonyl Butoxide for Possible 
Carcinogenicity (CAS No. 51-0306). Technical Report No. 120. 1979. 

NPTN. Piperonyl Butoxide: Technical Fact Sheet. 2000. 
http://npic.orst.edu/factsheets/pbotech.pdf  

NYCDOH. New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene. Environmental Impact 
Statement, Mosquito-Borne Disease Control Programs, July 2001. 
http://www.ci.nyc.ny.us/html/doh/downloads/pdf/wnv/f3cpub.pdf 

Office of Environmental Health Hazard Assessment (OEHHA). Pesticide illness surveillance 
and reporting. http://www.oehha.ca.gov/pesticides/programs/Pestrpt.html 

O'Malley M. Regulatory evaluation of the skin effects of pesticides. In Krieger R, 
Editor.Handbook of Pesticide Toxicology. 2001. Orlando FL: Academic Press. Pages 299-334. 

Penagos H, O'Malley M, and Maibach HI. Pesticide Dermatoses. 2001, Boca Raton, FL: CRC 
Press. Pages 101-105 

Takahashi O, Oishi S, Fujitani T, Tanaka T, Yoneyama M. Chronic toxicity studies of piperonyl 
butoxide in F344 rats: Induction of hepatocellular carcinoma. Fund Appl Toxicol. 1994; 22:293-
303. 

Takahashi O, Oishi S, Fujitani T, Tanaka T, Yoneyama M. Chronic toxicity studies of piperonyl 
butoxide in CD-1 mice: Induction of hepatocellular carcinoma. Toxicology. 1997; 124:95-103. 

United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA). OPP. 1999. Evaluation of the 
carcinogenic potential of pyrethrins. Cancer Assessment Document. 

United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA). 2002. Pesticides and Mosquito 
Control. http://www.epa.gov/pesticides/health/mosquitos/index.htm 

US EPA. 2004. Pyrethrins: Report of the Cancer Assessment Review Committee. Third 
Evaluation . OPP-2005-0043-0010. http://www.epa.gov/oppsrrd1/REDs/pyrethrins_red .pdf 

Wagner SL. Allergy from pyrethrin or pyrethroid insecticides. J Agromed. 1994; 1:39-45. 
Wagner  SL.  Fatal  asthma  in  a  child  after  use  of  an  animal  shampoo  containing 
pyrethrin. West J Med. 2000; 173:86-7. 

Wax PM, Hoffman RS. Fatality associated with inhalation of a pyrethrin shampoo. J Toxicol 
Clin Toxicol. 1994; 32:457-60. 

Wester RC, Bucks DA, Maibach HI. Human in vivo percutaneous absorption of pyrethrin and 
piperonyl butoxide. Food Chem Toxicol. 1994; 32:51-3. 

For additional references regarding the safety of pyrethrins and pyrethroids and other 
pesticides used to control adult mosquitoes, please visit the Human Toxicology and Risk 
Assessment  section on the westnile.ca.gov website under the Resources tab>Mosquito 
Control and Repellent Information>Adult mosquito control: Refereed journal articles.  

 

 

