Real-time location of 
network intrusions

   Intelligence organizations

s    Sensitive government data networks
n
o
i
t
a
c
i
l
p
p
A

   Diplomatic missions

   Banks

   Military bases

   Telco carriers

FFT Secure LinkTM detects and locates unauthorized 
interference and illegal tapping of your sensitive or 
secure  fiber  optic  networks,  in  real-time,  before 
data loss or damage occurs.

Secure  LinkTM  can  use  your  existing  approved  single 
mode fiber optic communications cables as the sensor, 
dramatically reducing the installation cost and time, yet 
still detect and locate an intrusion to within 25 meters 
(75 feet) regardless of the size of the network.

FFTs ARaD advanced signal processing reduces nuisance 
alarms, while maintaining high sensitivity to intrusions.

Only from FFT - The ultimate force in fiber optic intrusion detection

www.fftsecurity.com

FFT Secure LinkTM is an advanced network 
security monitoring system, detecting intrusion 
attempts, tampering, or illegal data tapping 
activities to better than 25 meters (75 feet) 
along data networks from a just few kilometers 
to thousands of kilometers in length.

The simple installation, reliability and 
maintenance free operation delivers the lowest 
Total Cost of Ownership (TCO) of any network 
intrusion detection solution in the market.

Key Benefits

 

 

 

 

Know  24/7  if  threats  from  illegal  data  tapping 
or  interference  occur  and  precisely  where  to 
dispatch  your  security  or  maintenance  staff  to 
minimize the risk of data loss and downtime.

A  cost-effective  solution  as  only  one  system  is 
required  for  single-ended  networks  up  to  40km 
or  25  miles  long.  Up  to  80km  or  50  miles  in  a 
ring  configuration.  Subject  to  approval,  Secure 
LinkTM may be able to use your existing network 
infrastructure and cable.

Lowest  ongoing  Total  Cost  of  Ownership  (TCO) 
as there are no electronics or power in the field. 
Secure  LinkTM  is  easy  and  economical  to  install 
and there is no field maintenance.

Security  staff  can  have  faith  in  the  system  as 
Secure  LinkTM  delivers  the  highest  levels  of 
detection  simultaneously  with  an  extremely  low 
Nuisance Alarm Rate due to the intelligent event 
discrimination and analysis utilized.

How It Works

Simple to install and operate, the FFT Secure LinkTM system delivers truly outstanding levels of detection and location combined 
with one of the lowest Nuisance Alarm Rates available. It is maintenance free; operating easily and reliably under a wide range 
of operational and environmental conditionsday after day, year after year.

At the heart of the system is the intelligence built into the Secure LinkTM Controller. A laser beam is transmitted along your existing fiber 
optic communications cable, and the returned signal is automatically monitored and analyzed for disturbances. This same signal is 

Existing fiber optic cable bundle

Start sensor

End sensor

Inactive lead-in cable

Interface to CCTV,
relays, SMS, email etc.

Secure LinkTM 
Controller

FFT CAMSTM 
System

Operators Console

Located within a secure control room remote from the network

then digitally processed to identify and remove nuisance alarms.

Simple and intuitive to use, FFT Secure LinkTM delivers the precise 
information your security staff need, combined with the ability to 
interface and activate CCTV systems, lighting, MODBUS, email, 
plus a broad range of external devices and systems.

The area or zone where alarms are triggered along with the 
GPS co-ordinates is instantly displayed onto a sitemap, and 
the event is automatically logged into a secure database.

A signal can then be sent via Ethernet directly to a high level 
command and control system, CCTV camera system, mobile 
device, email, or other external monitoring.

10 Key Reasons Why You Can Depend On FFT

Experience  Hundreds of major sites and thousands of kilometers of intrusion detection installed around the world

Independently Tested  FFT consistently delivers quality intrusion detection solutions, backed by 
independent testing

Stability  The worlds most experienced fiber optic security sensing company, operating since 1994

Value Proposition  Secure LinkTM delivers outstanding price and performance benefits

Technology  FFTs R&D and product development programs ensure you always have the very latest and 
most powerful technology, and systems are easily updated with the latest algorithms and signatures

Quality  Certified ISO 9001:2008

The Right Products  Designed and developed by FFT specifically for military & industrial applications

Reliability  All FFT systems come with a two year hardware and software warranty

Support  FFT has global support capability through its international offices

Availability  FFT has partners located around the world

FFT Secure LinkTM is the ultimate fiber optic network intrusion detection and location system

About FFT

hundreds 

of  major 

site 
With 
installations  in  some  of  the  most 
hostile  environments  on  the  planet, 
FFT  has 
real-world 
experience  to  deliver  highly  reliable 
yet  cost-effective  intrusion  detection 
and location solutions.

the  proven 

The  operator  interface  to  Secure  LinkTM  is  available  in  a  range  of 
languages  including  English,  Arabic,  French,  Russian,  Spanish, 
Japanese, and Chinese. Additional languages are easily added.

Future Fibre Technologies business is 
totally focused on the security industry. 
FFT is the world leader in the design 
and development of fiber optic sensing 
technologies for security applications 
and  the  global  technology  of  choice 
for  perimeter 
intrusion  detection, 
network  protection,  and  buried 
pipeline monitoring for TPI.

Features

    Provides valuable real-time early warning of unauthorized access
    A single system protects up to 80km or 50 miles of network
    Locate cable interference to 25 meters (75 feet) or better
    Low total cost of ownership
    Two year warranty
    No electronics or power in the field

FFT Secure LinkTM Specifications

Fiber Optic Sensor 
 

Sensing Configuration  
 

Location Accuracy  

Can use existing dark single mode fibers if suitable, or FFTs custom direct burial single mode fiber optic sensor cable
Expected life >20 years

Distributed sensor with a total optical path length of up to 80km or 50 miles of network in a ring configuration protected 
per controller. Total power budget of 25dB. Multiple systems can protect larger networksup to thousands of miles

Within 25 meters or 75 feet anywhere along the network (or better)

Probability of Detection (POD) 

Extremely high due to intelligent signal processing and analysis of disturbances

Nuisance Alarm Rate (NAR) 

Minimal due to multi-parameter intelligent signal analysis, discarding non-intrusion and environmental events

Operating Temperature Range 

FFT Sensor Cables: -22C to +70C  (-30F to +160F)

Controller Dimensions/Weight 
 

177mmH x 482mmW x 497mmD (7.0H x 19.0W x 19.6D)
Weight 24kg (53lbs), 19 rack mounted, 4U high

Electrical Specifications 
 
 

Input voltage 110-240V AC, 50-60Hz, auto ranging, 160 watts consumption, redundant supplies. 
Optional 48V DC available. 
Note: All field installed components are passive and require no power, communications, or electronics on the network

System Interface  
 
 
 

Alarm Monitoring 
 

Warranty 
 

Seasonal Calibration 

Zone Length & Number 

Contact FFT 

TCP/IP via FFT CAMSTM (Central Alarm Monitoring System) software
 Optional dry contacts
 Optional software development kit available to interface to a range of security management systems and devices 
including Lenel, Milestone, Bosch VMS, Indigo Vision, EBI, P2000, C-Cure 8000, MODBUS PLCs, Pelco, and more

Real-time distributed monitoringprovides an intuitive map-based operator GUI, and interfaces to CCTV systems, 
MODBUS, email systems, external SMS systems etc via TCP/IP

Comprehensive two year warranty on hardware and software with ongoing warranty extension program 
available for the life of the product

No seasonal calibration or adjustments required

Infinitely variable Virtual Zones are created in the FFT CAMSTM software to suit specific site requirements

EMAIL | info@fftsecurity.com 

WEB | www.fftsecurity.com

AMERICAS

ASIA PACIFIC

EUROPE

INDIA

MIDDLE EAST

Future Fibre Technologies (US) Inc.

Future Fibre Technologies Pty Ltd

Future Fibre Technologies Limited

Future Fibre Technologies

800 West El Camino Real, Suite 180 
Mountain View CA 94040 USA

10 Hartnett Close 
Mulgrave VIC 3170 Australia

TOLL FREE +1 (877) 650 8900 
OUTSIDE USA +1 (650) 903 2222

PH +61 3 9590 3100

3000 Hillswood Drive 
Hillswood Business Park, Chertsey 
Surrey KT16 0RS, England

M12 /23, DLF City Phase 2, 
Gurgaon, Haryana 122 002 
India

Future Fibre Technologies 
MENA FZ-LLC

Building 11 Office G08 
Dubai Internet City, UAE

PH +44 (0)1932 895 317

PH +91 124 408 7020

PH +971 4 434 5361

FFT helps support the environment by using chlorine and acid free sustainable forestry paper in its printed material

MB-SL-G08/13

