SecureLink eDeposit FAQs 

Mobile FAQs 
Desktop FAQs 
Desktop Video  
 
Q: What is SecureLink eDeposit? 
A: SecureLink eDeposit is a free and secure 24/7 online/mobile service that allows you to 
deposit  checks  into  eligible  Power  Financial  Credit  Union  checking  accounts  from 
anywhere  you  have  access  to  SecureLink  Online  Banking  using  an  approved  device 
(scanner attached to your computer or smartphone). 
 
Q: Who is eligible for SecureLink eDeposit? 
A:  Members  who  are  at  least  18  years  of  age,  have  a  checking  account  with  Power 
Financial Credit Union and are in good standing with the Credit Union. 
 
Q: How do I register for SecureLink eDeposit? 
A:  You  can  begin  using  SecureLink  eDeposit  within  SecureLink  Online  Banking  after 
accepting our SecureLink eDeposit Service Agreement. If  you prefer to take pictures of 
your  checks  using  your  smartphone,  you  will  need  to  create  a  user  account  for  our 
eDeposit mobile app. During this setup you will also be asked to accept our SecureLink 
eDeposit Service Agreement. 
 
Q: Will my deposit be held when using this service? 
A:  Yes,  your  deposits  can  be  held  according  to  our  PFCUs  Funds  Availability  Policy. 
Please refer to your account for available balance. 
 
Q: How soon do I have access to my eDeposit funds? 
A:  Your  funds  may  be  available  the  same  business  day  if  your  deposit  is  made  before 
12pm  noon.  Deposits  made  after  12pm  noon  may  be  credited  and  available  the  next 
business day. All deposits are subject PFCUs Funds Availability Policy. 
 
Q: What types of deposits are accepted through SecureLink eDeposit? 
A:  Personal  Checks,  Cashiers  Checks,  Corporate  Checks,  Money  Orders,  Government 
Checks are all accepted. All checks must be in U.S. funds payable to the name(s) on your 
account and endorsed by all payees. Canadian items in U.S. funds are not acceptable. 
 
Q: Is there a fee for using SecureLink eDeposit? 
A:  No.  There  are  no  fees  for  using  PFCUs  SecureLink  Online  Banking  or  eDeposit 
service.  There  are  fees  for  returned  items  that  are  deposited.  Please  refer  to  our  fee 
schedule for more information. 
 
Q: Is there a limit to how much I can deposit with SecureLink eDeposit? 
A: Yes, there is a limit for your SecureLink eDeposit check deposits up to $2,000. Each 
deposit you make through SecureLink eDeposit will reduce your deposit limit. Once we 
receive  and  approve  your  deposit,  the  limit  will  increase  by  the  deposit  amount  of  the 
check(s) we approve. 
 
 
 

 
Q: Is SecureLink eDeposit safe? 
A:  SecureLink  eDeposit  is  available  after  signing  into  our  secure  and  encrypted 
application.  Please  refer  to  our  Privacy  &  Security  section  of  our  website  for  more 
information. 
 
Q: When is SecureLink eDeposit available? 
A: SecureLink eDeposit is available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week*. The only exceptions 
will be during scheduled system maintenance and month-end processing. Please note that 
deposits made on a weekend/holiday will be processed the next business day.  
 
* Please note that Service availability is at all times conditioned upon the corresponding 
operation  and  availability  of  the  communication  systems  used  in  communicating  your 
instructions  and  requests  to  the  Credit  Union.  We  will  not  be  liable  or  have  any 
responsibility of any kind for any loss or damage thereby incurred by you in the event of 
any failure or interruption of such communication systems or services resulting from the 
act  or  omission  of  any  third  party,  or  from  any  other  cause  not  reasonably  within  the 
control of the Credit Union. 
 
Q: How many checks can be included in one deposit? Can multiple deposits be 
submitted each day? 
A: One check may be submitted as one deposit. However, multiple deposits are allowed. 
Each deposit must be scanned and submitted separately. You can deposit multiple checks 
up to your individual limit. 
 
Q: Do I need to include a deposit slip with my scanned check deposit? 
A:  No.  The  SecureLink  eDeposit  program  generates  an  electronic  record  with  each 
deposit. 
 
Q: How long can I view my deposit history? How do I obtain a copy of my deposit? 
A:  If  you  made  a  deposit  using  the  Online  Banking  Desktop  interface,  your  deposit 
history  is  maintained  for  review  for  18  months  within  SecureLink  eDeposit  in  Online 
Banking. You can view a copy of your SecureLink eDeposit by logging into SecureLink 
Online Banking, clicking the products and services menu item at the top of the page, and 
then enter the eDeposit application. 
 
If you made a deposit using our mobile app, your deposit history is maintained for 5 days. 
To view your deposit, please log into SecureLink eDeposit mobile app and click Review. 
Your  eDeposits  transactions  will  appear  in  your  transaction  history  within  SecureLink 
Online Banking for six months. 
 
Q: What should I do with my original check? 
A:  For  your  protection,  after  making  your  deposit  through  SecureLink  eDeposit,  please 
retain  the  original  check  for  up  to  30  days  after  receiving  confirmation  that  it  has  been 
credited to your account. When you are ready to discard it, mark it VOID and dispose 
of it in a way that prevents it from being presented for payment again. 
 
 
 

 
Q: How can I check the status of my deposit? 
A:  If  you  made  a  deposit  using  the  desktop  method,  you  can  check  the  status  of  your 
deposit  by  logging  into  SecureLink  Online  Banking,  clicking  the  products  and  services 
menu item at the top of the page, and entering the SecureLink eDeposit application. 
If  you  made  a  deposit  using  our  SecureLink  eDeposit  mobile  app,  you  can  check  the 
status of your deposit by logging into the mobile app and clicking on the Review button. 
 
Q: Do I need any special equipment or software to use SecureLink eDeposit with my 
smartphone? 
A: You will need to download our mobile app from your phones marketplace. You can 
find  a  link  to  the  app  by  visiting  https://www.powerfi.org/personal-accounts/personal-
online-services/securelink-edeposit/securelink-edeposit-mobile/ 
 
Q: How do I make a deposit via SecureLink eDeposit with my smartphone? 
A: 
1.  Please visit https://www.powerfi.org/personal-accounts/personal-online-

services/securelink-edeposit/securelink-edeposit-mobile. Click on the link to enroll in 
our mobile eDeposit service using your computer. 

2.  You  will  be  prompted  to  create  a  user  account  and  accept  our  SecureLink  eDeposit 
Mobile Agreement. For your own account security, do not use your member number 
as your user id. 

3.  You will then need to scan the QR code for your phone type. You will be taken to the 
marketplace  for  your  phone  where  you  will  need  to  download  our  mobile  app.  You 
can  also  search  for  the  SecureLink  eDeposit  Mobile  app  within  your  phones 
marketplace by searching for PFCU eDeposit. 

 
Log into the SecureLink eDeposit mobile app and follow the prompts for taking a photo 
of your check. 
 
1.  You will be asked to take a picture of the front and back of the checks or money 

orders you want to deposit 

2.  Confirm Deposit. 
3.  The deposit is sent to us through a secure Internet connection. 
4.  The funds will be deposited into your account after our review and approval and are 

subject PFCUs Funds Availability Policy. 

 
We recommend that you use black ink only for your endorsement and write legibly on 
the check to better enable the mobile app to capture the image. 
 
Q: How do I make a deposit via SecureLink eDeposit with check scanner? 
A: 
1.  Simply log into SecureLink Online Banking at powerfi.org. 
2.  Select Products & Services at the top of the page. 
3.  Select SecureLink eDeposit. 
4.  Select the account suffix where the funds will be deposited to. 
5.  Accept the SecureLink eDeposit Agreement. 
6.  Follow the prompts to scan, upload and deposit your check. 
 

 
The prompts include the following steps: 
 
1.  Endorse the back of the check and write For Deposit Only below your signature. 
2.  Scan  the  front  and  back  of  the  checks  or  money  orders  you  want  to  deposit.  If  you 
previously  scanned  the  items  and  saved  them  on  your  computer  you  can  upload  the 
images  utilizing  the  Zero-Client  option  and  browse  for  the  front  and  back  of  the 
image. 

3.  Submit Deposit. 
4.  The deposit is sent to us through a secure Internet connection. 
5.  The funds will be deposited into your account after our review and approval and are 

subject PFCUs Funds Availability Policy.  

 
We recommend that you use black ink only for your endorsement and write legibly on 
the check to better enable the scanner to capture the image. 
 
Q: Do I need any special equipment or software to use SecureLink Deposit with 
check scanner? 
A: A TWAIN compliant scanner is required. Most scanner software supports the TWAIN 
specification.  Wireless  scanners  may  not  be  compatible.  No  special  software  is  needed.  
If  the  software  does  not  recognize  the  TWAIN  compliant  scanner  or  Wireless  Scanner 
you can upload the image utilizing the Zero Client Method. 
 
Q: What are the minimum system requirements necessary to use SecureLink 
eDeposit with check scanner? 
A: The minimum supported environments include: 

  Windows 7 with Internet Explorer, Firefox or Chrome 
  Mac OSX 10.8 (Zero-Client mode only) with Safari 

 
Q: What can I do if my scanner is not recognized? 
A:  PFCU  cannot  diagnose  general  scanner  and  PC  problems.  Please  consult  your 
scanners  documentation  for  guidelines  on  how  to  scan  an  image  or  utilize  the  Zero 
Client Configuration and upload the front and back of the check image. 
 
Q:  Which  browsers  are  recommended  to  use  SecureLink  eDeposit  with  check 
scanner?  
A: SecureLink eDeposit has been optimized within certified browsers. Browsers that are 
certified have passed our security testing. By using an unsupported browser, you may not 
be able to view the take full advantage of all the features within SecureLink eDeposit.  
 
Supported Operating Systems: 

  Windows 7 or greater 
  Mac OSX 10.8 is supported using Load or Zero-Client features only 

 
Supported Browsers: 

  Internet Explorer 
  Firefox 
  Safari (Mac only) 

  Chrome (Windows only) 

 

Q: Which configuration method should I utilize for Desktop eDeposit?  
 
A:  eDeposit  Desktop  has  three  modes  of  operation;  ActiveX  (for  Microsoft  Internet 
Explorer users), Java (a cross-platform friendly downloadable java applet), or Zero-client 
(a pure HTML/javascript solution).. Direct scan also requires either of the downloadable 
modes,  ActiveX  or  Java.  In  all  three  modes,  you  may  alternatively  load  check  image 
JPEG files that have been captured separately by your scanner software. 
 
ActiveX Configuration: 
ActiveX  mode  is  for  users  of  Microsoft  Windows  and  the  Internet  Explorer  web 
browser  only.  Users  of  Windows  and  Internet  Explorer  who  want  the  efficiency  of 
working  directly  with  your  TWAIN  compliant  scanner  should  use  ActiveX  mode.  This 
mode  requires  the  download  and  installation  of  an  ActiveX  control  called  EZTwainX 
developed by Dosadi. 
Installation of this ActiveX control requires your authorization, please pay close attention 
to the security warnings and following the installation instructions. 
 
Java Configuration: 
Java  mode  is  for  users  who  want  the  efficiency  of  working  directly  with  your  32-bit 
TWAIN  compliant  scanner  using  a  java  applet.  This  mode  can  work  for  users  of 
Windows,  and  using  browsers  like  Firefox  and  Chrome.  Java  mode  requires  the 
download  and  installation  of  a  Java  applet  from  Vertifi  Software,  with  the  embedded 
Morena Image Acquisition Framework from GNOME Ltd. for TWAIN capabilities. 
Installation  of  this  java  applet  requires  your  authorization,  please  pay  close  attention  to 
the  security  warnings  and  following  the  installation  instructions.  Use  of  TWAIN  direct 
scan mode requires that your browser and java software are both running in 32-bit mode. 
 
Zero Client Configuration: 
Zero client mode is for users who want a pure HTML/JavaScript experience, without the 
technical challenges and security warnings of downloadable software. In this mode, you 
are required to separately capture front and back check images (JPEG, PNG or GIF) that 
are properly cropped, and upload those files for deposit. 
Zero client mode is the most compatible mode, but requires the most effort each time you 
make a deposit. You accept the responsibility of capturing, uploading, and subsequently 
removing check image files from your computer. 

