December 2000

Volume 3, Number 4

A Quarterly Technical Publication for
Internet and Intranet Professionals

F r o m

In This Issue

Numerous technologies have been developed to protect or isolate corporate networks from the Internet at large. These solutions incorporate
security, either end-to-end (IP security, or IPSec), or at the Internet/intranet border (firewalls). A third class of systems allow a range of IP
addresses to be used internally in a corporate network, while preserving
IP address consumption through the use of a single public address. This
latter class of device is called a Network Address Translator (NAT), and
while many Internet engineers consider NATs to be “evil,” they are
nonetheless very popular. Combining IPSec, NATs, and firewalls can be
quite challenging, however. In our first article Lisa Phifer explains the
problem and offers some solutions.

From the Editor .......................1
The Trouble with NAT ...........2
The Social Life of Routers .....14
New Frontiers for
Research Networks................26
Book Review..........................40
Call for Papers .......................41
Fragments ..............................42

T h e

E d i t o r

Successful network design is the result of many factors. In addition to
the basic building blocks of routers, switches and circuits, network planners must carefully consider how these elements are interconnected to
form an overall system with as few single points of failure as possible. In
our second article, Valdis Krebs looks at how lessons learned from social network analysis can be applied to the design of computer
networks.
The current Internet grew out of several government-funded research efforts that began in the late 1960s. Today, basic technology development
as well as research into new uses of computer networks continues in
many research “testbeds” all over the world. Bob Aiken describes the
past, present and future state of network research and research
networks.
The online subscription system for this journal will be up and running in
January at www.cisco.com/ipj. In addition to offering a subscription
form, the system will allow you to select delivery options, update your
mailing and e-mail address, and much more. Please visit our Web site
and give it a try. If you encounter any difficulties, please send your comments to ipj@cisco.com.

You can download IPJ
back issues and find
subscription information at:
www.cisco.com/ipj

—Ole J. Jacobsen, Editor and Publisher
ole@cisco.com

The Social Life of Routers
Applying Knowledge of Human Networks to the Design of Computer Networks
by Valdis Krebs

W

e often forget that computer networks are put in place to
support human networks—person-to-person exchanges of
information, knowledge, ideas, opinions, insights, and advice. This article looks at a technology that was developed to map and
measure human networks—social network analysis—and applies some
of its principles and algorithms to designing computer networks. And as
we see more peer-to-peer (P2P) models of computer-based networks, the
P2P metrics in human network analysis become even more applicable.
Social network analysts look at complex human systems as an interconnected system of nodes (people and groups) and ties (relationships and
flows)—much like an internetwork of routers and links. Human networks are often unplanned, emergent systems. Their growth is sporadic
and self-organizing[1]. Network ties end up being unevenly distributed,
with some areas of the network having a high density of links and other
areas of the network sparsely connected. These are called “small world
networks”[2]. Computer networks often end up with similar patterns of
connections—dense interconnectivity within subnetworks, and sparser
connections uniting subnetworks into a larger internetwork.
Social network researchers and consultants focus on geodesics—shortest paths in the network. Many of today’s social network algorithms are
based on a branch of mathematics called graph theory. Social network
scientists have concentrated their work, and therefore their algorithms,
in the following areas:
• Individual node centrality within a larger network—network dependency and load upon individual routers
• Overall path distribution—good connectivity without excessive routing tables
• Improving communication flow within and between groups—designing better topologies
• Network patterns surrounding ego networks—strategies for analyzing and manipulating individual router connections
• Analyzing information flow behavior of client organization—how
computer networks can support human networks
One of the methods used to understand networks and their participants
is to evaluate the location of actors in the network. Measuring the network location is finding the centrality of a node[3]. All network measures
discussed here are based on geodesics—the shortest path between any
two nodes. We will look at a social network, called the kite network,
that effectively shows the distinction between the three most popular
centrality measures—the ABCs—Activity, Betweenness, and Closeness.

The Internet Protocol Journal

14

This model[4] was first developed by David Krackhardt, a leading researcher in social networks.
Activity

Figure 1 shows a simple social network. A link between a pair of nodes
depicts a bidirectional information flow or knowledge exchange between two individuals. Social network researchers measure network
activity for a node by using the concept of degrees—the number of direct connections a node has.
In this human network, Diane has the most direct connections in the
network, making hers the most active node in the network with the
highest degree count. Common wisdom in personal networks is “the
more connections, the better.” This is not always so. What really matters is where those connections lead to—and how they connect the
otherwise unconnected![5] Here Diane has connections only to others in
her immediate cluster—her clique. She connects only those who are already connected to each other—does she have too many redundant
links?
Figure 1: Human
Network

Carol

Andre

Fernando

Diane

Beverly

Heather

Ike

Jane

Garth

Ed

Betweenness

While Diane has many direct ties, Heather has few direct connections—
fewer than the average in the network. Yet, in may ways, she has one of
the best locations in the network—she is a boundary spanner and plays
the role of broker. She is between two important constituencies, in a role
similar to that of a border router. The good news is that she plays a
powerful role in the network, the bad news is that she is a single point of
failure. Without her, Ike and Jane would be cut off from information
and knowledge in Diane’s cluster.

The Internet Protocol Journal

15

The Social Life of Routers: continued
Closeness

Fernando and Garth have fewer connections than Diane, yet the pattern
of their ties allow them to access all the nodes in the network more
quickly than anyone else. They have the shortest paths to all others—
they are close to everyone else. Maximizing closeness between all routers improves updating and minimizes hop counts. Maximizing the
closeness of only one or a few routers leads to counterproductive results, as we will examine below.
Their position demonstrates that when it comes to network connections, quality beats out quantity. Location, location, location—the
golden rule of real estate also works in networks. In real estate it is geography—your physical neighborhood. In networks, it is your virtual
location determined by your network connections—your network
neighborhood.
Network Centralization

Individual network centralities provide insight into the individual’s location in the network. The relationship between the centralities of all
nodes can reveal much about the overall network structure. A very centralized network is dominated by one or a few very central nodes. If
these nodes are removed or damaged, the network quickly fragments
into unconnected subnetworks. Highly central nodes can become critical points of failure. A network with a low centralization score is not
dominated by one or a few nodes—such a network has no single points
of failure. It is resilient in the face of many local failures. Many nodes or
links can fail while allowing the remaining nodes to still reach each
other over new paths.
Average Path Length in Network

The shorter the path, the fewer hops/steps it takes to go from one node
to another. In human networks, short paths imply quicker communication with less distortion. In computer networks, the signal degradation
and delay is usually not an issue. Nonetheless, a network with many
short paths connecting all nodes will be more efficient in passing data
and reconfiguring after a topology change.
Average Path Length is strongly correlated with Closeness throughout
the network. As the closeness of all nodes to each other improves (average closeness), the average path length in the network also improves.

The Internet Protocol Journal

16

Internetwork Topology

In the recent network design book, Advanced IP Network Design [6],
the authors define a well-designed topology as the basis of a well-behaved and stable network. They further propose that “three competing
goals must be balanced for good network design”:
• Reducing hop count
• Reducing available paths
• Increasing the number of failures the network can withstand
Our social network algorithms can assist in measuring and meeting all
three goals.
• Reducing the hop count infers minimizing the average path length
throughout the network—maximize the closeness of all nodes to
each other.
• Reducing the available paths leads to minimizing the number of geodesics throughout the network.
• Increasing the number of failures a network can withstand focuses
on minimizing the centralization of the whole network.
On the following pages we examine various network topologies and
evaluate them using social network measures while remembering these
three competing goals of network design.
The models we examine do not cover hierarchical structures—with
Core, Distribution, and Access layers—found in networks of hundreds
or thousands of routers. We examine flat, nonhierarchical topologies
such as those found in smaller internetworks, area subnetworks, or
within core backbones. The topologies we model are the most commonly used—Star, Ring, Full Mesh, and Partial Mesh. We compute the
social network measures on each of the topologies and discuss how the
various measures help us meet the competing goals discussed above.
Star Topology

The Star topology, shown in Figure 2, has many advantages—but one
glaring fault. The advantages include ease of management and configuration for the network administrators. For the Star, the three competing
goals delineate as follows:
• Reducing hop count: The short average path length (1.75) throughout the network meets this goal well. Any router can reach any other
router in two steps or less.
• Reducing available paths: The fact that there are a minimum number of possible available paths (56) to reach all other nodes—will not
overload the routing tables, nor cause delays during routing table updates. It takes only seven bidirectional links to create the available
paths.

The Internet Protocol Journal

17

The Social Life of Routers: continued

• Reducing network failures: The network fails miserably if Router A
goes down. Also, any link failure isolates the attached router—there
are no multiple paths to reach each router.
Router A is not only a single point of failure—it is also a potential bottleneck—it will likely become overburdened with packet flows and
routing updates as more routers are added in the star structure.
Router A receives the top score (1.000) in Activity, Betweenness, and
Closeness. As a result, the network is very centralized around Router A
from the perspective of all measures.
Figure 2: Routers in
Star Topology

Router A

Router H

Router B

Network Measures

Router C

Router G

14 paths of length 1
42 paths of length 2
56 geodesics in network
Physical Links
Average Path Length
Longest Path
Network Centralization

Router F

7
1.750
2 hops
1.000 (maximum)

Router D

Router E

Ring Topology

The Ring topology, shown in Figure 3, is an improvement over the Star.
It has some of the same advantages, but does not eliminate all of the
drawbacks of the Star. The advantages include ease of management and
configuration for the network administrators—adding another router is
very simple. Unlike the Star topology, the Ring provides some redundancy and, therefore, eliminates the single point of failure—all nodes
have an alternate path through which they can be reached. Yet it is still
vulnerable to both link and router failures. For the Ring, the three competing goals delineate as follows:
• Reducing hop count: The average path length of 2.5 is quite long for
a small network of eight nodes. Some routers (that is, A and E) require four steps to reach each other! Many ring physical layers hide
this complexity from the IP layers in order to make those hops invisible to routing protocols.

The Internet Protocol Journal

18

• Reducing available paths: This configuration has more geodesics (64)
than Star, yet not significantly more to overload the routing tables,
nor cause delays during table updates.
• Reducing network failures: Even though network centralization is at
the minimum (no node is more central than any other), this network
reaches failure quickly because of its weak redundancy. The Ring topology can withstand one link failure or one router failure and still
keep a contiguous network. Two simultaneous failures can cause unreachable segments because of the lack of redundancy.
Most modern ring technologies such as Synchronous Optical Network
(SONET) or the Cisco Dynamic Packet Transport Protocol (DPT) add a
measure of redundancy by running a dual ring that heals itself if a link
gets cut. The network “wraps” to avoid the downed line and operates at
lower speed. A two-hop path can become a six-hop path if a single link
fails. This can cause network congestion if the original dual ring was being used for data in all directions.
Figure 3: Routers in
Ring Topology
Network Measures

Router A
Router H

Router B

16
16
16
16

paths of length 1
paths of length 2
paths of length 3
paths of length 4

64 geodesics in network

Router G

Router C
Physical Links
Average Path Length
Longest Path
Network Centralization

Router F

8
2.500
4 hops
0.000 (minimum)

Router D
Router E

Full Mesh Topology

The Full Mesh topology has several big advantages and several faults.
The advantages include short path length (one hop) to all other routers
and maximum resilience to failure if links or routers start failing. The
disadvantages revolve around the complexity created by this topology.
For the Full Mesh, the three competing goals delineate as follows:
• Reducing hop count: The shortest path length possible is attained for
all routes—all nodes can reach each other in one hop.
• Reducing available paths: There are a minimum number of possible
available paths (56) to reach all other nodes. The routing entries will
not overload the routing tables, nor cause delays during routing table updates.

The Internet Protocol Journal

19

The Social Life of Routers: continued

• Reducing network failures: The network is not dependent upon any
single node (network centralization = 0.000). This configuration represents the most robust topology available—chances are very slim
that the number of failures necessary to fragment the network will
actually occur within the same time period.
The disadvantages of the Full Mesh topology all focus on one glaring
fault—there are too many physical links. If the routers are far apart, the
link costs can quickly become prohibitively expensive because adding
routers creates a geometrical explosion in links required—soon the routers do not have enough ports to support this topology. Administering
the system and keeping an up-to-date topology map becomes more and
more complex as routers are added. The network in Figure 4 has 28
two-way links. Double the routers, in a full mesh topology, and the link
count increases by a factor greater than 4.
Figure 4: Routers in Full
Mesh Topology
Network Measures
Router A
56 paths of length 1

Router H

Router B

Router G

Router C

Router F

56 geodesics in network
Physical Links
Average Path Length
Longest Path
Network Centralization

28
1.000
1 hop
0.000 (minimum)

Router D
Router E

Partial Mesh Topology

The Partial Mesh topology is quite different. It is the most difficult to
build—there is no simple rule to follow (rule for Star: connect everyone
to Router A; rule for Full Mesh: connect everyone to everyone). If built
incorrectly, the partial mesh layout can have many of the disadvantages
of the former topologies without many of the benefits. If built correctly,
the opposite is true—more advantages, fewer disadvantages.
Building a successful partial mesh topology is where the interactive use
of our social network measures really comes into play. The design below evolved after several iterations. With every iteration the average
path length dropped until it appeared to reach a plateau where no further changes lowered the hop count without noticeably increasing the
number of physical links. For the Partial Mesh, the three competing
goals delineate as follows:

The Internet Protocol Journal

20

• Reducing hop count: The short average path length (1.667) throughout the network meets this goal well. Any router can reach any other
router in two steps or less. Path length is less than that for the Star
and Ring topologies.
• Reducing available paths: The number of available paths in the network (72) is the highest among all topologies, though not
significantly more than the Ring topology. As the number of nodes in
a network increases, this could become a problem—the average path
length vs. path count trade-off needs to be closely monitored.
• Reducing network failures: Network centralization (0.000) is the
same as for the Full Mesh topology—no router, nor link, is more important than any other. As nodes or links are removed from this
network, it does not fragment quickly. Chances are slim that the
number of failures necessary to fragment the network will actually
occur within the same time period. Although we optimized our network centralization for this small “toy” network, we cannot expect
this for most real networks. Yet, the goal remains to keep this metric
as small as possible.
This topology in Figure 5 was built starting with a Ring topology—a
simple architecture. A link was added and the network was remeasured.
Was this structure better than the previous? If so, the current structure
was kept and another link was added and the network was remeasured.
This iterative process was continued until no further improvements happened after several changes. This process does not guarantee an
optimum solution, yet it quickly converges on a good solution—even
large networks improve quickly with just a few added links.
Figure 5: Routers in
Partial Mesh Topology
Network Measures
Router A
Router H

Router B

24 paths of length 1
48 paths of length 2
72 geodesics in network

Router G

Router C

Router F

Physical Links
Average Path Length
Longest Path
Network Centralization

12
1.667
2 hops
0.000 (minimum)

Router D
Router E

The Internet Protocol Journal

21

The Social Life of Routers: continued

A quirky aspect of networks is that sometimes you can subtract by adding—add a link to a network and reduce the average path length. The
opposite also works, sometimes. You can add by subtracting—remove a
tie and watch the average hop count grow. Yet, you never know for certain what effect adding or removing a link will have—it is neither a
linear nor a local phenomenon. The size and direction of these changes
depend upon the existing topology of the network and the location of
the added or removed tie. It is key to have a model that allows quick
what-if calculations.
Let’s experiment with removing random ties—a situation similar to
links between routers failing. If we remove the link between Router A
and Router H in Figure 5, the number of geodesics in the network increases from 72 to 76, and the average path length increases to 1.815.
Yet, removing a different link, G to F, reduces the the number of geodesics in the network from 72 to 66, while the average path length
increases only to 1.727. If we are concerned about too many paths in
the network, we can remove another link, B to C. This further decreases
the number of shortest paths to 60, while reducing physical links to 10.
This is very near the 56 paths in the very efficient star topology.
Whereas the star is very vulnerable because of its single point of failure,
this partial mesh, with the two links removed, is still robust. While the
number of geodesics drops, the average path length creeps up slightly to
1.80 with the removal of the second link. Figure 5 has no paths greater
than two hops. With the two links (G to F, B to C) removed, we now
have 8 geodesics of three hops, while at the same time 12 fewer geodesics to load into routing tables, and two fewer physical links. It is a
constant trade-off.
NSFnet Backbone

The NSFnet Backbone network, shown in Figure 6, connected the supercomputing centers in the USA in 1989. It is a partial mesh design that
functions as a real-life example to test our social network algorithms.
Figure 6: NSFnet in
1989

NWnet
MERITnet
NYSERnet

PSCnet

WESTnet
BARRnet

JVNCnet

USAN
MIDnet

NCSAnet
SURAnet

SDSCnet
SESQUInet
The Internet Protocol Journal

22

We remember our three competing goals for good internetwork design.
• Reducing hop count: average path length in steps/hops
• Reducing available paths: total geodesics in the network
• Increasing the number of failures the network can withstand: network centralization
What happens to these goals as we experience failures in the links or the
nodes of the network? Table 1 shows the base metrics for Figure 6 and
then shows what happens to the metrics, and our three goals, when five
different failures occur.
Table 1: Possible Link and Node Failures
Number of
Geodesics in
the Network

Network
Centralization

Longest
Path
(hops)

Average
Path
Length
(hops)

Original Design
(Figure 6)

200

0.062

4

2.370

1)

Node failure:
NCSA

180

0.208

5

2.689

2)

Node failure:
MID

180

0.083

4

2.489

3)

Node failure:
JVNC

148

0.046

4

2.324

4)

Link failure:
NCSA–PSC

230

0.167

6

2.974

5)

Link failure:
USAN–MID

212

0.123

5

2.660

6)

Link failure:
MERIT–JVNC

192

0.069

4

2.458

Scenario

The most damaging was link failure 4—the link failure between NCSA
and PSC. This link is between two of the most central nodes in the network. If the flows between nodes are distributed somewhat evenly, then
this link is one of the most traveled in the network.
The least damaging is node failure 3—the node failure at JVNC. In fact,
this failure improved most metrics! By removing this node from the network, the number of network paths drops significantly, network
centralization decreases, path length decreases slightly, and the longest
path is still four hops.
The original NSFnet topology design is very efficient. I tried two different strategies to improve the network. The first strategy involved moving
existing links to connect different pairs of routers. No obviously better
topology was found by rearranging links among the routers. I was not
able to find a better design that reduced both the number of geodesics
and the average path length without significantly increasing the number
of physical links in the network.

The Internet Protocol Journal

23

The Social Life of Routers: continued

The second strategy is counter-intuitive, yet often networks respond well
to this approach. It is the “subtracting by adding” approach described
above. By adding new links in the right place in the network, we not
only reduce the distance between nodes, we also decrease the number of
geodesics in the network.
Because the NSFnet nodes had a maximum limit of three direct neighbors, I started connecting the nodes of Degree = 2. Options 1 through 3
show the various combinations and their effect on the total network.
The improvements are minimal, yet each option offers specific strengths.
Option 2 offers more improvements than the others.
• The longest geodesic was reduced to three hops.
• The average path length was reduced throughout the network.
• The number of paths for the routers to remember was reduced
slightly.
• Network centralization did not increase enough to noticeably affect
the number of failures the network could withstand.
Table 2: Possible Network Improvements
Number of
Geodesics in
the Network

Network
Centralization

Longest
Path
(hops)

Average
Path
Length
(hops)

200

0.062

4

2.370

Option 1
(add link: SDSC–MID)

202

0.071

4

2.287

Option 2
(add link: NW–DSC)

198

0.074

3

2.273

Option 3
(add link: NW–MID)

202

0.050

4

2.356

Scenario

Original Design
(Figure 6)

The improvement in Option 2 (add link: NW–SDSC) was actually implemented in the 1991 version of NSFnet—an excellent example of the
“subtracting by adding” network dynamic. Networks are complex systems. How the network responds to change is based on the distribution
and pattern of connections throughout the network.
Conclusion

In the real world we may not have the flexibility to experiment with our
network model as we have with these examples. There will be more
constraints. The information flows in your organization may require
that specific pairs of routers have direct links—even if those connections
would not be recommended by the algorithms we have been examining. Yet, when we have our “must-have” connections in place, we can
experiment with the placement of the remaining connections using these
social network metrics to indicate when we are getting close to a robust,
yet efficient topology.
The Internet Protocol Journal

24

Given “initial conditions,” social network methods can model our computer networks and suggest link changes[7] to form an effective topology
that has a short average hop count, not too many paths, and just
enough redundancy.
References
[1] Krebs V., “Visualizing Human Networks,” Release 1.0, Esther Dyson’s
Monthly Report, February 1996.
[2] Watts D., Strogatz S., “Collective Dynamics of Small World Networks,”
Nature, 4 June 1998.
[3] Freeman L., “Centrality in Social Networks:
Clarification,” Social Networks, No. 1, 1979.

A

Conceptual

[4] Krackhardt D., “Assessing the Political Landscape: Structure, Cognition,
and Power in Organizations,” Administrative Science Quarterly, No.
35, 1990, page 351.
[5] Burt, Ronald S., Structural Holes—The Social Structure of Competition,
ISBN 0674843711, Harvard University Press, 1992.
[6] Retana, A., Slice, D., White, R., Advanced IP Network Design, ISBN
1578700973, Cisco Press, 1999.
[7] Hagen G., Discussions with fellow network researcher, Guy Hagen,
regarding combinatorial algorithms and models for recommending
changes to improve the overall topology of a network. Link to web site.

VALDIS E. KREBS leads his own management consulting firm—orgnet.com He holds
an undergraduate degree in Mathematics & Computer Science and a graduate degree in
Human Resources. Since 1988 he has applied organizational network analysis to improve knowledge work within and between Fortune 500 firms such as IBM, Lucent,
TRW, and supported consulting firms such as Ernst & Young, PricewaterhouseCoopers,
and Booz-Allen-Hamilton. In addition to knowledge networks, he has applied these
methodologies to mapping, measuring, and molding strategic alliances, communities of
interest, emergent structures on the WWW, and internetworks. His work has been referenced in many publications, including the Wall Street Journal, Entrepreneur, Training,
PC Magazine, ZDNet, Corporate Leadership Council’s Best Practices Reports, Knowledge Management, Across the Board, Business Week, HR Executive, Personnel Journal,
FORTUNE, and Esther Dyson’s influential information industry newsletter, Release 1.0.
He writes a regular column, “Working in the Connected World,” for the IHRIM Journal. His Web site is at: www.orgnet.com and his e-mail is: valdis@orgnet.com

The Internet Protocol Journal

25

