Solar storm Risk to the 
north American electric grid 

Key Contacts 
Trevor Maynard  Exposure Management 
Telephone: 020 7327 6141  trevor.maynard@lloyds.com  

Neil Smith  Exposure Management 
Telephone: 020 7327 5605  neil.j.smith@lloyds.com 

Sandra Gonzalez  Exposure Management 
Telephone: 020 7327 6921  sandra.gonzalez@lloyds.com 

 

 

 

 
 

 

This report was written by Lloyds with research and analysis by scientists from Atmospheric and Environmental 
Research, Inc. (AER) Nicole Homeier, PhD, Director of Product Innovation and Senior Staff Scientist at AER Lisa Wei, 
PhD, Staff Scientist at AER.  
 
Lloyds would like to thank Professor Richard Horne (Fellow, AGU, British Antarctic Survey), Michael Maran (Chief 
Science Officer Catlin) and David Wade (Underwriter, Atrium Space Insurance Consortium) for their input in the report. 
We would also like to thank NASA for providing us with the picture for the front cover.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Disclaimer 
 
This report has been produced by Lloyd's and the Atmospheric and Environmental Research, Inc. for general information purposes 
only.  The information contained herein has included inputs from Atmospheric and Environmental Research (AER), a Verisk 
Analytics company. While care has been taken in gathering the data and preparing the report, Lloyd's does not make any 
representations or warranties as to its accuracy or completeness and expressly excludes to the maximum extent permitted by law 
all those that might otherwise be implied. 
 
Lloyd's accepts no responsibility or liability for any loss or damage of any nature occasioned to any person as a result of acting or 
refraining from acting as a result of, or in reliance on, any statement, fact, figure or expression of opinion or belief contained in this 
report.  This report does not constitute advice of any kind. 
 
 Lloyds 2013    All rights reserved 

Solar storm risk to the north American electric grid 

 

 

 
 

Contents 

1 

2 

3 
3.1 
3.2 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 

INTRODUCTION 

THE MAGNETIC SUN 

Geomagnetic Storms 

Historical Geomagnetic Storms 

4 
FREQUENCY OF EXTREME STORMS 
4.1  Movement of the Geomagnetic Pole 
4.2 
4.3 

Auroral Catalogs 

Aurora Displays 

RELATIVE RISK FACTORS 

Ground Conductivity 

5 
5.1  Magnetic Latitude 
5.2 
5.3 
5.4 
5.5 

Coast Effect 

Line Length and Rating 

Relative Risk by County 

6 
6.1 
6.2 
6.3 
6.4 
6.5 
6.6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

DYNAMIC RISK ASSESSMENT 

Carrington-Level Storm Time-Series 

Power Grid Model 

Transformer Age Distribution 

Transformer Internal Heating 

Damage Criteria and Outage 

Outage Scenarios 

AWARENESS AND PREPARATION 

IMPLICATIONS FOR THE INSURANCE INDUSTRY 

CONCLUSIONS 

APPENDIX 

GLOSSARY 

REFERENCES 

4 

5 

6 
6 
6 

8 
8 
8 
8 

9 
9 
10 
10 
10 
10 

11 
11 
11 
12 
12 
13 
13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

3 

Solar storm risk to the north American electric grid 

 

1  Executive Summary 

 
A Carrington-level, extreme geomagnetic storm is almost inevitable in the future. While the probability 
of an extreme storm occurring is relatively low at any given time, it is almost inevitable that one will occur 
eventually. Historical auroral records suggest a return period of 50 years for Quebec-level storms and 150 
years for very extreme storms, such as the Carrington Event that occurred 154 years ago.  
 
The risk of intense geomagnetic storms is elevated as we approach the peak of the current solar cycle. 
Solar activity follows an 11-year cycle, with the most intense events occurring near the cycle peak. For the 
current Cycle 24, the geomagnetic storm risk is projected to peak in early 2015. 
 
As the North American electric infrastructure ages and we become more and more dependent on 
electricity, the risk of a catastrophic outage increases with each peak of the solar cycle. Our society is 
becoming increasingly dependent on electricity. Because of the potential for long-term, widespread power 
outage, the hazard posed by geomagnetic storms is one of the most significant. 
 
Weighted by population, the highest risk of storm-induced power outages in the US is along the 
Atlantic corridor between Washington D.C. and New York City. This takes into account risk factors such 
as magnetic latitude, distance to the coast, ground conductivity and transmission grid properties. Other high-
risk regions are the Midwest states, such as Michigan and Wisconsin, and regions along the Gulf Coast.  
 
The total U.S. population at risk of extended power outage from a Carrington-level storm is between 
20-40 million, with durations of 16 days to 1-2 years. The duration of outages will depend largely on the 
availability of spare replacement transformers. If new transformers need to be ordered, the lead-time is likely 
to be a minimum of five months. The total economic cost for such a scenario is estimated at $0.6-2.6 trillion 
USD (see Appendix). 
 
Storms weaker than Carrington-level could result in a small number of damaged transformers 
(around 10-20), but the potential damage to densely populated regions along the Atlantic coast is 
significant. The total number of damaged transformers is less relevant for prolonged power outage than 
their concentration. The failure of a small number of transformers serving a highly populated area is enough 
to create a situation of prolonged outage.  
 
A severe space weather event that causes major disruption to the electricity network in the US could 
have major implications for the insurance industry. If businesses, public services and households are 
without power for sustained periods of time, insurers may be exposed to business interruption and other 
claims. 
 

 

 
4 
 

 

Solar storm risk to the north American electric grid 

 

2  Introduction 
Electricity: imagine our world without it. Society depends on electricity for everything from communication, 
banking and business transactions to basic necessities like food and water. Terrestrial weather and human 
errors account for $75-180bn annually in economic costs from power outages1. 
 
One serious threat to the reliability of electric power is geomagnetic storms  severe disturbances caused by 
solar storms in the upper layers of our atmosphere that induce currents in long conductors on the Earths 
surface, such as power lines. These additional currents can overload the electric grid system to trigger 
voltage collapse, or worse, damage a significant number of expensive extra-high voltage transformers. The 
economic costs of such an event would be catastrophic. Large transformer repairs/replacements occur on 
the timescale of weeks to months, and could result in long-term widespread blackouts.  
 
In this report, we discuss the likelihood of extreme geomagnetic storms, specific vulnerabilities of the North 
American power grid, the regions at highest risk from this complex natural hazard and the implications for the 
insurance industry and society generally. 
 

 

 

 
 

5 

Solar storm risk to the north American electric grid 
 

3  The Magnetic Sun 
The surface of our Sun is a froth of plasma and magnetic fields, always active and ever changing. The sun 
follows a cycle of magnetic activity reflected by the number of sunspots and the average sunspot area, which 
waxes and wanes on a time scale of 9-14 years. Historical sunspot data dates back to 1775, which marks 
the beginning of the first solar cycle. Currently, we are near the peak of Solar Cycle 24.  
 
A sunspot appears as a dark area where magnetic field lines enter and exit the Suns visible surface. The 
field lines create an area of slightly reduced thermal temperature, which causes the dark appearance. The 
actual measure of the sunspot number is a weighting between individual spots and sunspot groups, or 
complex areas with several merged sunspots. For extreme geomagnetic storm risk, it is the largest sunspot 
groups, or superactive regions, that pose a significant threat to the Earth2.  

 
 
Magnetic field lines looping out of sunspot regions can 
reconnect and release a large amount of energy. This 
energy can push plasma violently outwards towards 
space, a process known as a coronal mass ejection 
(CME). The CME rate peaks approximately 2 years after 
the maximum sunspot number within the solar cycle3. 
The geomagnetic storm risk is highest near the cycle 
peak, but skewed towards the latter half of the cycle. 
For the current Cycle 24, the geomagnetic storm risk is 
projected to peak in early 2015. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 1: A coronal loop on the sun. NASA / Solar 
Dynamics Observatory 

3.1  Geomagnetic Storms 
 
During a CME, the sun releases a burst (or bursts) of plasma carrying intense magnetic fields. This material 
compresses the Earths magnetic field, causing reconnection on the night side and allowing plasma to flow 
into the magnetosphere. This results in an increase of electric current in the magnetosphere and ionosphere, 
generating electromagnetic fields in the upper atmosphere that induce ground electromagnetic fields. 
Ground electric field variations can induce large electric currents in power transmission lines, pipelines, and 
telecommunication cables4,5. Large amounts of geomagnetically induced currents (GIC) flowing through the 
power grid can damage power transformers and/or lead to voltage collapse, resulting in widespread power 
outages6.  

3.2  Historical Geomagnetic Storms  
 
We can begin to understand the threat of geomagnetic storms by considering the impacts of several large 
geomagnetic storms in recent historical records. These descriptions give concrete examples of technological 
impacts of geomagnetic storms, as well as providing some quantitative benchmarks in terms of the 
Disturbance Storm Time Index (Dst). 

August - September 1859  Carrington Event 
 
The events during 28 August  2 September 1859 are widely regarded as the most extreme space weather 
events on record. Looking at four key measures of geomagnetic storm strength (sudden ionospheric 
disturbance, solar wind, geomagnetic storm and aurora), it is the only event that appears within the top five 
events in each category7.  
 
There were two huge auroral events: one on 28 August and an even more widespread display on 2 
September. The CME transit time (from flare onset to geomagnetic storm commencement) was one of the 
shortest on record: 17.6 hours8. The lowest latitude extent of the visible aurora was 18o corrected 
geomagnetic latitude (near Panama) for the second event9. While electricity was not widely used at that time, 
 
6 
 

 

 
the storm reportedly induced sparks along telegraph wires  shocking operators and rendering the telegraph 
network inoperable on those two days in North America, Europe, and even parts of Australia and Asia10. 

Solar storm risk to the north American electric grid 

March 1989  Quebec Storm 
 
The 13-14 March 1989 geomagnetic storm is one of the most well-known for its effect on power systems. 
The storm reached 589 nT on the Dst scale, the strongest since standard storm strength indices were used 
in 1932. The size of the solar active region where the eruptions originated was one of the largest ever 
measured. 
 
The geomagnetic storm struck around 3a.m. Eastern Time on 13 March and collapsed the Hydro-Quebec 
power grid in less than two minutes. The resulting geomagnetically induced currents were severe enough 
that the harmonics tripped protective systems on several static VAR (volt-ampere reactive) compensators on 
the Hydro-Quebec grid, resulting in the loss of electric power to more than six million people for nine hours at 
an economic cost estimated to be around C$13.2Bn11. Voltage oscillations caused more tripping of 
protective equipment, nearly bringing the Northeast Power Coordinating Council (NPCC) and the Mid-
Atlantic Area Council (MAAC) down in a cascading collapse12. Two transformers were damaged due to 
voltage overloads13. The storm also caused permanent damage to a generator step-up transformer at a 
nuclear station in New Jersey owned by Public Service Gas & Electric, necessitating its removal from 
service14.  

October 2003  Halloween Storms 
 
In late October 2003, three large active regions were present on the solar surface. One of these was 
responsible for the majority of the flaring and eruptive activity during the 2003 storm events. Not only was the 
geomagnetic storm noteworthy, the solar proton event was the fourth largest in 25 years of records. The 
largest solar active region was responsible for the ~2000 km/s CMEs that triggered the geomagnetic storms 
of 29-31 October.  
 
Minor power grid disturbances were experienced in North America, including a capacitor trip in the 
Northwest, and transformer heating in the Northeast. Ground magnetic field fluctuations were stronger over 
Northern Europe, and Sweden experienced a blackout of less than an hour in length affecting around 50,000 
customers15. The blackout was attributed to the combination of harmonic distortions caused by 
geomagnetically induced currents and incorrectly set protective relay thresholds.  
 
Perhaps the most surprising impact from this event was the twelve transformers in South Africa that suffered 
damage necessitating their removal from service16. The low latitude of South Africa (~40 corrected 
geomagnetic latitude - roughly the same as the state of Florida) is usually assumed to be immune from 
surface electric fields strong enough to cause transformer internal heating.   
 
 
Corrected Geomagnetic Coordinates 
 
The geomagnetic coordinate system is based on the Earth's magnetic poles (as opposed to the geographic 
poles). While the geomagnetic latitude can be approximated by assuming that the Earth is a dipole, the 
corrected geomagnetic field model is a more realistic depiction that is based on tracing the geomagnetic field 
lines. The corrected geomagnetic field model is preferable to dipole magnetic coordinates where ionospheric 
phenomena are concerned because charged particles follow spiral trajectories along these field lines.  
 
 

 

 

 
 

7 

Solar storm risk to the north American electric grid 
 

4  Frequency of Extreme Storms 
Anecdotal reports of significant aurora displays demonstrate an important fact: the Carrington event was not 
unprecedented in Earths history. There were several comparable storms and it is unlikely that the Carrington 
event was the strongest storm Earth has experienced. In the Auroral Catalogs section below we discuss 
some of these reports, but others can be found in such diverse sources as the Bible (Ezekiels vision of 600 
B.C.)17 and written accounts by Roman historians (Seneca reporting a red aurora seen southwest of Rome in 
37 B.C.)18. 
 
Historical records of solar events suggest that a reasonable range for the average return period for an 
extreme geomagnetic storm is 100-250 years. This is similar to other extreme hazard scenarios such as 
large earthquakes and explosive volcanic eruptions19. In the following section we describe some of the 
evidence for extreme geomagnetic storms in the historical auroral record. 

4.1  Movement of the Geomagnetic Pole 
 
One complication with using historical auroral records is the movement of the geomagnetic pole. The 
location of the centre of the auroral oval is not constant in time. This movement is taken into account when 
interpreting the significance of historical auroral locations. The centre of the auroral oval is on the 
geomagnetic pole, which is not coincident with the magnetic pole that a compass would point to. The 
geomagnetic poles can be used to define a system of geomagnetic dipole coordinates (see Corrected 
Geomagnetic Coordinates box).  

4.2  Aurora Displays 
 
Auroral records have been used to establish the existence of the solar activity cycle in the past. As far back 
as it has been studied, the auroral frequency does vary cyclically with a period very close to the modern 
10.5-year average cycle. Indications of a particularly strong geomagnetic storm include: aurora of any kind 
within 25-30 degrees of the magnetic equator, strong aurorae for multiple nights, and aurorae observed in 
both the northern and southern hemisphere. 
 
An observable physical event that occurs during extreme geomagnetic storms is a red aurora at mid-to-low 
magnetic latitudes. For example, there were two significant aurora displays associated with the Carrington 
event: 29 August and 2 September. Visible aurora reached 25N and 18N corrected geomagnetic latitude 
on the two respective dates20. Overhead aurorae reached 48N and 41N, respectively. Only one other 
storm during that period had a similarly low-latitude extent: February 187221. Several storms have been 
documented with aurora that reached ~30N: September 1909, May 1921, January 1938, February 1958, 
and March 1989 (the Quebec event). 

4.3  Auroral Catalogs 
 
Between 371 and 17 B.C., there were seven aurora-like torch sightings over Greece, Italy, and southern 
Gaul22. Seven events over ~350 years suggest that the lower limit for the recurrence interval of Quebec-level 
and greater storms is ~50 years. During the period 1137-1648 A.D. there were two intense geomagnetic 
storms in East Asia23, indicating a lower limit on the recurrence interval of Carrington-scale storms of 
approximately 250 years. Over the period 817 AD to 1570 AD, there were 20 credible aurora sightings from 
Yemen, Iraq, Egypt, Syria, and Morocco, five of which were Carrington-level24,25. This sets a lower limit on 
the recurrence interval of Quebec-level or greater at 38 years, and Carrington-scale events at 151 years. 
 
Based on information from historical auroral records, the mid-point estimate for the return period of a 
Carrington-level is 150 years, with a reasonable range of 100 - 250 years. For a Quebec-level event, the 
return period is 50 years, with a reasonable range of 35 - 70 years. These estimates are consistent with 
return periods derived from power-law modeling of the Dst distribution26 and statistical analysis of historical 
events27. 
 

 

 
8 
 

 

 
 

Solar storm risk to the north American electric grid 

5  Relative Risk Factors 
The space weather threat to power grids is determined by both physical and technological risk factors. The 
dominant physical risk factors are: corrected geomagnetic latitude (Figure 2), the ground conductivity profile 
down to several hundred meters, and the distance from the coast. Technological risk factors include 
infrastructure characteristics such as: the length of connecting transmission lines, kV rating of the lines, 
extra-high voltage (EHV) transformer internal and grounding resistance, EHV transformer core construction, 
and the presence or absence of capacitors which block the flow of geomagnetically induced currents. 

5.1  Magnetic Latitude 
 
The risk of strong magnetic field fluctuations depends strongly on corrected geomagnetic latitude (Figure 2). 
During less severe magnetic storms, atmospheric currents are mainly confined to high magnetic latitudes 
and we associate them with visible aurora (e.g. Northern Lights). During extreme storms these currents are 
also found at lower latitudes, although still at a lower strength than the currents at high latitudes. Even 
regions of low magnetic latitude are not completely free of risk; for example, during the 2003 Halloween 
storm, transformers in South Africa sustained damage severe enough to remove them from service28. This 
magnetic latitude (35-45) is equivalent to magnetic latitudes covering the Southern U.S. from California to 
Florida.  
 
 

 

 

 

 
 

Figure 2: Bands of magnetic latitude are color-coded by AERs model of relative risk from extreme 
geomagnetic storms. Dark and light purple represent regions of highest and lowest risk, 
respectively. 

 

9 

Solar storm risk to the north American electric grid 
 

5.2  Ground Conductivity 
 
 
The same magnetic field time-series does not result in the 
same surface electric field in all regions of the globe. It 
depends on the profile of local ground conductivity. Figure 
3 shows the relative risk due to ground conductivity model 
variations in continental US29 and Canada. The risk is 
determined from an average of surface electric field 
strengths derived from many different historical magnetic 
field time series30.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 3: Relative risk from strong electric field 
fluctuations in the US and Canada based on 
ground conductivity models. Red and blue 
represents the highest and lowest risk regions, 
respectively. 

5.3  Coast Effect 
 
Coastal regions experience an enhancement in the surface electric field due to the high conductivity of 
seawater. This can be thought of as the seawater carrying extra charge, and the nearby, grounded, 
transformers provide a path for the current to flow. The enhancement from the coast effect increases 
exponentially towards the coast31.  

5.4  Line Length and Rating 
 
The total resistance along each transmission line is made up of three components: transmission line 
resistance, transformer internal resistance and transformer grounding resistance. The latter two are fixed, 
while the former increases with distance. The current carried by the line also increases with distance; 
therefore the total risk increases with the total path length. 
 
Transformer core type is also significant for risk. Certain types are more vulnerable to internal heating than 
others. There are broad relationships of core type with kV and MVA rating; in general, transformers above 
500 kV are single phase, while below this they are predominately three-phase. This is significant because 
single-phase transformers are more vulnerable to internal heating than three-phase transformers given the 
same level of geomagnetically induced current. The higher voltage lines also offer less resistance, and 
therefore larger currents flow relative to lower voltage lines when exposed to the same surface electric fields. 

5.5  Relative Risk by County 
 
These risk factors can be combined for each EHV transformer 
and then summarised to estimate the relative risk by county. 
The scale of relative risk ranges over a factor of 1000 (Figure 
4). This means that for some counties, the chance of an 
average transformer experiencing a damaging geomagnetically 
induced current is more than 1000 times that risk in the lowest 
risk county. The regions with the highest risk are along the 
corridor between Washington D.C. and New York City. Other 
high-risk regions are the Midwest and regions along the Gulf 
Coast. 
 
 
 
 
 

 

 

Figure 4: Relative risk of power outage by 
county in New England. 
 
10 
 

Solar storm risk to the north American electric grid 

 

6  Dynamic Risk Assessment 
One way to understand geomagnetic storm risk is to simulate Carrington-level storms and model the electric 
grid response. Essentially, such a model is a combination of geophysical risk characteristics simulated in a 
realistic way, and enough information about grid components to create models of transformer internal 
heating, reactive power consumption, and voltage stability. Voltage stability and collapse during an extreme 
storm is particularly complex as it requires modeling the AC power flow through the grid and detailed 
transformer specifications and is not covered in the current study. 

6.1  Carrington-Level Storm Time-Series 
 
Carrington-level geomagnetic storm simulations can be created using statistical models of past storms or 
simulations of the interaction between extreme solar wind conditions and the geomagnetic field. Simulated 
magnetic field time-series are then combined with the local ground conductivity structure to derive the 
surface electric fields. Figure 5 shows electric field amplitudes and directions across the US at a single time 
step during a simulated Carrington storm. Regions shaded in dark purple are experiencing the strongest 
ground electric fields.  

Figure 5: A snapshot of electric field amplitudes (color-scale) and direction (barbs) during a simulated 
Carrington-level storm. Regions shaded in dark purple are experiencing the strongest surface electric 
fields at that time. 

6.2  Power Grid Model 
 
Extreme storm simulations can be combined with a power grid model to estimate the geomagnetically 
induced current flowing through each EHV transformer at each point in time. While these calculations are 
complex, they are also relatively well-understood and documented in the literature32,33,34,35. The results 
described here are based on a model that uses commercially available transmission grid data as the 
framework of the GIC power flow model. The GIC flows are then used to assess transformer vulnerability 
due to internal heating during the storm.  

 

 
 

11 

Solar storm risk to the north American electric grid 
 
6.3  Transformer Age Distribution 
 
The model includes a distribution of installation years for the EHV population (Figure 6), which is derived 
from past installation records (excluding replacements) and a hazard function describing yearly failures36, 
which considers an ongoing failure rate of hundreds of large power transformers per year.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Figure 6: Estimated number of large power 
transformers installed before and after 1972. 
1972 has been used in the grid industry as 
reference point for a significant change in the 
robustness of transformers to GIC due to 
changes in manufacture and design (Bartley 
2002). 

6.4  Transformer Internal Heating 
 
One of the dangers to EHV transformers during a 
geomagnetic storm is internal heating caused by flux 
leakage from the core. The flow of geomagnetically induced 
currents through the transformer can rapidly heat 
components that were not designed to withstand this extra 
energy. Two of the more well-understood components that 
are sensitive to GIC flow are the winding hot spot and the 
tie plates. In Figure 7 we show an example of the rise in the 
winding hot spot temperature for a transformer exposed to 
a constant level of 50 and 30 Amps per phase (based on 
transformer tests shown in Marti et al. 201337). 
Temperature models based on transformer core type are used 
to assess two metrics: 1) total loss of life accumulated through a 
storm and 2) the number and distribution of transformers with 
winding hot spots that exceeded a critical damage threshold.  
 
 

 

Figure 7: Rise in transformer winding 
hot spot temperature when exposed to 
constant levels of 50 and 30 amps per 
phase of direct current. Different 
transformer construction types have 
different responses to DC, but all show a 
rise. 

 

 
12 
 

 

Solar storm risk to the north American electric grid 

 
6.5  Damage Criteria and Outage 
 
GIC as a function of time can be coupled with 
transformer temperature models to follow winding 
hot spot temperatures (or other metrics) 
throughout the storm. It is reasonable to expect 
that most of the transformer failures during an 
extreme geomagnetic storm would come from the 
population that has exceeded a critical 
temperature threshold.  
 
Another metric of interest is the loss of 
transformer life due to overheating during a storm. 
Even a transformer whose winding hot spot 
remained below the critical temperature threshold 
will sustain insulation damage, and this reduces 
the lifetime of the transformer. This additional 
loss-of-life in years is incorporated into the model. 
 

Figure 8: Example of modeled geomagnetically induced 
current through a transformer during an extreme storm 
simulation (top) and the corresponding increase in 
winding hot spot temperature in the transformer 
(bottom). In this simulation the winding hot spot 
temperature exceeded the IEEE guidelines of 180C, 
indicating vulnerability to damage. 
 

To investigate outage scenarios by county, we derive 
metrics that map to the fraction of EHV transformers 
serving each county. Figure 9 shows results by county for 
the severity of EHV transformer damage for one extreme 
storm scenario. Red indicates counties where the 
overwhelming majority of EHV transformers are out of 
service, orange indicates a majority out of service, yellow 
indicates a minority out of service, and green is few or 
none. Red and orange are likely to be without power. 
Yellow is uncertain. Green can be considering as having 
power.  
 
If spares are readily available, the total transportation and 
setup time for a large power transformer can range from a 
few weeks to months depending on distance and logistical 
issues38. If new transformers need to be ordered, the lead-
time is estimated to be between 5-12 months for domestic 
suppliers, and 6-16 months for international 
suppliers39,40,41. 
 
The total number of damaged transformers is less relevant 
for prolonged regional power outage than their 
concentration. The failure of a small number of 
transformers serving a highly populated area is enough to 
create a situation of prolonged outage. So while storms 
weaker than Carrington, but stronger than Quebec, could 
result in a smaller number of damaged transformers around 
10-20), the potential for concentration of damage along the 
Atlantic coast is extremely concerning.  

13 

 

            

6.6  Outage Scenarios 

Figure 9: Fraction of EHV transformers 
damaged by county during an extreme 
geomagnetic storm scenario. Red and 
orange are likely to be without power. 
Yellow is uncertain. Green would be very 
likely to have power. 

 

 

 
 

Solar storm risk to the north American electric grid 
 

7  Awareness and Preparation 
Given the extensive impact geomagnetic storms can have on the electric grid and power supply, preventative 
measures that may mitigate the effect of these storms are important. The JASON Defense Advisory Panel 
Report42 recommends establishing a space weather monitoring program for CMEs and ensuring the safety of 
vital grid components with protective installations.  
 
Currently, four space satellites (SOHO - Solar and Heliospheric Observatory, ACE  Advanced Composition 
Explorer, and STEREO A/B  Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory) monitor the Sun. Situated between 
the Sun and Earth or along Earths orbit, these satellites can provide warnings of incoming CMEs on a 
timescale of a few days to hours. These warnings allow electric grid operators to take protective measures 
(i.e., decrease the electric load in the grid and increase reactive power production) before the storm hits. 
However these satellites are all several years past their planned mission lives43 and only one has a 
replacement scheduled to launch in 2014.  
 
Additionally, several steps can be taken to harden the electric grid against geomagnetically induced currents: 
neutral-current-blocking capacitors can be installed to block GIC from flowing into at-risk transformers, 
series-line capacitors can be installed on autotransformers, improvements can be made to the tripping 
techniques to avoid false tripping from GIC harmonics, and the utilisation of GIC monitors at transformers will 
ensure that current levels remain stable.  
 
Since the 1989 Quebec storm and power outage, the Canadian government has invested $1.2 billion (about 
$34 per person) into protecting the Hydro-Quebec grid infrastructure, installing numerous blocking 
capacitors44. While these mitigation strategies can be expensive up front (estimated cost of $100k per 
blocking capacitor for a total of $100 million to protect the 1,000 most vulnerable transformers45), the cost of 
prevention is much smaller than the cost of the damage a single storm can create. 
 
 

 

 
14 
 

 

Solar storm risk to the north American electric grid 

 

8  Implications for the Insurance Industry  
A severe space weather event that causes major disruption to the electricity network in North America could 
have major implications for the insurance industry. As highlighted in this report, the total US population at risk 
of an extended outage from a Carrington-level storm ranges between 20-40 million with durations up to 1-2 
years. The report also highlights that areas of high population concentrations, such as the corridor between 
Washington DC and New York City, could be at risk. The knock-on effects of loss of electricity are very 
difficult to quantify, but given the fact that our society is increasingly dependent on electricity they are likely to 
be severe and wide-ranging.  
 
If businesses, public services and households are without power for sustained periods of time, insurers could 
be exposed to significant business interruption claims, particularly as back-up supplies are only likely to last 
for a limited period. Typically business interruption cover under standard property policies will require 
physical damage. However, in the event of a major space weather event transformers could be damaged 
leading to a physical damage trigger. Even in a case of pure voltage collapse without equipment damage, 
the incapacity of the grid itself could be deemed physical damage, because it is unable to perform its 
essential function (see the decision on Wakefern vs. Liberty Mutual, 200946 from the North American 
blackout of August 2003).  
 
Business interruption is likely to be only one aspect of potential insurance exposure. A major space weather 
event could disrupt supply chains and this might trigger contingent business interruption covers  again there 
could be issues around physical damage triggers. Major disruption to the power network is also likely to lead 
to wide scale cancellation of events (cultural, sporting and others) which could affect insurers offering this 
type of cover. It is also conceivable that major power outages could result in liability claims if, say for 
example, employees safety was compromised or the public were put at risk. Furthermore, if companies and 
other organisations impacted by a space weather event were viewed as not taking appropriate preventative 
action, they could be susceptible to directors and officers claims. 
 
In the more extreme end of the spectrum, a major space weather event on the scale of the Carrington Event 
could lead to power loss for a period of weeks or more. This would cause major disruption to transport, food 
supplies, emergency and hospital services amongst other things. For example, if pumping operations 
needed  to be suspended that would quickly affect water and fuel supplies, sewage systems and flood 
defences. The absence of such fundamental services could lead to major and widespread social unrest, riots 
and theft with ramifications for the insurance industry and society in general. It is also likely that financial 
markets (especially as the financial sector is generally concentrated in the areas most at risk i.e. the north-
east of the US) could be significantly disrupted by a severe space weather event, which would have major 
global financial impacts, including on insurers in terms of their investment portfolios  
 
As highlighted earlier in the report, the return period for very severe storms is around 150 years. The 
insurance industry often plans for and is regulated in certain countries (in the UK for example) to hold capital 
for 1 in 200 year events. Given the difficulties of estimating probabilities for extreme events, it could be 
argued that the grid network, including transformers, should aim to protect society to at least a level of 1 in 
250 years. This would allow a tolerance for error. 
 
The insurance industry can play a key role in helping businesses and communities better understand the 
potential risks they face from solar storms and assist in mitigating these risks. In particular, some insurers 
are considering how to model the risks of geomagnetic storms on earth systems and apply expertise and 
learning from more traditional catastrophe modelling to the impacts of solar storms. 
 

 

 

 
 

15 

Solar storm risk to the north American electric grid 
 

9  Conclusions 
Given the essential role electricity plays in society today, it is crucial to understand how natural hazards 
impact the reliability of the grid. The hazard posed by geomagnetic storms is one of the most concerning due 
to the potential for long-term, widespread power outage. While the probability of an extreme storm occurring 
is relatively low at any given time, one will occur eventually. And as the electric infrastructure ages and we 
become more and more dependent on electricity, the risk of a catastrophic outage increases with each peak 
of the solar cycle.  
 
Considering physical and technological risk factors such as magnetic latitude, distance to the coast, ground 
conductivity, and transmission grid properties, it is clear that the corridor between Washington D.C. and New 
York City are at the highest risk for power outages from damaged transformers. Other high-risk regions 
include the Midwest and the Gulf Coast states. Dynamic simulations of extreme geomagnetic storms suggest 
that the total human population at risk of extended outage from a Carrington-level storm ranges between 20-
40 million in the at-risk areas, with durations of 16 days up to 1-2 years. 
 
Depending on the number of EHV transformers immediately available for replacement, outages in highly 
impacted regions could last from weeks to months. In fact, geomagnetic storms weaker than the extreme, 
Carrington-level storm still have the potential to be extremely costly if transformer damage is concentrated in 
small regions with large populations.  
 
Given the potential for large-scale, long-term economic and societal chaos, it is necessary to evaluate 
preparatory and mitigative measures. There are currently several space satellites in operation that can 
provide warnings of incoming CMEs on the timescale of hours to days, timescales that could allow grid 
operators to take preventative measures before the storm hits.  
 
However, magnetic field strength and orientation of incoming plasma  key ingredients in forecasting Earth 
impacts, can only be measured with a lead time of 15-30 minutes. Additionally, these satellites are all past 
their mission lives, and replacements are essential for monitoring solar activity in the near future. 
Improvement in forecasting Earth impacts will only be made by funding research targeted at predicting and 
continued investment in the infrastructure necessary to measure impulsive solar wind events. 
 
The electric grid can be hardened against the flow of geomagnetically induced currents in regions with the 
highest risk of outage. Current blocking capacitors and GIC monitors can be installed to protect transformers 
and regulate the power flow. While these measures represent additional costs to grid companies, the cost of 
prevention is much smaller than the price of damage a single storm can create.  
 
A severe geomagnetic storm event could have significant implications for the insurance industry, as well as 
society as a whole. The insurance industry can play a key role, working together with energy and utility 
companies and governments, to address the risk posed by solar storms. 
 

 

 
16 
 

 

Solar storm risk to the north American electric grid 

10 Appendix 
The economic costs of the outage scenarios are estimated by calculating the percentage of residential, 
commercial, and industrial customers without power by state and using the average amount of electricity 
consumed by each segment in each state per hour47. The total amount of electricity "lost" for each sector in 
each state is then the product of these items. 
 
Chapter 2 of "Electric Power Distribution and Reliability"48 provides an estimate of average interruption costs 
for residential, commercial, and industrial customers in 2001 dollars. We assume a linear relationship with 
time and estimate: $2.00/kW, $19.38/kW, and $8.40/kW for residential, commercial, and industrial 
customers, respectively. A factor of 1.31 accounts for inflation from 2001 to 2013. The total economic cost is 

 

 
 

the sum of costs by segment by state. 

 

 

 
 

17 

Solar storm risk to the north American electric grid 
 

11 Glossary 
 
Auroral  Pertaining to aurorae, an atmospheric phenomenon where streams or bands of light appear in 
the northern skies caused by collision of charged particles.  
 
Capacitor  An electrical component used to store energy in an electric field. 
 
CME  Coronal mass ejection. A burst of plasma from the sun. 
 
Dipole  A pair of equal and opposite charges separated by a distance. 
 
Dst  Disturbance storm time. A measure of the geomagnetic disturbance level on a global scale. It is 
measured in units of nanoTeslas, or nT. A more negative Dst value indicates a stronger storm. 
 
EHV  Extra-high-voltage; in reference to power transformers with a maximum voltage rating greater than or 
equal to 345 kV. 
 
Flux  The rate of flow of energy through an area. 
 
GIC  Geomagnetically induced current. Direct current flowing through transmission lines induced by rapidly 
varying electric fields on the surface of the Earth.  
 
Harmonics  Integer multiples of the fundamental power system frequency. Harmonics appear when non-
linear loads are connected to the power system. Geomagnetically induced currents result in harmonics and 
their resultant power system disturbances. 
 
Ionosphere  Region of Earths upper atmosphere (about 85-600 km above the surface). 
 
kV  Kilovolt. Voltage unit used in the high voltage transmission system 
 
Magnetosphere  Region of space near an astronomical object (in this case, the Sun) that is controlled by 
the objects magnetic field. 
 
MVA  Mega volt-ampere, or 106 VA. The vol-ampere is the unit for the apparent power in an electrical 
circuit. 
 
Power Law Modeling  Modeling the behavior of something by an exponential (i.e., y(x) = xk). 
 
Resistance (transmission lines)  The opposition of electric current flowing through a transmission line. 
 
Solar Proton Event  An event when protons from the Sun are accelerated to high energies during a 
coronal mass ejection. 
 
Tie Plate  Metal plates used to anchor a transformer. 
 
Transformer  A device that transfers energy by induction. 
 
VAR  Volt-ampere reactive; a unit of reactive power in electrical systems. Reactive power is used to support 
the transfer of real power across the electric grid. 
 
Winding hot spot  The hottest point of a transformers winding. 
 

 

 
18 
 

 

Solar storm risk to the north American electric grid 

 

12 References  

                                                                 
 
 
1 Amin, M. & Schewe, P., Scientific American, August 2008. Preventing Blackouts: Building a Smarter 
Power Grid  
 
2 Chen, A. Q., Wang, J. X., Li, J. W., Feynman, J., & Zhang, J., Astronomy & Astrophysics, 534, A47, 
October 2011. Statistical Properties of Superactive Regions During Solar Cycles 19-23 
 
3 Ramesh, B., Astrophysical Journal Letters, 712, 77, 2010. Coronal Mass Ejections and Sunspots  Solar 
Cycle Perspective 
 
4 Albertson, V. D. & Van Baelen, J. A., IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, 89, 4, 578, 
April 1970. Electric and Magnetic Fields at the Earths Surface Due to Auroral Currents 
 
5 Boteler, D. H., Pirjola, R. J., & Nevanlinna, H., Advances in Space Research, 22, 1, 17, 1998. The Effects 
of Geomagnetic Disturbances on Electrical Systems at the Earths Surface 
 
6 Molinski, T. S., Feero, W. E., & Damsky, B. L., IEEE Spectrum, 37, 11, 55, November 2000. Shielding 
Grids from Solar Storms (Power System Protection) 
 
7 Cliver, E. W. & Svalgaard, L., Solar Physics, 224, 1-2, 407, October 2004. The 1859 Solar-Terrestrial 
Disturbance and the Current Limits of Extreme Space Weather Activity 
 
8 Green, J. L. & Boardesn, S., Advances in Space Research, 38, 2, 130, 2006. Duration and Extent of the 
Great Auroral Storm of 1859 
 
9 Boteler, D. H., Advances in Space Research, 38, 159, 2006. The Super Storms of August/September 1859 
and their Effects on the Telegraph System 
 
10 Bolduc, L., Journal of Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics, 64, 16, 1793, November 2002. GIC 
Observations and Studies in the Hydro-Quebec Power System 
 
11 Boteler, D. H., Pirjola, R. J., & Nevanlinna, H., Advances in Space Research, 22, 1, 17, 1998. The Effects 
of Geomagnetic Disturbances on Electrical Systems at the Earths Surface 
 
12 Albertson, V. D. & Van Baelen, J. A., IEEE Transactions on Power Apparatus and Systems, 89, 4, 578, 
April 1970. Electric and Magnetic Fields at the Earths Surface Due to Auroral Currents 
 
13 The MITRE Corporation, JASON Report, November 2011. Impacts of Severe Space Weather on the 
Electric Grid 
 
14 Power Delivery Technical Report, TR-100450, June 1992. Proceedings: Geomagnetically Induced 
Currents Conference 
 
15 Pulkkinen, A., Lindahl, S., Viljanen, A., & Pirjola, R., Space Weather, 3, 8, August 2005. Geomagnetic 
Storm of 29-31 October 2003: Geomagnetically Induced Currents and their Relation to Problems in the 
Swedish High-Voltage Power Transmission System 
 
16 Gaunt, C. T. & Coetzee, G., 2007 IEEE Lausanne, 807, July 2007. Transformer Failures in Regions 
Incorrectly Considered to have Low GIC-Risk 
 
17 Eather, R. H., AGU, 1980. Majestic Lights: The Aurora in Science, History, and the Arts 
 
18 Eather, R. H., AGU, 1980. Majestic Lights: The Aurora in Science, History, and the Arts 
 
19 Love, J. J., Geophysical Research Letters, 39, 10, May 2012. Credible Occurrence Probabilities for 
Extreme Geophysical Events: Earthquakes, Volcanic Eruptions, Magnetic Storms 
 

 

 
 

19 

Solar storm risk to the north American electric grid 
 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
 
20 Green, J. L. & Boardesn, S., Advances in Space Research, 38, 2, 130, 2006. Duration and Extent of the 
Great Auroral Storm of 1859 
 
21 Cliver, E. W. & Svalgaard, L., Solar Physics, 224, 1-2, 407, October 2004. The 1859 Solar-Terrestrial 
Disturbance and the Current Limits of Extreme Space Weather Activity 
 
22 Stothers, R., Isis, 70, 85, 1979. Ancient Aurorae 
 
23 Willis, D. M., Armstrong, G. M., Ault, C. E., & Stephenson, F. R., Ann. Geophys., 23, 945, 2005. 
Identification of Possible Intense Historical Geomagnetic Storms Using Combined Sunspot and Auroral 
Observations from East Asia 
 
24 Basurah, H. M., Journal of Atmospheric and Solar-Terrestrial Physics, 68, 8, 937, May 2006. Records of 
Aurora in the Islamic Chronicles during 9th-16th Centuries 
 
25 Basurah, H. M., Journal of King Abdul Aziz University, 22, 2, 195, 2010. Auroras in Arabian Peninsula 
 
26 Riley, P., Space Weather, 10, 2, 2012. On the probability of occurrence of extreme space weather events 
 
27 Love, J. J., Geophysical Research Letters, 39, 10, May 2012. Credible Occurrence Probabilities for 
Extreme Geophysical Events: Earthquakes, Volcanic Eruptions, Magnetic Storms 
 
28 Pulkkinen, A., Lindahl, S., Viljanen, A., & Pirjola, R., Space Weather, 3, 8, August 2005. Geomagnetic 
Storm of 29-31 October 2003: Geomagnetically Induced Currents and their Relation to Problems in the 
Swedish High-Voltage Power Transmission System 
 
29 United States Geological Survey and Fernberg, P., J. Gannon, and B. Bedrosian (2013), US regional 1-d 
conductivity maps, under review 
 
30 Wei, L. H., N. Homeier, J. Gannon, Surface Electric Fields for North America During Historical 
Geomagnetic Storms, submitted to Space Weather Journal 
 
31 Pirjola, R., Advances in Applied Physics, 1, 1, 9, 2013. Practical Model Applicable to Investigating the 
Coast Effect on the Geoelectric Field in Connection with Studies of Geomagnetically Induced Currents 
 
32 Overbye, T. J., Hutchins, T. R., Shetye, K., Weber, J., & Dahman, S., North American Power Symposium, 
September 2012. Integration of Geomagnetic Disturbance Modeling into the Power Flow 
 
33 Pulkkinen, A., Viljanen, A., & Pirjola, R., Space Weather, 4, S08005, 2006. Estimation of Geomagnetically 
Induced Current Levels from Different Input Data 
 
34 Trichtchenko, A. A., Boteler, D. H., & Foss, A., Canadian Conference on Electric and Computer 
Engineering, 2006. GIC Modeling for an Overdetermined System 
 
35 Viljanen, A., et al., Journal of Space Weather and Space Climate, 2, A17, 2012. Continental Scale 
Modeling of Geomagnetically Induced Currents 
 
36 Bartley, W., Breakthrough Asset Management for the Restructured Power Industry, 2002. Life Cycle 
Management of Utility Transformer Assets 
 
37 Marti, L., Rezaei-Zare, A., Narang, A., IEEE Transactions on Power Delivery, January 2013, Vol. 28, No. 1 
 
38  Office of Energy Delivery & Electric Reliability, Report, June 2012. Large Power Transformers and the 
U.S. Electric Grid 
 
39 Office of Energy Delivery & Electric Reliability, Report, June 2012. Large Power Transformers and the 
U.S. Electric Grid 
 
40 U.S. International Trade Commission, Investigation No. 731-TA-1189, publication 4346, August 2012. 
Large Power Transformers from Korea 
 
20 
 

 

Solar storm risk to the north American electric grid 

 
                                                                                                                                                                                                                     
 
 
   
41 Corbin, R. B., Fast-Track Power. The Challenges of Replacing a Failed Transformer 
 
42 The MITRE Corporation, JASON Report, November 2011. Impacts of Severe Space Weather on the 
Electric Grid 
 
43 The MITRE Corporation, JASON Report, November 2011. Impacts of Severe Space Weather on the 
Electric Grid 
 
44 CENTRA Technology, on behalf of the Office of Risk Management and Analysis, US Department of 
Homeland Security, OECD/IFP Futures Project on Future Global Shocks, January 2011. Geomagnetic 
Storms 
 
45 The MITRE Corporation, JASON Report, November 2011. Impacts of Severe Space Weather on the 
Electric Grid 
 
46 McCarter & English, May 2009, 
http://www.mccarter.com/new/files/6852_5.09%20WakefernFoodCorp_print.pdf 
 
47 U.S. Energy Information Administration (http://www.eia.gov/electricity/data/state/ ) 
 
48 Brown, R. E., 2009. Electric Power Distribution and Reliability, 2nd Edition. Richard  
  E. Brown, CRC 2009 

 

 
 

21 

