EDPACS June 2005.fm  Page 14  Monday, April 11, 2005  2:31 PM

E D P A C S

JUNE 2005

FIGHTING SPYWARE 
AND ADWARE IN THE 
ENTERPRISE
SARAH GORDON
While  obvious  security  threats  like  fast-spreading  worms

have  a  tendency  to  garner  news  headlines,  other  stealthy
security  risks  threaten  businesses  every  day.  Increasing
amounts of spyware and adware programs have the ability to
facilitate the disclosure of business information and risk pri-
vacy, confidentiality, integrity, and system availability. Cor-
porations usually accumulate a vault of information that could
cause serious problems if it were shared with the wrong con-
tacts or, even worse, taken. Spywares evolution from simple
cookies to a range of sophisticated user-tracking systems has
left  many  businesses  without  the  control  over  their  propri-
etary data and operations.

A recent IDC survey identified spyware as the fourth great-
est threat to enterprise security. Security threats infiltrating
businesses  today  vary  from  an  array  of  viruses,  Trojan
horses, and worms that pose a threat to consumers confiden-
tial  data.  Many  will  recall  the  first  computer  virus  that
appeared in 1981, requiring users to physically transport an
infected disk to another computer for the virus to spread.
Since that time, the amplified use of technology, along with
improved computer speed, has provided malicious programs
with the ability to spread rapidly, export personal and confi-
dential data, and bog down computer systems. The widespread
distribution  of  more  recent  virus  threats  such  as  Sasser,
Blaster, and MyDoom spread rapidly and brought entire net-
works to their knees. Even more complex than traditional
threats, a new destructive force called blended threats com-
bines  a  number  of  dangers  together  to  form  one  powerful
enemy.

Despite their elusive nature, adware and spyware vary in
both prevalence and impact. In some instances, these pro-
grams can perform innocuous activity such as keeping track
of  Web  sites  visited  for  advertising  purposes,  with  little
impact other than the consumption of resources. Other times,
these programs will perform overtly malicious activity, such
as  logging  keystrokes  and  exporting  sensitive  data.  If  left
unattended or unnoticed, they have the potential to wreak
havoc  on  computers  and  networks  by  tying  up  system
resources and making computers completely inoperable.

It is difficult to calculate the amount of spyware and adware
that exists at any given time. An AOL/National Cyber Security
Alliance  (NCSA)  Online  Safety  Study  recently  found  that

14

 Copyright 2005 Taylor & FrancisAll rights reserved.

EDPACS June 2005.fm  Page 15  Monday, April 11, 2005  2:31 PM

JUNE 2005

E D P A C S

DESPITE THEIR
DIFFERENCES,
THESE TWO
COUSINS ACQUIRE
INFORMATION
WITHOUT EXPLICIT
PERMISSION OR
NOTIFICATION.

80 percent of scanned computers actually had some form of
spyware or adware present.

In reality, it is not unusual to become infected with more
than one type of spyware or adware.  After surfing popular
kid-focused  Web  sites  for  one  hour,  Symantec  found  359
pieces of adware left behind on a computer. This February
2005  study  detected  17  adware  threats  and  two  spyware
threats after browsing six sports sites. Additionally, 64 pieces
of adware and two pieces of spyware were detected on five
travel  Web  sites,  and  23  instances  of  adware  and  four
instances of spyware were revealed on six gaming sites.

DANGERS OF SPYWARE 
Although  similar,  spyware  and  adware  perform  different
functions. Spyware scans computer systems, monitors Inter-
net  activity,  and  relays  information  to  other  computers  in
cyberspace.  Adware  has  much  more  limited  capabilities.
Adware  monitors  Web  browsing  habits  or  preferences  and
transmits that information to third parties that use it for tar-
get  advertising.  Despite  their  differences,  these  two  cousins
acquire  information  without  explicit  permission  or  notifica-
tion.

In a scan of 3 million computers systems over nine months,
Earthlink found 83 million instances of spyware. Most often,
employees introduce spyware into their computer systems by
downloading free Internet programs such as shareware or
freeware software. Spyware can also be hidden in links to e-
mail messages, instant messaging clients, or in the terms of
some software end user license agreements (EULAs). Hun-
dreds of popular file-sharing programs, games, utilities, and
media players come bundled with these malicious programs.

It is relatively easy to install spyware by neglecting to read
EULAs and naively accept license agreements. Some spyware
conforms to strong standards that present users with an easy-
to-read EULA, clearly stating what the program will do. Other
forms of spyware come bundled with desired software without
the users knowledge.

Spyware uses various methods to retrieve and supply data
to another person. Spyware programs such as E-Blaster will
track e-mail, instant message usage, and keystrokes in stealth
mode. They then send periodic e-mails containing the logged
information to a predefined e-mail address. Even beyond log-
ging keystrokes, some spyware will perform screen captures,
scan  PCs,  and  corrupt  data.  They  will  also  trap  e-mail  or
instant  messaging  traffic  and  harvest  sensitive  personal
information. Confidential information such as passwords and
account numbers disclosed and acquired through the Internet
provide  enough  information  for  anyone  with  a  malicious
intent to exploit.

 Copyright 2005 Taylor & FrancisAll rights reserved.

15

EDPACS June 2005.fm  Page 16  Monday, April 11, 2005  2:31 PM

E D P A C S

JUNE 2005

ADWARE CAN RISK 
THE DISCLOSURE OF 
CONFIDENTIAL DATA 
BY UNKNOWINGLY 
REDIRECTING 
INDIVIDUALS TO 
LOOK-ALIKE WEB 
SITES.

ADWARE  THE MENACE 
Analyst firm Gartner Inc. estimates that more than 20 million
people have installed adware, spywares less harmful cousin.
Despite the prevalence of adware, most employees do not rec-
ognize  the  dangers  associated  with  it.  Similar  to  spyware,
some  forms  of  adware  will  install  themselves  without  any
human  interaction.  Adware  can  risk  the  disclosure  of  confi-
dential data by unknowingly redirecting individuals to look-
alike Web sites. Internet users can also download adware by
simply  visiting  infected  Web  sites.  In  some  cases,  adware
downloads  when  users  click  on  links  in  e-mail  messages  or
instant messaging clients, or it comes bundled with other soft-
ware, with or without an EULA.

When  responding  to  pop-up  advertisements,  employees
should exercise caution and perform due diligence. The most
familiar and prevalent form of adware appears as Internet
pop-up windows or bars that track Web browsing habits or
preferences.  This  form  of  adware  will  track  sites  visited,
browsing habits, and apparent likes and dislikes. Data is then
sent to companies that purchase the services of an adware
provider. This gives advertisers the capability to create tailor-
made advertisements that are applicable to the users inter-
ests. Although adware provides information obtained by unau-
thorized access, it does not typically use any kind of personal
identifier during the collection of data.

THE BATTLE AGAINST SPYWARE AND ADWARE 
The most effective way to reduce risks from programs classi-
fied  as  security  risks  is  to  use  a  complete  security  solution
that deals with a wide range of threats. In particular, organi-
zations need a solution that categorizes programs according to
their  functionality  and  allows  them  to  choose  an  acceptable
risk  level.  Integrated  technologies  (anti-virus,  firewall,  and
intrusion protection) should work together to provide defense-
in-depth. For example, while an anti-virus solution works to
protect a system against spyware, a firewall allows an organi-
zation to create a list of recipients personal information and
to block unwanted advertisements. Furthermore, when a fire-
wall detects that an application is trying to establish an out-
bound network communication (as a spyware program would
to relay information to the outside world), it should automat-
ically close the port and prevent the transmission.

Other issues to consider include the number of spyware def-
initions supported by a particular solution, the process used
for finding new spyware programs, and how the definitions
are updated.

To strengthen their defenses, businesses should also con-
sider implementing additional security precautions, such as
securing encrypted Internet connections, implementing more
restrictive Web browser settings, and disabling the acceptance
of third-party cookies.

16

 Copyright 2005 Taylor & FrancisAll rights reserved.

EDPACS June 2005.fm  Page 17  Monday, April 11, 2005  2:31 PM

JUNE 2005

E D P A C S

IT IS IMPERATIVE TO
KNOW AND TRUST
THE AUTHENTICITY
OF ANY SOFTWARE
BEFORE
DOWNLOADING AND
INSTALLING IT.

In addition to the use of strong technologies, there are pol-
icy  measures  that  can  help  firms  reduce  their  risks.  For
example, make sure that you know and trust the authenticity
of any software before you download and install it. Read the
EULAs of software programs to make sure you know what
you  are  getting;  and  make  sure  that  you  understand,  and
agree with, the programs functionality. Examine EULAs care-
fully to make sure they are in agreement with your security
policy. Also, as some spyware is installed using ActiveX con-
trols,  consider  requiring  a  prompt  for  ActiveX  to  execute
within Web browsers.

Stringent  rules  for  downloading  and  installing  software
should play a role in establishing this stronghold. Restricting
employees from downloading software without the express
permission of the IT department is a sure way to maintain
defenses.  It is imperative to know and trust the authenticity
of any software before downloading and installing it.  The
adage Just say no! takes on a whole new meaning when reg-
ulating the installation and downloading of unauthorized com-
puter software.

The Federal Trade Commission warns that Before using a
file-sharing program, you may want to buy software that can
prevent the downloading of spyware or help detect it on your
hard drive. Due to the breadth of security threats and risks,
it is vital that organizations heed this warning and use secu-
rity products that can not only deal with spyware and adware,
but the entire breadth of Internet security threats. Anti-virus
and firewall products allow users to protect themselves from
malicious  code  such  as  viruses  and  Trojans,  as  well  as
expanded threats, which include spyware and adware.

Intolerance for these annoying and harmful programs has
reached new heights.  To combat adware and spyware, orga-
nizations and governments across the globe have started tak-
ing action to secure their defenses. Recently, the U.S. House of
Representatives unanimously voted to tighten jail sentences
for those who use spyware with malicious intent. Under the
Internet Spyware (I-SPY) Prevention Act of 2004, individuals
found guilty of using spyware to steal private information for
the purpose of misusing it or to compromise a computers
defenses could face up to two years behind bars. Those using
spyware to commit other federal crimes face up to five years
in prison  on top of their original sentences.

Government regulation, however, has its limits. Organiza-
tions working to protect themselves from all sides should heed
warnings  to  reinforce  security  defenses  by  implementing
strict security policies. 

Various laws and acts require systems storing or transmit-
ting  certain  types  of  data,  primarily  personal  information
related to health or finance, to conform to various types and
levels of privacy protection. Any time a new program is intro-
duced into a system, there is a potential risk. Organizations
required to comply with various acts  the Health Insurance

 Copyright 2005 Taylor & FrancisAll rights reserved.

17

EDPACS June 2005.fm  Page 18  Monday, April 11, 2005  2:31 PM

E D P A C S

JUNE 2005

Portability  and  Accountability  Act  (HIPAA)  for  healthcare
organizations or Graham-Leach-Bliley (GLB) for financial ser-
vices  need to ensure that newly introduced programs or
processes do not introduce unnecessary exposure or risk.

As  the  spate  of  new,  recent  legislative  and  FTC  activity
attests, public intolerance of spyware has reached a new pla-
teau.  In  the  enterprise  environment,  spyware  is  rapidly
becoming a serious security concern, particularly as most cor-
porate networks allow HTTP traffic, the means by which spy-
ware is propagated. As dependence on Internet connectivity in
the enterprise increases for day-to-day business operations,
risks from spyware and adware programs will continue to
require a multi-level defense, as well as adherence to good
security policies. Security administrators should take extra
measures to maintain a strong security posture on client sys-
tems. It takes cooperation among end-user groups, technical
support,  and  security  teams  to  ensure  that  a  companys
response to spyware keeps pace with this growing threat to
privacy. 

SARAH GORDON is Senior Principal Engineer at Symantec Security Response.

OF INTEREST

CONSOLIDATING USER CREDENTIALS 
INTO A SINGLE IDENTITY AND 
PROTECTING THIS WITH MULTI-FACTOR 
AUTHENTICATION CAN AVERT ONLINE 
FRAUD 

Protocom Development Systems (www.proto-
com.com) advises enterprises that deploying
credential  management  solutions  such  as
enterprise  single  sign-on  and  authentication
technologies  will  assist  them  in  establishing
the fundamental elements for secure E-busi-
ness and preventing online fraud. 

Enterprises reliance on online transac-
tions has caused grave implications for data
protection. At any one time, the data stored
and transmitted in business-to-business, cus-
tomer-to-business,  or  employee-to-business
transactions, without the necessary security
precautions, is vulnerable to attack, Proto-
com CEO Jason Hart said. 

Most  instances  of  online  theft,  such  as
phishing  or  rogue  administrator  fraud,
attack vulnerabilities in an enterprises secu-
rity landscape, such as weak proof-of-iden-
t i t y   p r a c t i c e ,   p o o r   u s e r   c r e d e n t i a l
management, or a lack of online event audit-
ing.  Enterprise  single  sign-on  technologies
strengthen  enterprise  networks  against
these threats by consolidating user creden-
tials into a single identity, enforcing strin-
gent  verification  of  this  identity,  strictly
managing  user  application  authentication
and access to online data, and auditing online
events. 

Enterprise  networks  have  never  been
more vulnerable to fraud. The sheer volume
of credentials a user needs to perform daily
jobs, combined with a notable lack of strong
user verification at the enterprise network
login, makes it easier than ever for fraud-
sters to gain access to sensitive data. Hart
added. 

18

 Copyright 2005 Taylor & FrancisAll rights reserved.

