884 

PUBLIC  LAW 93-205-DEC.  28,  1973 

[87  STAT. 

December  28,  1973 

' 

Public  Law  93-205 

^jsj  A CT 

To  provide  for  the  conservation  of  en(iangere<l  and  threatened  species  of  lish. 

wildlife,  and  i>lants.  and  for  other  pnr])oses. 

Endangered 

Species  Act  of 
1973!" ""'  "' 

Be  it  enacted  by  the  Senate  and  Hon>ie of  Representatives  of  the 
United  States  of  America,  in  Congresx  asseinhted.  That  this  Act  may 
be cited as the "Eiidaiijreied  Species Act of  lOT^V. 

T A B LE  OF  COXTKNTS 

Sec.  2.  Findings,  pnrposes.  and  policy. 
Sec.  3.  Definitions. 
Sec.  4. Determination  of  endangered  species and  threatened  species. 
Sec.  5.  Land  acquisition. 
Sec.  6. Cooperation  with  the  States. 
Sec.  7.  Interagency  cooperation. 
Sec.  8.  International  cooperation. 
Sec.  9.  Prohibited  acts. 
Sec.  10. Exceptions. 
Sec.  11. Penalties  and  enforcement. 
Sec.  12.  Endangered  plants. 
Sec.  13. Conforming  amendments. 
Sec.  14.  Repealer. 
Sec.  15. Authorization  of  appropriations. 
Sec.  16. Effective  date. 
Sec.  17. Marine  Mammal  Protection  Act  of  1!)72. 

-

1'1ND1N;S.  PIKPOSKS.  A M) 

I'OMCY 

, 

SEC.  2.  (a)  FINDINGS.The  Congress  finds  and  declares  that 

(1)  various  species  of  fish,  wildlife,  and  plants  in  the  United 
States  have  been  rendered  extinct  as  a  consequence  of  economic 
growth  and  development  untempered  by  adequate  concern  and 
conservation; 

(2)  other  species  of  fish,  wildlife,  and  plants  have  been  so 
depleted  in  numbers  that  they  are  in  danger  of  or  threatened 
with  extinction; 

(3)  these  species  of  fish,  wildlife,  and  plants  are  of  esthetic, 
ecological, educational, historical, recreational, and scientific  value 
to  the  Nation  and  its  people; 

(4)  the  United  States  has  pledged  itself  as  a  sovereign  state 

in  the  international  community  to  conserve  to the  extent  practica(cid:173)
ble  the  various  species  of  fish  or  wildlife  and  plants  facing 
extinction,  pursuant  to 

(A)  migratory  bird  treaties  with  C'anada  and  Mexico; 
(B)  the  Migratory  and  Endangered  Bird  Treaty  with 

J a p a n; 

(C)  the  Convention  on  Nature  Protection  and  Wildlife 

Preservation  in  the  Western  Hemisphere; 
for 

(D)  the  International  Convention 

the  Northwest 

Atlantic  Fisheries; 

(E)  the  International  Convention  for  the High  Seas  Fish-

eries  of  the  North  Pacific  Ocean; 

(F)  the  Convention  on  International  Trade  in  Endan(cid:173)

gered  Species  of  Wild  Fauna  and  Flora;  and 

(G)  other  international  agreements. 
the  States  and  other 

(5)  encouraging 

interested  parties, 
through  Federal  financial  assistance  and  a  system  of  incentives, 
to  develop  and  maintain  conservation  programs  which  meet 
national  and  international  standards  is  a  key  to  meeting  the 

56 Stat.  1354. 

^"^'^^^^- 

4UST380. 

, 

87  STAT.] 

PUBLIC  LAW  9 3 - 2 0 5 - D E C.  28,  1973 

885 

Nation's  inteinatioiial  ooniinitments  and  to  better  safeguarding, 
for  the  IxMiefit  of  all  citizens,  the  Nation's  heritage  in  fish  and 
wildlife. 

(b)  PuRPOSKS.The  purposes  of  this  Act  are  to  provide  a  means 
Vvliereby  the  ecosystems  upon  which  endangered  species  and  threat(cid:173)
ened  species  depend  may  be  conserAcd, to  provide  a  program  for  the 
conservation  of  such  endangered  species  and  threatened  species,  and 
to take  such  steps  as may  Ix' appropriate  to achieve the purposes of  the 
treaties  and  conventions  set  forth  in  subsection  (a)  of  this  section. 

(c)  Poi.icY.It  is  further  declared  to  be  the  policy  of  Congress 
that  all  Federal  departments  and  agencies  shall  seek  to  conserve 
endangered  species  and  threatened  s|)ecies  and  shall  utilize  their 
antliorities  in  furtherance  of  the  purposes  of  this  Act. 

DEFIXITIOXS 

SKC. 8. For  the purposes of  this Act 

(1)  The  term  "commercial  activity"  means  all  activities  of 
industry  and  trade,  including,  but  not  limited  to,  the  buying  or 
selling  of  commodities  and  activities  conducted  for  the  purpose 
of  facilitating  such  buying and  selling. 

(2)  The  terms  "conserve'*,  "conserving",  and  "conservation'' 
n^ean to  use  and  the  use  of  all  methods  and  procedures  which  are 
necessary  to  bring  any  endangered  species  or  threatened  species 
to  the  point  at  which  the  measures  provided  pursuant  to this  Act 
are  no  Iq^iger  necessary.  Such  methods  and  procedures  include, 
but  are  not  limited  to,  all  activities  associated  with  scientific 
resources  management  such  as  research,  census, law  enforcement, 
habitat  acquisition  and  maintenance,  propagation,  live  trapping, 
and  transplantation, and. in  the extraordinary  case where  popula(cid:173)
tion  pressures  within  a  given  ecosystem  cannot  be  otherwise 
relieved, may  include regulated  taking. 

(3)  The  term  "Convention"  means  the  Convention  on  Inter(cid:173)
national  Trade  in  Endangered  Species  of  Wild  Fauna  and  Flora, 
signed  on  March  3,  1973, and  the  appendices  thereto. 

(4)  The  term  "endangered  species"  means  an}-  species  which 
is  in  danger  of  extinction  throughout  all  or  a  significant  portion 
of  its  range  other  than  a  species  of  the  Class  Insecta  determined 
by  the  Secretary  to  constitute  a  pest  whose  protection  under  the 
provisions  of  this  Act  would  present  an  overAvhelming  and  over(cid:173)
riding risk to man. 

(5)  The  term  "fish  or  wildlife''  means  any  member  of  the 
animal  kingdom,  including  without  limitation  any  mammal,  fish, 
bird  (including  any  migratory, nonmigratory. or endangered  bird 
for  which  protection  is  also  aiforded  by  treaty  or  other  inter(cid:173)
national  agreement),  amphibian,  reptile,  mollusk,  crustacean, 
arthi'opod  or  other  invertebrate,  and  includes  any  part,  product, 
egg,  or  oli'spring  thereof,  or  the  dead  body  or  parts  thereof. 

(6)  The term  "foreign  commerce'' includes, among other  things, 

any  transaction 

(A)  between  persons  within  one  foreign  country; 
(B)  between  persons  in two  or  more  foreign  countries; 
(C)  between  a  person  within  the  United  States  and  a  per(cid:173)

son in  a foreign  country;  or 

:, 

J 

(D)  between  persons  Avithin the  United  States,  where  the 
fish  and  wildlife  in  question  are  moving  in  any  country  or 
countries outside the L^nited States. 

(7)  The  term  "import''  means  to  land  on, bring  into,  or  intro(cid:173)

duce  into,  or  attemj^t  to land  on, bring  into, or  introduce  into,  any 

886 

PUBLIC  LAW 93-205-DEC.  28,  1973 

[87  STAT. 

84  Stat.  2090. 
5  u se  app.  II. 

place  subject  to the jurisdiction  of the United  States,  whether or 
not  such  landing,  bringing, or introduction  constitutes  an impor(cid:173)
tation  within  the meaning  of  the  customs  laws  of  the  United 
States. 

(8)  The  term  "person" means  an individual,  corporation,  part(cid:173)
nership,  trust,  association,  or  any other  private  entity,  or any 
officer,  employee,  agent,  department,  or  instrumentality  of the 
Federal  Government, of any State or political subdivision  thereof, 
or of any foreign  government. 

(9)  The term  "plant" means any member of the plant  kingdom, 

including seeds, roots and other parts  thereof. 

(10)  The term  "Secretary"  means,  except  as otherwise  herein 

provided,  the Secretary  of the Interior  or the Secretary  of  Com(cid:173)
merce as program  responsibilities  are vested  pursuant  to the  pro(cid:173)
visions  of Reorganization  Plan  Numbered  4 of 1970;  except  that 
with  respect to the enforcement  of the  provisions of this Act  and 
the  Convention  which  pertain  to the importation  or  exportation 
of  terrestrial  plants, the term  means the  Secretary of Agriculture. 
(11)  The  term  "species" includes any  subspecies of fish or wild(cid:173)

life  or plants  and any  other  group  of fish or wildlife  of the  same 
species or smaller  taxa  in common spatial  arrangement  that  inter(cid:173)
breed  when  mature. 

(12)  The term  "State"  means  any of  the several  States, the 
District  of  Columbia, the Commonwealth  of Puerto  Rico,  Amer(cid:173)
ican  Samoa,  the Virgin  Islands,  Guam,  and the Trust  Territory 
of  the  Pacific  Islands. 

(13)  The  term  "State  agency"  means the  State  agency,  depart(cid:173)

ment,  board,  commission,  or other  governmental  entity  which  is 
responsible  for the management  and conservation  of fish or wild(cid:173)
life  resources within a State. 

(14)  The term  "take"  means  to  harass,  harm,  pursue,  hunt, 
shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture, or collect, or to attempt to  engage 
in  any  such  conduct. 

(15)  The  term  "threatened  species" means  any  species which is 
likely  to  become  an  endangered  species  within  the  foreseeable 
future  throughout  all or a significant  portion  of its range. 

(16)  The term  "United  States",  when  used  in a  geographical 

context, includes all  States. 

D E T E R M I N A T I ON  OF  ENDANGERED  SPECIES  A ND  THREATENED  SPECIES 

SEC.  4.  (a)  GENERAL.(1)  The  Secretary  shall by regulation  deter(cid:173)

mine  whether  any species  is an  endangered  species  or  a  threatened 
species because of  any of the  following  factors: 

(1)  the present  or threatened  destruction,  modification,  or cur(cid:173)

tailment  of its habitat  or range ; 

(2)  overutilization  for commercial,  sporting,  scientific,  or edu(cid:173)

cational  purposes; 

(3)  disease or predation; 
(4)  the inadequacy  of existing  regulatory  mechanisms; or 
(5)  other  natural  or manmade  factors  affecting  its  continued 

existence. 

(2)  With  respect to any  species over  which  program  responsibilities 

have  been  vested in the  Secretary  of Commerce pursuant to Reorgani(cid:173)
zation  Plan  Numbered  4 of  1970 

(A)  in  any case  in  which  the Secretary  of  Commerce  deter(cid:173)

mines  that  such  species  should 

(i)  be  listed  as  an  endangered  species  or  a  threatened 

species, or 

87  STAT.] 

PUBLIC  LAW  9 3 - 2 0 5 - D E C.  28,  1973 

887 

(ii)  be  changed  in  status  from  a  threatened  species  to  an 

endangered  species, 

he  shall  so  inform  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  who  shall  list 
such  species  in  accordance  with  this  section; 

(B)  in  any  case  in  which  the  Secretary  of  Commerce  deter(cid:173)

mines that  such species should 

(i)  be  removed  from  any  list  published  pursuant  to  sub(cid:173)

section  (c)  of  this  section,  or 

(ii)  be  changed  in  status  from  an  endangered  species  to  a 

threatened  species, 

he  shall  recommend  such  action  to  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior, 
and  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  if  he  concurs  m  the  recommen(cid:173)
dation,  shall  implement  such  action;  and 

(C)  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  may  not  list  or  remove  from 
any  list  any  such  species,  and  may  not  change  the  status  of  any 
such species which are listed, without  a prior favorable  determina(cid:173)
tion  made  pursuant  to  this  section  by  the  Secretary  of  Commerce. 
(b)  BASIS  TOR  DETERMINATIONS.(1)  The  Secretary  shall  make 
determinations  required  by  subsection  (a)  of  this  section  on  the  basis 
of  the  best  scientific  and  commercial  data  available  to  him  and  after 
consultation,  as  appropriate,  with  the  affected  States,  interested  per(cid:173)
sons and  organizations, other interested  Federal  agencies, and, in coop(cid:173)
eration  with  the  Secretary  of  State,  with  the  country  or  countries  in 
which  the  species  concerned  is normally  found  or  whose citizens  har(cid:173)
vest  such  species  on  the  high  seas;  except  that  in  any  case  in  which 
such  determinations  involve  resident  species  of  fish  or  wildlife,  the 
Secretary  of  the  Interior  may  not  add  such  species to, or  remove  such 
species  from,  any  list  published  pursuant  to subsection  (c)  of  this sec(cid:173)
tion, unless the  Secretary  has  first 

(A)  published  notice  in  the  Federal  Register  and  notified  the  Fed^rai'1?tLu!r 

Governor  of  each  State  within  which  such  species  is  then  known 
to occur that such action is contemplated; 

(B)  allowed  each  such  State  90  days  after  notification  to  sub(cid:173)
mit  its  comments  and  recommendations,  except  to  the  extent  that 
such period  may  be shortened  by agreement  between the  Secretary 
and the Governor or Governors concerned;  and 

(C)  published  in  the  Federal  Register  a  summary  of  all  com(cid:173)
ments  and  recommendations  received  by  him  which  relate  to  such 
proposed  action. 

(2)  In  determining  whether  or  not  any  species  is  an  endangered 
species or  a threatened  species, the  Secretary  shall take into  considera(cid:173)
tion those efforts,  if  any, being made by any nation or any political sub(cid:173)
division  of  any  nation  to  protect  such  species,  whether  by  predator 
control,  protection  of  habitat  and  food  supply,  or  other  conservation 
practices, within  any  area  under  the  jurisdiction  of  any  such nation  or 
political subdivision, or on the high seas. 

(3)  Species  which  have  been  designated  as  requiring  protection 
from  unrestricted  commerce  by  any  foreign  country,  or  pursuant  to 
any  international  agreement,  shall  receive  full  consideration  by  the 
Secretary  to  determine  whether  each  is  an  endangered  species  or  a 
threatened  species. 

Federal  Register,  and  from  time  to  time  he  may  by  regulation  revise, 
a  list  of  all  species  determined  by  him  or  the  Secretary  of  Commerce 
to  be endangered  species  and  a list  of  all  species determined  by  him  or 
the  Secretary  of  Commerce  to  be  threatened  species.  Eaeh  list  shall 
refer  to  the  species  contained  therein  by  scientific  and  common  name 
or  names,  if  any,  and  shall  specify  with  respect  to  each  such  species 
over  what  portion  of  its  range  it  is endangered  or  threatened. 

(c)  LISTS.(1)  The  Secretary  of  the  Interior  shall  publish  in  the  F^'d^rai'^Rigrsier. 

888 

Review. 
80  Stat. 383. 

80  Stat.  926; 

83  Stat.  2 7 5 , 2 8 3. 

16  u se  668aa 

note. 

PUBLIC  LAW 93-205-DEC.  28, 1973 

[87  STAT. 

(2)  The  Secretaiy  shall,  upon  the  petition  of an interested  person 
under subsection  553  (e)  of title 5, United  States Code, conduct a review 
of  any listed or unlisted  species proposed to be removed from  or  added 
to either  of the lists  published  pursuant  to paragraph  (1) of this  sub(cid:173)
section, but only  if he makes  and publishes a  finding  that  such  person 
has  presented  substantial  evidence  which  in his judgment  warrants 
such a review. 

(3)  Any list In  effect  on the day before  the date of the enactment of 
tliis  Act of species of  fish or wildlife  determined  by the  Secretary of 
the  Interior,  pursuant  to the Endangered  Species  Conservation  Act of 
1969,  to be threatened  with  extinction  shall be republished  to  conform 
to  the classification  for endangered  species  or threatened  species, as 
the  case may be, provided  for  in this Act, but until  such  republication, 
any  such  species so listed shall be deemed an endangered  species  within 
the  meaning of this  Act. The republication  of any species pursuant to 
this  paragraph  shall  not require  public  hearing  or  comment  under 
section  553 of title 5, United  States  Code. 

(d)  PROTKCTIVK  RKGULATIOXS.Whenever  any  species  is listed  as  a 

threatened  species  pursuant  to subsection  (c) of  this  section,  the  Sec(cid:173)
retary  shall  issue  such  regulations  as he deems  necessary  and advis(cid:173)
able  to provide  for the conservation  of  such  species.  The Secretary 
may by regulation  prohibit  with  respect  to any threatened  species any 
act  prohibited  under  section  9(a) (1), in the case  of  fish  or  wildlife, 
or  section  9(a) (2), in the  case  of plants,  with  respect  to endangered 
species; except that  with  respect to the taking of resident species of fish 
or wildlife, such regulations shall apply  in any State which lias entered 
into a cooperative  agreement  pursuant  to section  6(a)  of this Act only 
to  the extent  that  such  regulations  have  also  been  adopted  by  such 
State. 

(e)  SIMILARITY  OF APPEAILVXCE  CASES.The  Secretary  may,  by 
regulation,  and  to the extent  he deems  advisable,  treat  any  species as 
an  endangered  species or threatened  species even though it is not listed 
pursuant to section -t of this Act if he finds that 

(A)  such species so closely  resembles in appearance, at the point 
in  question,  a species  which  has been  listed  pursuant  to such  sec(cid:173)
tion  that  enforcement  personnel  would  have  substantial  difficulty 
in  attempting  to  differentiate  between  the  listed  and  unlisted 
species; 

(B)  the effect  of  this  substantial  difficult}'  is  an  additional 

threat  to an endangered  or threatened  species; and 

(C)  such  treatment  of  an  unlisted  species  will  substantially 

facilitate  the  enforcement  and further  the policy  of this Act. 

(f)  REGULATIONS. (1)  Except  as  provided  in  paragraphs  (2) 

and  (3) of this  subsection  and  subsection  (b) of this  section, the pro(cid:173)
visions of section  553 of title  5, United  States  Code  (relating  to rule(cid:173)
making  procedures),  shall  apply  to any regulation  promulgated  to 
carry  out the purposes of this Act. 

(2) (A)  In the case of any  regulation  proposed  by the  Secretary to 

carry out the purposes of this  Act 

(i)  the Secretary  shall  publish  general  notice  of the  proposed 
regulation  (including  the complete  text  of the regulation)  in the 
Federal  Register  not less than  60 days  before  the effective  date of 
the  regulation; and 

(ii)  if  any  person  who feels  that  he may be adversely  affected 
by  the proposed  regulation  files  (within  45 days  after  the date of 
publication  of  general  notice)  objections  thereto  and requests  a 
public  hearing  theieon. the Secretary" niay  grant  such  re(]uest, but 
shall,  if  he denies  such  re<iuest,  publi.sh  his reasons  therefor  in 
the  Federal  Refrister. 

Publication  in 

Federal  Register. 

Hearing  request. 

Publication  in 

Federal  Register. 

87  STAT.] 

PUBLIC  LAW  9 3 - 2 0 5 - D E C.  28,  1973 

889 

(B)  Neither  subparagraph  (A)  of  this  paragraph  nor  section  553 
of  title  5,  United  States  Code,  shall  apply  in  the  case  of  any  of  the 
following  regulations  and  any  such  regulation  shall,  at  the  discretion 
of  the  Secretary, take effect  immediately  upon  publication  of  the  regu(cid:173)
lation  in the Federal  Register: 

(i)  Any  regulation  appropriate to carry  out the purposes of  this 
the 

Act  which  was  originally  promulgated 
Endangered  Species  Conservation  Act  of  1969. 

to  carry  out 

(ii)  Any  regulation  (including  any  regulation  implementing 

so stat. 383. 

83^star'275^^283 

le use ee'saa 

section  6(g)  (2)  (B)  (ii)  of  this  Act)  issued  by  the  Secretary  in  note. 
regard  to  any  emergency  posing  a  significant  risk  to  the  well-
being  of  any  species of  fish  or  wildlife,  but  only  if  (I)  at  the  time 
of  publication  of  the  regulation  in the  Federal  Register  the  Secre(cid:173)
tary  publishes  therein  detailed  reasons  why  such  regulation  is 
necessary,  and  (II)" in  the case such  regulation  applies to  resident 
species  of  fish  and  wildlife,  the  requirements  of  subsection  (b) 
(A),  ( B ),  and  (C)  of  this  section  have  been  complied  with.  Any 
regulation  promulgated  under  the  authority  of  this  clause  (ii) 
shall cease to have force and effect  at the close of the 120-day  period 
following  the  date  of  publication  unless,  during  such  120-day 
period,  the  rulemaking  procedures  which  would  apply  to  such 
regulation  without  regard  to  this  subparagraph  are  complied 
with. 

(3)  The  publication  in  the  Federal  Register  of  any  proposed  or  ,^f^^^^TM^^,"'^,^^ 
the  Secretary. 

final  regulation  which  is  necessary  or  appropriate  to  carry  out  the 
purposes  of  this  Act  shall  include  a  statement  by  the  Secretary  of  the 
facts  on  which  such  regulation  is  based  and  the  relationship  of  such 
facts to such  regulation. 

LAND  ACQUISITION 

SEC.  5.  (a)  PROGRAM.The  Secretary  of  the  Interior  shall  establish 
and  implement  a  program  to  conserve  (A)  fish  or  wildlife  which  are 
listed  as endangered  species or threatened  species pursuant to section 4 
of  this  Act;  or  (B)  plants  which  are  concluded  in  Appendices  to  the 
Convention. To carry  out such program,  he 

(1)  shall  utilize the  land  acquisition  and  other  authority  under 

the Fish  and Wildlife Act of  1956, as amended, the Fish and  Wild(cid:173)
life  Coordination  Act,  as  amended,  and  the  Migratory  Bird  Con(cid:173)
servation  Act,  as appropriate;  and 

70  Stat.  1119. 
16  u se  742a 
note. 
6o stat. loso 

(2)  is authorized  to acquire by purchase, donation, or otherwise,  '^^Tusc "ei 

lands,  waters,  or  interest  therein,  and  such  authority  shall  be  in  note 
'*^ 
addition  to  any  other  land  acquisition  authority  vested  in  him. 

(b)  ACQUISITIONS.Funds made available pursuant to the Land  and 
Water  Conservation  Fund  Act  of  1965, as  amended,  may  be  used  for 
the  purpose  of  acquiring  lands, waters, or  interests  therein  under  sub-  4 note. 
section  (a)  of this  section. 

45  Stat.  1222. 
16  u se  715. 

J^ ^^^^ Uli 

COOPERATION  W I TH  T HE  STATES 

SEC.  6.  (a)  GENERAL.In  carrying  out  the  program  authorized  by 

this  Act,  the  Secretary  shall  cooperate  to  the  maximum  extent  practi(cid:173)
cable with  the  States. Such cooperation  shall include consultation  with 
the  States  concerned  before  acquiring  any  land  or  water,  or  interest 
therein,  for  the  purpose  of  conserving  any  endangered  species  or 
threatened  species. 

(b)  MANAGEMENT  AGREEMENTS.The  Secretary  may  enter  into 
agreements  with  any  State  for  the  administration  and  management  of 
any  area  established  for  the  conservation  of  endangered  species  or 

890 

PUBLIC  LAW 93-205-DEC.  28,  1973 

[87  STAT. 

tlu'oateiied  species.  Any  levemies  (leri>ed  from  the  administration  of 
such  ai'eas  under  these  agreements  shall  be  subject  to  the  provisions 
of  section  401  of  the  Act  of  June  15,  1935  (49  Stat.  383;  16  U.S.C. 
T l o S ). 

78  Stat.  701. 

(c)  COOPJ:RATINE  AGKKEMENTS.In  furtherance  of  the  purposes  of 

this  Act,  the  Secretary  is  authorized  to  enter  into  a cooperative  agree(cid:173)
ment  in  accordance  with  this  section  with  any  State  which  establishes 
and  maintains  an  adequate  and  active program  for  the conservation  of 
endangered  species  and  threatened  species.  Within  one  hundred  and 
twenty  days  after  the  Secretary  i-eceives a certified  copy  of  sucli a  pro(cid:173)
posed  State  program,  he  shall  make  a  determination  whether  such 
l)rogram is in accordance with this Act. Unless he determines, pursuant 
to this subsection, that the  State program  is not in accordance with  this 
Act, he shall  enter  into  a cooperative  agreement  with  the  State  for  the 
purpose  of  assisting  in  implementation  of  the  State  program.  In  order 
for  a  State  program  to be deemed  an  adequate  and  active  program  for 
the conservation  of  endangered  species and threatened  species, the Sec(cid:173)
retary  nnist  find,  and  ammally  thereafter  reconfirm  such  finding,  that 
under  the  State  program 

(1)  authority  resides  in  the  State  agency  to  conserve  resident 
species  of  fish  or  wildlife  determined  by  the  State  agency  or  the 
Secretary to be endangered or threatened; 

(2)  the  State  agency  has  established  acceptable  conservation 
programs,  consistent  with  the  purposes  and  policies  of  this  Act, 
for  all  resident  species  of  fish  or  wildlife  in  the  State  which  are 
deemed  by  the  Secretary  to  be  endangered  or  threatened,  and  has 
furnished  a  copy  of  such  plan  and  program  together  with  all 
pertinent  details, 
the 
Secretary; 

information,  and  data 

requested 

(3)  the  State  agency  is  authorized  to  conduct  investigations  to 
determine  the  status  and  requirements  for  survival  of  resident 
species of fish and  wildlife; 

to 

(4)  the State agency is authorized  to establish programs,  includ(cid:173)

the  acquisition  of 

ing 
interests 
therein,  for  the  conservation  of  resident  endangered  species  or 
tlireatened  species;  and 

land  or  aquatic  habitat  or 

(5)  provision  is  made  for  public  participation  in  designating 

resident  species  of  fish  or  wildlife  as endangered  or  threatened. 

(d)  ALLOCATION  OF  FUNDS.(1)  The  Secretary  is  authorized  to 
pj'ovide  Hnancial  assistance  to  any  State, through  its  respective  State 
agency,  which  has  entered  into  a  cooperative  agreement  pursuant  to 
subsection  (c)  of  this  section  to  assist  m  development  of  programs  for 
the  conservation  of  endangered  and  tlireatened  species. The  Secretary 
shall  make  an  allocation  of  appropriated  funds  to  such  States  based 
on  consideration  of 

(A)  the  international  commitments  of  the  United  States  to 

protect endangered  species or threatened  species; 

(B) 

the  readiness  of  a  State  to  proceed  with  a  conservation 
l)rogram  consistent  with  the  objectives  and  purposes  of  this  Act; 
( 0)  the  number  of  endangered  species  and  threatened  species 

within  a  State; 

(I))  the  potential  for  restoring  endangered  species  and  threat(cid:173)

ened species within a State;  and 

(E)  the  relative  urgency  to  initiate  a  program  to  restore  and 
protect  an  endangered  species  or  threatened  species  in  terms  of 
sur\ival  of  the species. 

So  much  of  any  appropriated  funds  allocated  for  obligation  to  any 
State  for  any  fiscal  year  as  remains  uiiol)ligated  at  the  close  thereof  is 

87  STAT. ] 

PUBLIC  LAW 93-205-DEC.  28, 1973 

891 

authorized  to  be  made  available  to  that  State  until  the  close  of  the 
succeeding  fiscal  year.  Any  amount  allocated  to  any  State  which  is 
unobligated  at  the  end  of  the  period  during  which  it  is  available  for 
expenditure  is authorized  to be made  available  for  expenditure  by the 
Secretary  in  conducting  programs  under  this  section. 

(2)  Such  cooperative  agreements  shall  provide  for  (A)  the  actions 
to  be taken  by the  Secretary  and the States;  (B)  the benefits  that  are 
expected  to  be derived  in  connection  with  the  conservation  of  endan(cid:173)
gered  or  threatened  species;  (C)  the  estimated  cost  of  these  actions; 
and  (D)  the  share  of  such  costs  to  be borne  by  the  Federal  Govern(cid:173)
ment  and  by the  States;  except  that 

(i)  the  Federal  share  of  such  program  costs  shall  not  exceed 

66%  per centum  of the estimated  program  cost stated in the agree(cid:173)
ment;  and 

(ii)  the Federal  share may be increased  to 75 per centum  when(cid:173)

ever  two or more  States  having  a common  interest  in one or  more 
endangered  or threatened  species, the conservation  of  which  may 
be  enhanced  by  cooperation  of  such  States,  enter  jointly  into  an 
agreement  with  the  Secretary. 

The  Secretary  may, in his discretion, and under  such  rules and  regula(cid:173)
tions as he may prescribe,  advance  funds  to the State  for financing  the 
United  States  pro  rata  share  agreed  upon  in  the  cooperative  agree(cid:173)
ment.  For  the purposes  of  this  section, the non-Federal  share  may, in 
the  discretion  of  the Secretary,  be in the  form  of  money  or  real  prop(cid:173)
erty,  the  value  of  which  will  be  determined  by  the  Secretary,  whose 
decision  shall  be  final. 

(e)  REVIEW  OF  STATE  PROGRAMS.Any  action  taken  by  the  Secre(cid:173)
tary  under  this  section  shall  be  subject  to  his  periodic  review  at  no 
greater than  annual  intervals. 

(f)  CONFLICTS  BETWEEN  FEDERAL  AND  STATE  LAWS.Any  State 
law  or  regulation  which  applies  with  respect  to  the  importation  or 
exportation  of,  or  interstate  or  foreign  commerce  in, endangered  spe(cid:173)
cies  or  threatened  species  is  void  to the extent  that  it  may  effectively 
(1)  permit  what  is prohibited  by this Act or by any regulation  which 
implements  this  Act, or  (2)  prohibit  what  is  authorized  pursuant  to 
an  exemption  or  permit  provided  for  in  this  Act or in  any  regulation 
which  implements  this  Act. This  Act shall  not otherwise  be  construed 
to  void  any  State  law  or  regulation  which  is  intended  to  conserve 
migratory,  resident,  or  introduced  fish  or  wildlife,  or  to  permit  or 
prohibit  sale  of  such  fish  or  wildlife.  Any  State  law  or  regulation 
respecting  the  taking  of  an  endangered  species  or  threatened  species 
may be more restrictive than the exemptions or permits provided  for in 
this  Act  or  in  any  regulation  which  implements  this  Act but  not  less 
restrictive than the prohibitions so defined. 

(g)  TRANSITION. (1)  For  purposes  of  this  subsection,  the  term  ^J^^H'-''^'^'^'"^''' 

p e r i o d ." 

"establishment  period"  means,  with  respect  to  any  State,  the  period  "  "" 
beginning  on the date  of  enactment  of  this  Act and ending  on  which(cid:173)
ever  of  the  following  dates  first  occurs:  (A)  the  date  of  the  close of 
the  120-day  period  following  the  adjournment  of  the  first  regular 
session  of  the  legislature  of  such  State  which  commences  after  such 
date  of  enactment, or  (B)  the date of the close of the 15-month  period 
following  such  date  of  enactment. 

(2)  The  prohibitions  set  forth  in  or  authorized  pursuant  to  sec(cid:173)
tions  4(d)  and  9(a) (1) (B)  of  this  Act  shall  not  apply  with  respect 
to the taking  of  any resident  endangered  species or threatened  species 
(other  than  species  listed  in  Appendix  I  to  the  Convention  or  other(cid:173)
wise  specifically  covered  by  any  other  treaty  or  Federal  law)  within 
any  State 

892 

PUBLIC  LAW 93-205-DEC.  28,  1973 

[87  STAT. 

(A)  which  is then  a  party  to  a  cooperative  agreement  with  the 
Secretary  pursuant  to  section  6(c)  of  this  Act  (except  to  the 
extent  that  the  taking  of  any  such  species  is  contrary  to  the  law 
of  such State);  or 

(B)  except  for  any  time  Avithin  the  establishment  period 

when 

80 Stat. 383. 

66 Stat. 662. 

68 Stat. 454. 

(i)  the  Secretary  applies  such  prohibition  to  such  species 

at the request of the State, or 

(ii)  the  Secretary  applies  such  prohibition  after  he  finds, 
and  publishes  his  finding,  that  an  emergency  exists  posing  a 
significant  risk  to  the  w^ell-being of  such  species  and  that  the 
prohibition  must  be  applied  to  protect  such  species. The  Sec(cid:173)
retary's  finding  and  publication  may  be made  without  regard 
to  the  public  hearing  or  comment  provisions  of  section  553 
of  title  5, United  States  (jode,  or  any  other  provision  of  this 
Act;  but  such  prohibition  shall  expire  90 days  after  the  date 
of  its  imposition  unless  the  Secretary  further  extends  such 
prohibition  by  publishing  notice  and  a statement  of  justifica(cid:173)
tion  of  such  extension, 

(h)  REGULATioNS.-^The Secretary  is authorized  to promulgate  such 
regulations  as  may  be  appropriate  to  carry  out  the  provisions  of  this 
section relating to  financial  assistance to  States. 

(i)  APPROPRIATIONS.For  the  purposes  of  this  section,  there  is 
authorized  to  be  appropriated  through  the  fiscal  year  ending  June  30, 
1977,  not  to exceed $10,000,000. 

INTERAGENCY  COOPERATION 

SEC.  7. The  Secretary  shall  review  other  programs  administered  by 
him  and  utilize  such  programs  in  furtherance  of  the  purposes  of  this 
Act. All  other  Federal  departments  and  agencies shall, in  consultation 
with  and  with  the  assistance  of  the  Secretary,  utilize  their  authorities 
in  furtherance  of  the  purposes  of  this  Act  by  carrying  out  programs 
for  the conservation  of endangered species and threatened species listed 
pursuant  to  section  4  of  this  Act  and  by  taking  such  action  necessary 
to insure that  actions authorized, funded,  or carried out by them do not 
jeopardize  the  continued  existence  of  such  endangered  species  and 
threatened  species  or  result  in  the  destruction  or  modification  of  hab(cid:173)
itat  of  such  species  which  is  determined  by  the  Secretary,  after  con(cid:173)
sultation  as  appropriate  with  the  affected  States, to  be  critical. 

I N T E R N A T I O N AL  COOPERATION 

SEC.  8.  (a)  FINANCIAL  ASSISTANCE.As  a  demonstration  of  the 
commitment  of  the  United  States  to  the  worldwide  protection  of 
endangered  species  and  threatened  species, the  President  may,  subject 
to  the  provisions  of  section  1415 of  the  Supplemental  Appropriation 
Act, 1953 (31 U.S.C. 724), use foreign  currencies accruing to the  United 
States  Government  under  the  Agricultural  Trade  Development  and 
Assistauce  Act  of  1954  or  any  other  law  to  provide  to  any  foreign 
country  (with  its  consent)  assistance  in  the  development  and  man(cid:173)
agement  of  programs  in  that  country  which  the  Secretary  determines 
to  be  necessary  or  useful  for  the  conservation  of  any  endangered 
species  or  threatened  species  listed  by  the  Secretary  pursuant  to  sec(cid:173)
tion  4  of  this  Act.  The  President  shall  provide  assistance  (which 
includes, but  is not  limited  to, the acquisition,  by  lease or  otherwise, of 
lands,  waters, or  interests  therein)  to  foreign  countries  under  this  sec(cid:173)
tion  under  such  terms  and  conditions  as he  deems  appropriate.  When(cid:173)
ever  foreign  currencies  are  available  for  the  provision  of  assistance 

87  STAT. ] 

PUBLIC  LAW 93-205-DEC.  28,  1973 

893 

under  this  section, such  currencies  shall  be used  in preference  to  funds 
appropriated  under the authority  of section  15 of this Act. 

(b)  ENCOURAGEMENT OF  FOREIGN  PROGRAMS.In  order  to  carry^  out 

further  the  provisions  of  this  Act,  the  Secretary,  through  the  Secre(cid:173)
tary  of  State, shall  encourage 

(1)  foreign  countries  to  provide  for  the  conservation  of  fish  or 
including  endangered  species  and  threatened  species 

wildlife 
listed pursuant to section 4 of this Act; 

(2)  the  entering  into  of  bilateral  or  multilateral  agreements 

with  foreign  countries  to  provide  for  such  conservation;  and 

(3)  foreign  persons who directly  or indirectly  take fish or  wild(cid:173)
life  in  foreign  countries  or  on  the  high  seas  for  importation  into 
the  United  States  for  commercial  or  other  purposes  to  develop 
and  carry  out  with  such  assistance  as  he  may  provide,  conserva(cid:173)
tion  practices  designed  to  enhance  such  fish  or  wildlife  and  their 
habitat. 

(c)  PERSONNEL.After  consultation  with the Secretary of  State, the 

Secretary  may 

(1)  assign or otherwise make available any officer  or employee of 

his department  for  the  purpose  of  cooperating  with  foreign  coun(cid:173)
tries  and  international  organizations  in  developing  personnel 
resources  and  programs  which  promote  the conservation  of  fish  or 
wildlife;  and 

(2)  conduct  or  provide  financial  assistance  for  the  educational 
training  of  foreign  personnel,  in  this  country  or  abroad,  in  fish, 
wildlife,  or  plant  management,  research  and  law enforcement  and 
to  render  professional  assistance abroad  in such  matters. 

(d)  INVESTIGATIONS.After consultation with the Secretary  of  State 
and  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  as  appropriate,  the  Secretary  may 
conduct  or  cause  to  be  conducted  such  law  enforcement  investigations 
and  research  abroad  as he deems necessary  to carry  out  the purposes  of 
this  Act. 

(e)  CONVENTION  IMPLEMENTATION.The  President  is  authorized 

and  directed  to  designate  appropriate  agencies  to  act  as  the  Manage(cid:173)
ment Authority  or Authorities and the Scientific Authority  or  Author(cid:173)
ities  pursuant  to  the  Convention.  The  agencies  so  designated  shall 
thereafter  be  authorized  to  do  all  things  assigned  to  them  under  the 
Convention,  including  the  issuance  of  permits  and  certificates.  The 
agency  designated  by the  President  to communicate  with  other  parties 
to  the  Convention  and  with  the  Secretariat  shall  also  be  empowered, 
where  appropriate,  in  consultation  with  the  State  Department,  to  act 
on behalf  of  and represent  the United  States in  all regards  as  required 
by  the  Convention.  The  President  shall  also  designate  those  agencies 
which  shall  act  on  behalf  of  and  represent  the  United  States  in  all 
regards as required by the Convention on Nature Protection  and  Wild(cid:173)
life Preservation  in the Western Hemisphere. 

^ 

se stat. 1354. 

r 

PROHIBITED  ACTS 

SEC. 9.  (a)  GENERAL. (1)  Except  as provided  in sections 6(g)  (2) 
and  10  of  this  Act,  with  respect  to  any  endangered  species  of  fish  or 
wildlife  listed  pui-suant  to  section  4 of  this  Act  it  is unlawful  for  any 
person  subject  to the jurisdiction  of  the United  States  to 

(A)  import  any  such  species  into,  or  export  any  such  species 

from  the  United  States; 

(B)  take  any  such  species  within  the  United  States  or  the  ter(cid:173)

ritorial  sea of  the United  States; 

(C)  take any such species upon the high  seas; 

894 

PUBLIC  LAW 93-205-DEC.  28,  1973 

[87  STAT. 

(D)  possess,  sell,  deliver,  carry,  transport,  or  ship,  by  any 
means  whatsoever,  any  such  species  taken  in  \iolation  of  sub-
paragraplis  (B)  and  ( C ); 

(E)  deliver,  receive,  carry,  transport,  or  ship  in  interstate  or 
foreign  commerce, by  any  means  Avhatsoever  and  in  the  course  of 
a  commercial  activity, any  such  species; 

(F)  sell  or  offer  for  sale  in  interstate  or  foreign  commerce 

any such species; or 

(G)  violate  any  regulation  pertaining  to  such  species or  to  am' 
threatened  species  of  fish  or  wildlife  listed  pursuant  to  section  4 
of 
to 
authority  provided by this  Act. 

this  Act  and  promulgated  by  the  Secretary  pursuant 

(2)  Except  as provided  in  sections  6(g)  (2)  and  10 of  this Act,  with 
respect  to  any  endangered  species of  plants  listed pui'suant to section  1 
of  this  Act,  it  is unlawful  for  any  person  subject  to the  jurisdiction  of 
the  Ignited  States  to 

(A)  import  any  such  species  into,  or  export  any  such  species 

flom,  the  United  States; 

(B)  deliver,  receive,  carry,  transport,  or  ship  in  interstate  or 
foreign  commerce,  by  any  means  whatsoever  and  in  the  course 
of  a commercial  activity, any  such  species; 

(C)  sell  or  olfer  for  sale  in  interstate  or  foreign  connnerce  any 

such  species;  or 

(D)  violate  any  regulation  pertaining  to  sucli species  or  to  any 
threatened  species  of  plants  listed  pursuant  to  section  4  of  this 
Act  and  promulgated  by  the  Secretary  pursuant  to  authorit}' 
provided  by this  Act. 

(b)  SPECIES  HELD  ix  (^AmviTY  OK  COXTKOLLED  ENVIKOXMENT. 
The  provisions  of  this  section  shall  not  apply  to  any  fish  or  wildlife 
held  in  captivity  or  in  a  cfmtrolled  environment  on  the  effective  date 
of  this  Act  if  the  purposes  of  such  holding  are  not  contrary  to  tlie 
purposes  of  this  Act;  except  that  this  subsection  shall  not  apply  in 
the case of  any fish  or  wildlife  held  in the course of  a commercial  activ(cid:173)
ity.  With  respect  to  any  act  prohibited  by  this  section  which  occurs 
after  a  period  of  180  days  from  the  effective  date  of  this  Act,  there 
shall  be  a  rebuttable  presumption  that  the  fish  or  wildlife  involved 
in  such  act  was  not  held  in  captivity  or  in  a  controlled  environment 
on  such  effective  date. 

(c)  Vioi^TioN  OF CoxvEXTiON.(1)  It  is  uiilawful  for  any  person 
subject  to the jurisdiction  of  the  United  States to  engage  in  any  trade 
in  any  specimens  contrary  to  the  provisions  of  the  Convention,  or  to 
possess  any  specimens  traded  contrary  to  the  provisions  of  the  Con(cid:173)
vention,  including  the  definitions  of  terms  in  article  I  thereof. 

(2)  Any  importation  into the  United  States  of  fish  or  wildlife  shall, 

if 

(A)  such  fish  or  wildlife  is  not  an  endangered  species  listed 
pursuant  to  section  4  of  this  Act  but  is  listed  in  Appendix  II  to 
the  Convention, 

(B)  the  taking  and  exportation  of  such  fish  or  wildlife  is  not 

contrary  to  the  provisions  of  the  Convention  and  all  other  appli(cid:173)
cable  requirements  of  the  Convention  have  been  satisfied, 

(C)  the  applicable  requirements  of  subsections  (d),  (e),  and 

(f)  of  this  section  have  been  satisfied,  and 

(I))  such  importation  is not made  in the course of  a  commercial 

activity, 

be  presumed  to  be  an  importation  not  in  violation  of  any  provision  of 
this Act  or any  regulation  issued  pursuant  to this  Act. 

87  STAT. ] 

PUBLIC  LAW 93-205-DEC.  28,  1973 

895 

(d)  IMPORTS  AND  E X P O R T S . ^ ( I)  It  is  unlawful  for  any  person  to 
engage  in  business as an  importer  or exporter  of  fish  or  wildlife  (other 
than  shellfish  and  fishery  products  which  (A)  are  not  listed  pui-suant 
to  section  4  of  this  Act  as  endangered  species  or  threatened  species, 
and  (B)  are  imported  for  purposes  of  human  or  animal  consumption 
or  taken  in  waters  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  United  States  or  on 
the  high  seas for  recreational  purposes)  or  plants  without  first  having 
obtained  permission  from  the  Secretary. 

(2)  Any  person  required  to obtain  permission  under  paragraph  (1)  Recordkeeping. 

of  this  subsection  shall 

(A)  keep  such  records  as  will  fully  and  correctly  disclose  each 
importation  or  exportation  of fish, wildlife, or  plants made by  him 
and  the  subsequent  disposition  made  by  him  with  respect  to  such 
fish,  wildlife,  or  plants; 

(B)  at  all  reasonable  times  upon  notice  by  a  duly  authorized 
representative  of  the  Secretary,  afford  such  representative  access 
to  his  places  of  business,  an  opportunity  to  examine  his  inven(cid:173)
tory  of  imported  fish,  wildlife,  or  plants  and  the  records  required 
to  be  kept  under  subparagraph  (A)  of  this  paragraph,  and  to 
copy  such  records;  and 

(C)  file  such  reports  as the  Secretary  may  require. 

and  appropriate  to  carry  out  the  purposes  of  this  subsection. 

(e)  REPORTS.It  is  unlawful  for  any  person  importing  or  export(cid:173)

ing  fish  or  wildlife  (other  than  shellfish  and  fishery  products  which 
(1)  are  not  listed  pursuant  to  section  4  of  this  Act  as  endangered  or 
threatened  species,  and  (2)  are  imported  for  purposes  of  human  or 
animal  consumption  or  taken  in  waters  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the 
United  States  or  on  the  high  seas  for  recreational  purposes)  or  plants 
to  fail  to  file  any  declaration  or  report  as  the  Secretary  deems  neces(cid:173)
sary  to  facilitate  enforcement  of  this Act  or  to meet the obligations  of 
the  Convention. 

(3)  The  Secretary  shall  prescribe  such  regulations  as  are  necessary  Regulations. 

Reports. 

(f)  DESIGNATION  OF  PORTS.(1)  It 

is  unlawful  for  any  person 
subject  to the  jurisdiction  of  the United  States to import  into or  export 
from  the  United  States  any  fish  or  wildlife  (other  than  shellfish  and 
fishery  products  which  (A)  are  not  listed  pursuant  to section 4 of  this 
Act  as endangered  species or  threatened  species, and  (B)  are  imported 
for  purposes  of  human  or  animal  consumption  or  taken  in  waters 
under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  United  States  or  on  the  high  seas  for 
recreational  purposes)  or  plants,  except  at  a  port  or  ports  designated 
by  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior.  For  the  purpose  of  facilitating 
enforcement  of  this  Act  and  reducing  the  costs thereof,  the  Secretary 
of  the  Interior,  with  approval  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury  and 
after  notice  and  opportunity  for  public  hearing,  may,  by  regulation, 
designate  ports  and  change  such  designations.  The  Secretary  of  the 
Interior,  under  such  terms  and  conditions  as  he  may  prescribe,  may 
permit  the  importation  or  exportation  at  nondesignated  ports  in  the 
interest  of  the  health  or  safety  of  the  fish  or  wildlife  or  plants, or  for 
other  reasons  if,  in  his  discretion,  he  deems  it  appropriate  and  con(cid:173)
sistent  with the purpose of  this  subsection. 

(2)  Any  port  designated  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  under  the 
authority  of  section  4(d)  of  the  Act  of  December  5,  1969  (16  U.S.C. 
6 6 6 c c ^ ( d ) ),  shall,  if  such  designation  is  in  effect  on  the  day  before 
the  date  of  the  enactment  of  this  Act,  be  deemed  to  be  a  port  desig- 
nated  by  the  Secretary  under  paragraph  (1)  of  this  subsection  unt^l 
such time as the Secretary otherwise  provides. 

(g)  VIOLATIONS.It  is unlawful  for  any  person  subject  to the  juris(cid:173)
diction  of  the  United  States  to  attempt  to  commit,  solicit  another  to 
commit,  or  cause  to  be  committed,  any  offense  defined  in  this  section. 

^^ ^*^*-  277. 

^^^ 668cc-4. 

896 

PUBLIC  LAW 93-205-DEC.  28,  1973 

[87  STAT. 

EXCEPTIONS 

SEC.  10. (a) PERMITS.The  Secretary  may  permit, under  such  terms 
and  conditions  as he may prescribe,  any act otherwise  prohibited by 
section 9 of this Act  for scientific  purposes or to enhance the  propaga(cid:173)
tion or survival of the affected  species. 

(b)  HARDSHIP  EXEMPTIONS.(1)  If  any person  enters  into  a  con(cid:173)
tract  with  respect  to a  species  of  fish  or wildlife  or plant  before the 
date  of the publication  in the Federal  Register  of notice of  considera(cid:173)
tion of that  species as an endangered  species and  the subsec[uent  listing 
of  that  species  as an endangered  species  pursuant  to section 4 of  this 
Act  will  cause  undue  economic  hardship to such  person  under  the  con(cid:173)
tract,  the Secretary,  in order  to minimize  such  hardship,  may  exempt 
such  person  from  the application  of  section  9(a) of  this  Act to the 
extent  the Secretary  deems  appropriate  if  such  person  applies  to him 
for  such  exemption  and includes  with  such  application  such  informa(cid:173)
tion  as the Secretary  may  require to prove  such hardship;  except  that 
(A)  no such  exemption  shall  be for a duration  of more  than  one  year 
from  the date  of publication  in the Federal  Register  of notice of con(cid:173)
sideration  of the species concerned, or shall  apply  to a quantity  of fish 
or  wildlife  or plants  in excess of that  specified  by the Secretary;  (B) 
the  one-year  period  for those  species  of  fish  or wildlife  listed  by the 
Secretary  as endangered  prior  to the effective  date  of  this  Act shall 
expire  in accordance  with  the  terms of section  3 of the  Act  of Decem-
16 use 668CC-3.  ber  5,1969  (83 Stat.  275); and (C) no such exemption  may be  granted 
for  the importation  or exportation  of a specimen  listed  in  Appendix 
I  of the  Convention  which is to be used in a commercial  activity. 

(2)  As used  in this  subsection,  the term  "undue  economic  hardship" 

"Undue  eco(cid:173)

nomic  h a r d s h i p ." 

shall include, but not be limited  t o: 

(A)  substantial economic loss resulting from  inability  caused  by 
this  Act to perform  contracts  with  respect  to species  of fish and 
wildlife  entered  into  prior  to the date  of publication  in the Fed(cid:173)
eral  Register  of  a  notice  of  consideration  of  such  species  as an 
endangered  species; 

(B)  substantial  economic loss to persons who, for the year  prior 
to  the notice  of  consideration  of  such  species  as an  endangered 
species,  derived  a  substantial  portion  of  their  income  from  the 
lawful  taking  of any listed  species,  which  taking  would  be made 
unlawful  under this Act; or 

(C)  curtailment  of  subsistence  taking  made  unlawful  under 
this Act by persons  (i) not  reasonably  able to secure other  sources 
of  subsistence;  and  (ii)  dependent  to a  substantial  extent  upon 
hunting  and  fishing  for subsistence;  and  (iii) who  must  engage 
in such curtailed  taking for subsistence  purposes. 

(3)  The  Secretary  may  make further  requirements for a showing of 
undue economic hardship  as he deems fit. Exceptions granted under  this 
section  may be limited  by the Secretary  in his discretion  as to time, 
area, or other factor of Applicability. 

(c) NoTiCE AND REVIEW.The  Secretary  shall  publish  notice in the 
-pg^gj.^j Register of each application  for an exemption or permit  which 
is  made  under  this  subsection.  Each  notice  shall  invite the submission 
from  interested  parties, within  thirty  days after  the  date of the notice, 
w^ritten  data,  views,  or  arguhients  with  respect  to  the  application. 
Information  received by the Secretary  as a part of any application  shall 
be  available  to the public  as a matter  of public  record  at every  stage 
of  the  proceeding. 

(d)  PERMIT  AND  EXEMPTION  POLICY.The  Secretary  may  grant 
exceptions under subsections  (a) and (b) of this section only if he  finds 

Publication in 
Federal  Register. 
.- 

 

897 

Publication in 

Federal  Register. 

Definitions. 

Regulations. 

86  Stat. 1033. 
16 u se  1373. 

87  STAT.] 

PUBLIC  LAW 93-205-DEC.  28,  1973 

and  publishes his finding  in the Federal  Register  that  (1)  such  excep(cid:173)
tions  were applied  for in good  faith,  (2) if  granted  and exercised  will 
not  operate  to the disadvantage  of  such  endangered  species,  and  (3) 
will  be consistent  with  the purposes  and policy  set forth  in  section  2 
of  this Act. 

(e)  ALASKA  XATI^^ES. (1)  Except  as provided  in paragraph  (4) of 
this subsection the provisions of this Act shall not apply with respect to 
the  taking  of  any  endangered  species  or  threatened  species,  or  the 
importation  of  any such  species  taken  pursuant  to this  section,  by 
(A)  any  Indian,  Aleut,  or  Eskimo  who is an  Alaskan  Native 

who  resides  in Alaska;  or 

(B)  any  non-native  permanent  resident  of  an  Alaskan  native 

village; 

if  such  taking  is  primarily  for  subsistence  purposes.  Non-edible 
byproducts  of  species  taken  pursuant  to  this  section  may be sold  in 
interstate commerce when made into authentic native articles of handi(cid:173)
crafts  and clothing;  except  that  the provisions of this  subsection  shall 
not  apply  to  any  non-native  resident  of  an  Alaskan  native  village 
found  by the Secretary  to be not primarily  dependent  upon the taking 
of  fish  and  wildlife  for  consumption  or  for  the  creation  and  sale of 
authentic  native  articles of handicrafts  and clothing. 

(2)  Any taking  under  this  subsection  may not be accomplished  in 

a  wasteful  manner. 

(3)  As used in this subsection 

(i)  The term  "subsistence"  includes  selling  any edible  portion 
of fish or wildlife  in native villages and towns in Alaska  for native 
consumption  within  native  villages  or  towns;  and 

(ii)  The  term  "authentic  native  articles  of  handicrafts  and 
clothing"  means  items  composed  wholly  or  in  some  significant 
respect  of  natural  materials,  and which  are produced,  decorated, 
or  fashioned  in  the  exercise  of  traditional  native  handicrafts 
without  the use of  pantographs,  multiple  carvers,  or  other  mass 
copying  devices.  Traditional  native  handicrafts  include,  but are 
not  limited  to, weaving,  carving,  stitching,  sewing, lacking,  bead(cid:173)
ing,  drawing,  and  painting. 

(4)  Notwithstanding  the  provisions  of  paragraph  (1)  of  this  sub(cid:173)

section,  whenever  the Secretary  determines  that  any species of  fish or 
wildlife  which  is  subject  to  taking  under  the provisions  of  this  sub(cid:173)
section  is an  endangered  species  or  threatened  species,  and that  such 
taking  materially  and negatively  affects  the threatened  or  endangered 
species, he may prescribe  regulations  upon  the taking  of  such  species 
by  any  such  Indian,  Aleut,  Eskimo,  or  non-Native  Alaskan  resident 
of  an  Alaskan  native  village.  Such  regulations  may  be  established 
with 
to  species,  geographical  description  of  the  area 
included,  the  season  for  taking,  or  any  other  factors  related  to the 
leason  for establishing  such  regulations  and consistent  with the policy 
of  this  Act.  Such  regulations  shall  be  prescribed  after  a  notice  and 
hearings  in the  affected  judicial  districts  of  Alaska  and as  otherwise 
required  by section  103 of the Marine  Mammal  Protection  Act of 1972, 
and  shall  be  removed  as  soon  as  the  Secretary  determines  that  the 
need  for their  impositions has  disappeared. 

reference 

PENALTIES  AND  ENFORCEMENT 

SEC.  11.  (a)  CIVIL  PENALTIES. (1)  Any  person  who  knowingly 
violates,  or  who  knowingly  cbmmits  an  act  in  the  course  of  a 
commercial  activity  which  vioflates,  any  provision  of  this  Act,  or 
any  provision  of  any permit  or  certificate  issued  hereunder,  or of any 
regulation  issued  in order  to  implement  subsection  (a) (1)  ( A ), ( B ), 

22-150  O -  75 - 59 

898 

PUBLIC  LAW 93-205-DEC.  28,  1973 

[87  STAT. 

(D),  ( E ).  or  ( F ).  (a)(2)  ( A ),  ( B ).  or  (C).  (c),  (d)  (other 

(C), 
than  reofiilation  rehitino-  to  lecordkeeping'  or  filing"  of  reports),  (f) 
or  {(r)  of  section  9 of  this  Act,  may  be  assessed  a  civil  penalty  by  the 
Secretary  of  not  more  than  $10,000  for  each  violation.  Any  person 
who  knowingly  Aiolates,  or  who  knowingly  commits  an  act  in  the 
course  of  a  commercial  activity  which  violates,  any  provision  of  any 
other  regulation  issued  under  this  Act  may  be  assessed  a  civil  penalty 
by  the  Secretary  of  not  more  than  $5,000  for  each  such  violation. 
Any  person  who  otherwise  violates  anj'  provision  of  this  Act,  or  any 
regidation,  permit,  or  certificate  issued  hereunder,  may  be  assessed  a 
civil  penalty  by  the  Secretary  of  not  more  than  $1,000  for  each  such 
o '^ortunit'^^^""^  violation.  No  penalty  may  be  assessed  under  this  subsection  unless 
such  person  is given  notice  and  opportunity  for  a hearing  with  respect 
to  such  violation.  Each  violation  shall  be  a  separate  offense.  Any  such 
civil  penalty  may  be  remitted  or  mitigated  by  the  Secretary.  Upon 
any  failure  to  pay  a  penalty  assessed  under  this  subsection,  the  Secre(cid:173)
tary  may  request  the  Attorney  General  to  institute  a  civil  action  in 
a  district  court  of  the  L^nited  States  for  any  district  in  which  such 
person  is  found,  resides,  or  transacts  business  to  collect  the  penalty 
and  such  court  shall  have  jurisdiction  to  hear  and  decide  any  such 
action.  The  court  shall  hear  such  action  on  the  record  made  before 
the  Secretary  and  shall  sustain  his  action  if  it  is supported  by  substan(cid:173)
tial  evidence  on  the  record  considered  as  a  whole. 

so Stat. 384. 
subpenas. 

(2)  Hearings  held  during  proceedings  for  the  assessment  of  civil 
penalties  authorized  by  paragraph  (1)  of  this  subsection  shall  be  con-
ducted  in  accordance  with  section  554  of  title  5, United  States  Code. 
'p]^g  Secretary  may  issue  subpenas  for  the  attendance  and  testimony 
of  witnesses  and  the  production  of  relevant  papers,  books,  and  docu-
witness fees.  ments,  and  administer  oaths.  Witnesses  summoned  shall  be  paid  the 
same  fees  and  mileage  that  are  paid  to  witnesses  in  the  courts  of  the 
United  States.  In  case  of  contumacy  or  refusal  to  obey  a  subpena 
served  upon  any  person  pursuant  to  this  paragraph,  the  district  court 
of  the  United  States  for  any  district  in  which  such  person  is  found 
or  resides or  transacts  business, upon  application  by  the  United  States 
and  after  notice  to  such  person,  shall  have  jurisdiction  to  issue  an 
order  requiring  such  person  to  appear  and  give  testimony  before  the 
Secretary  or  to  appear  and  produce  documents  before  the  Secretary, 
or  both,  and  any  failure  to  obey  such  order  of  the  court  may  be  pun(cid:173)
ished  by  such  court  as  a  contempt  thereof. 

(b)  (?RTMixAL VIOLATIONS. (1)  Any  person  who  willfully  commits 
an  act  which  violates  any  provision  of  this  Act,  of  any  permit  or 
certificate  issued  hereunder,  or  of  any  regulation  issued  in  order  to 
implement  subsection  (a)(1)  (A).  ( B ).  (C),  (D),  ( E ),  or  (F)  ;  (a) 
(2)  ( A ),  ( B ),  or  (C),  (c),  (d)  (other  than  a  regulation  relating  to 
recordkeeping, or  filing  of  reports),  (f),  or  (g)  of  section  9 of  this  Act 
shall,  upon  conA-iction.  be  fined  not  more  than  $20,000  or  imprisoned 
for  not  more  than  one  year,  or  both.  Any  person  who  willfully  com(cid:173)
mits an  act  which  Aiolates any provision  of  any  other  regulation  issued 
under  this  Act  shall,  upon  couAdction,  be  fined  not  more  than  $10,000 
or  imprisoned  for  not  more  than  six  months,  or  both. 

(2)  The  head  of  any  Federal  agency  which  has  issued  a  lease, 
license,  permit,  or  other  agreement  authorizing  the  use  of  Federal 
lands,  including  grazing  of  domestic  livestock,  to  any  person  Avho  is 
convicted  of  a criminal  violation  of  this Act  or  any  regulation,  permit, 
or  certificate  issued  hereunder  may  immediately  modify,  suspend,  or 
revoke  each  lease,  license,  permit,  or  other  agreement.  The  Secretary-
shall also suspend for  a period  of  up to one year, or cancel, any  Federal 
hunting  or  fishing  permits  or  stamps  issued  to  any  person  who  is  con(cid:173)
victed  of  a  criminal  violation  of  any  provision  of  this  Act  or  any 

87  STAT.] 

PUBLIC  LAW 93-205-DEC.  28,  1973 

899 

regulation,  permit,  or certificate  issued  hereunder.  The United  States 
shall  not be liable  for the payments  of any compensation,  reimburse(cid:173)
ment,  or damages  in connection  with  the modification,  suspension, or 
revocation  of any leases, licenses, permits, stamps, or other  agreements 
pursuant to this  section. 

(c)  DISTRICT  COURT  JURISDICTION.The  several  district  courts  of 
the  United  States,  including  the courts  enumerated  in section  460  of 
title  28, United  States  Code,  shall  have  jurisdiction  over  any  actions 
arising  under  this  Act.  For the purpose  of this  Act,  American  Samoa 
shall  be included  within  the judicial  district  of the District  Court of 
the  United  States  for the District  of  Hawaii. 

(d)  REWARDS.Upon the  recommendation  of the  Secretary, the Sec(cid:173)
retary of the Treasury  is authorized to pay an amount equal to one-half 
of  the  civil  penalty  or  fine  paid,  but  not  to  exceed  $2,500,  to any 
person  who furnishes  information  which  leads to a  finding  of civil  vio(cid:173)
lation  or a  conviction  of  a criminal  violation  of any provision  of  this 
Act  or  any  regulation  or  permit  issued  thereunder.  Any  officer  or 
employee of the United  States or of any  State or local government who 
furnishes  information  or  renders  service  in  the  performance  of his 
official  duties  shall  not  be  eligible  for  payment  under  this  section. 

(e)  ENFORCEMENT.(1)  The provisions  of  this  Act and any regu(cid:173)

lations  or  permits  issued  pursuant  thereto  shall  be enforced  by the 
Secretary,  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  or  the  Secretary  of  the 
Department  in  which  the Coast  Guard  is operating,  or all  such  Sec(cid:173)
retaries.  Each  such  Secretary  may utilize by agreement,  with  or  with(cid:173)
out  reimbursement,  the personnel,  services, and facilities  of any other 
Federal  agency  or  any  State  agency  for  purposes  of  enforcing  this 
Act. 

(2)  The judges  of the district  courts  of  the United  States  and  the 
United  States  magistrates  may,  within  their  respective  jurisdictions, 
upon  proper  oath  or  affirmation  showing  probable  cause,  issue  such 
warrants  or other  process  as may be required  for enforcement  of  this 
Act and any  regulation  issued  thereunder. 

(3)  Any person  authorized  by the Secretary,  the Secretary  of the 
Treasury,  or  the  Secretary  of  the  Department  in  which  the  Coast 
Guard  is operating, to enforce  this Act may detain  for inspection and 
inspect  any package,  crate, or other  container,  including  its contents, 
and  all  accompanying  documents,  upon  importation  or  exportation. 
Such  person  may  execute  and  serve  any  arrest  warrant,  search 
warrant,  or  other  warrant  or civil  or criminal  process  issued  by any 
officer  or court  of  competent  jurisdiction  for enforcement  of this Act. 
Such  person  so authorized  may search  and seize,  with  or  without  a 
warrant,  as  authorized  by law. Any  fish,  wildlife,  property,  or  item 
so seized  shall  be held  by any person  authorized  by the Secretary, the 
Secretary  of  the  Treasury,  or  the  Secretary  of  the  Department  in 
which  the  Coast  Guard  is  operating  pending  disposition  of  civil  or 
criminal  proceedings,  or the institution  of  an  action  in rem for  for(cid:173)
feiture  of such  fish,  wildlife,  property, or item  pursuant  to  paragraph 
(4)  of  this  subsection;  except  that  the  Secretary  may, in  lieu  of 
holding  such  fish,  wildlife,  property,  or  item,  permit  the  owner  or 
consignee  to post  a bond  or other  surety  satisfactory  to the Secretary. 

(4) (A)  All  fish  or  wildlife  or  plants  taken,  possessed,  sold,  pur(cid:173)

chased,  offered  for sale  or  purchase,  transported,  delivered,  received, 
carried,  shipped,  exported,  or imported  contrary  to the provisions of 
this  Act, any  regulation  made  pursuant  thereto,  or  any  permit  or 
certificate  issued  hereunder  shall be subject  to forfeiture  to the  United 
States. 

65  Stat.  725; 

72  Stat. 348. 

Federal  and 

State  agenciesi, 
utilization. 

Warrants. 

Package  inspec(cid:173)

tion. 

Search  and sei-
ure,  authority. 

900 

PUBLIC  LAW 93-205-DEC.  28,  1973 

[87  STAT. 

(B)  All  guns,  traps,  nets,  and  other  equipment,  vessels,  vehicles, 
aircraft,  and  other  means  of  transportation  used  to  aid  the  taking, 
possessing,  selling,  purchasing,  offering  for  sale  or  purchase,  trans(cid:173)
porting,  delivering,  receiving,  carrying,  shipping,  exporting,  or 
importing  of  any  fish  or  wildlife  or  plants  in  violation  of  this  Act, 
any  regulation  made  pursuant  thereto,  or  any  permit  or  certificate 
issued  thereunder  shall  be  subject  to  forfeiture  to  the  United  States 
upon  conviction  of  a  criminal  violation  pursuant  to  section  11(b)  (1) 
of  this  Act. 

(5)  All  provisions  of  law  relating  to  the  seizure,  forfeiture,  and 
condemnation  of  a  vessel  for  violation  of  the  customs  laws,  the  dis(cid:173)
position  of  such  vessel  or  the  proceeds  from  the  sale  thereof,  and  the 
remission  or  mitigation  of  such  forfeiture,  shall  apply  to  the  seizures 
and  forfeitures  incurred,  or  alleged  to  have  been  incurred,  under  the 
provisions  of  this  Act,  insofar  as  such  provisions  of  law  are  appli(cid:173)
cable  and  not  inconsistent  with  the  provisions  of  this  Act;  except  that 
all  powers,  rights,  and  duties  conferred  or  imposed  by  the  customs 
laws  upon  any  officer  or  employee  of  the  Treasury  Department  shall, 
for  the  purposes  of  this  Act.  be  exercised  or  performed  by  the  Secre(cid:173)
tary  or  by  such  persons  as he  may  designate. 

to  enforce 

(f)  EEnrivATioxs.The  Secretary,  the  Secretary  of  the  Treasury, 
and  the  Secretary  of  the  Department  in  which  the  Coast  Guard  is 
operating,  are  authorized  to  pronudgate  such  regulations  as  may  be 
appropriate 
this  Act,  and  charge  reasonable  fees  for 
expenses  to  the  Government  connected  with  permits  or  certificates 
authorized  by  this  Act  including  processing  applications  and  reason(cid:173)
able  inspections,  and  with  the  transfer,  board,  handling,  or  storage 
of  fish  or  wildlife  or  plants  and  evidentiary  items seized  and  forfeited 
under  this  Act. All  such  fees  collected  pursuant  to this subsection  shall 
be  deposited  in  the  Treasury  to  the  credit  of  the  appropriation  which 
is  current  and  chargeable  for  the  cost  of  furnishing 
the  services. 
Appropriated  funds  may  be  expended  pending  reimbursement  from 
parties  in  interest. 

(g)  CiTizEX  SUITS. (1)  Except  as  provided  in  paragraph  (2)  of 
this  subsection  anv  person  mav  commence  a  civil  suit  on  his  own 
behalf 

[ 

Administrative 

fees. 

' 

' 

'" 

/ 

;,. 

,^ 

Jurisdiction. 

" 

' 

(A)  to  enjoin  any  person,  including  the  T'^nited  States  and  any 
other  governmental  instrumentality  or  agency  (to  the  extent 
permitted  by  the  eleventli  amendment  to  the  Constitution),  wlio 
is  alleged  to  be  in  violation  of  any  provision  of  this  Act  or  regu(cid:173)
lation  issued  under  the  autliority  thereof;  or 

(B)  to  compel  the  Secretary  to  apply,  pursuant  to  section  6(g) 
(2)  (B)  (ii)  of  this  Act. the  prohibitions  set  forth  in  or  authorized 
pursuant  to  section  4(d)  or  section  9(a)  (1)  (B)  of  this  Act  with 
res])ect to the taking  of  any  resident  endangered  species or  threat(cid:173)
ened  species  within  anv  State. 

^j^g  district  courts  shall  liave  jurisdiction,  Avithout  regard  to  the 
amount  in  controversy  or  the  citizenship  of  the  parties, to enforce  any 
such  provision  or  regulation, as the  case may  be. In  any  civil  suit  com(cid:173)
menced  under  subparagra})h  (B)  the  district  court  shall  compel  the 
Secretary  to  apply  the  prohibition  sought  if  the  court  finds  that  the 
allegation 
that  an  emergency  exists  is  supported  by  substantial 
evidence. 

(2) (A)  No  action  may  be  commenced  under  subparagraph  (1)  (A) 

of  this  section 

(i)  prior  to  sixty  days  after  written  notice  of  the  violation  has 
been  given  to  the  Secretary,  and  to  any  alleged  violator  of  any 
such  provision  or  regulation; 

87  STAT. ] 

PUBLIC  LAW 93-205-DEC.  28,  1973 

901 

(ii)  if the  Secretary  has  commenced  action  to  impose a penalty 

pursuant  to subsection  (a)  of this section; or 

(iii)  if  the United  States  has commenced  and is  diligently 
prosecuting  a criminal  action  in a court of the  United  States or a 
State to redress a violation  of any  such provision  or  regulation. 

(B)  Xo  action  may  be  commenced  under  subparagraph  (1) (B) of 

this  section 

(i)  prior  to sixty  days  after  written  notice has been given to  the 
Secretary  setting  forth  the  reasons  why  an emergency  is thought 
to  exist  with  respect  to an endangered  species  or a  threatened 
species in the  State  concerned; or 

(ii)  if  the Secretary  has commenced  and is diligently  prose(cid:173)
cuting  action  under  section  6(g)  (2) (B)  (ii)  of this  Act  to deter(cid:173)
mine whether  any such emergency  exists. 

(3) (A)  Any  suit  under  this  subsection  may  be brought  in the  judi(cid:173)

cial district  in which the violation  occurs. 

(B)  In  any such  suit  under  this  subsection  in which  the United 
States  is not  a party,  the  Attorney  General, at the  request of the  Sec(cid:173)
retary,  may  intervene  on behalf  of the  L^nited  States  as a matter of 
right. 

ant  to paragraph  (1)  of this  subsection,  may  award  costs of litigation 
(including  reasonable  attorney  and  expert  witness  fees)  to any  party, 
whenever the court determines such award  is  appropriate. 

(5)  The injunctive  relief  provided  by  this  subsection  shall  not 
i-estrict  any right  which  any  person  (or class  of persons)  may  have 
under  any  statute  or  common  law  to seek enforcement  of any  standard 
or  limitation  or to seek  any  other  relief  (including  relief  against  the 
Secretary  or a State  agency). 

(4)  The  court, in issuing  any  final  order in any  suit  brought  pursu-  Litigation costs. 

intervention. 

injunctive relief. 

(h)  CooRDixATiox  W I TH  OTHER  LAWS.The  Secretary  of  Agricul(cid:173)
ture  and  the  Secretary  shall  provide  for appropriate  coordination  of 
the  administration  of this  Act  with  the  administration  of the  animal 
quarantine  laws  (21 U.S.C.  101-105,  lll-135b,  and  612-614)  and  sec(cid:173)
tion  306 of the  Tariff  Act  of 1930  (19  U.S.C.  1306).  Nothing  in this  ^/y^^'j/gf' 
Act  or any  amendment  made  by  this  Act  shall  be  construed  as  super(cid:173)
seding  or limiting  in any  manner  the functions  of the  Secretary of 
Agriculture  under  any  other  law  relating  to prohibited  or restricted 
importations  or possession  of animals  and  other  articles  and  no  pro(cid:173)
ceeding  or determination  under  this  Act  shall  preclude  any  proceed(cid:173)
ing  or be  considered  determinative  of any  issue of fact  or law  in any 
proceeding  under  any  Act  administered  by  the  Secretary  of Agricul(cid:173)
ture.  Nothing  in  this  Act  shall be construed  as superseding  or  limiting 
in  any  manner  the  functions  and  responsibilities  of the  Secretary of 
the  Treasury  under  the  Tariff  Act  of 1930, including,  without  limita(cid:173)
tion, section  527 of that  Act  (19 U.S.C.  1527), relating to the importa- 
tion  of  wildlife  taken,  killed,  possessed,  or exported  to the United 
States  in violation  of the  laws  or regulations  of a foreign  country. 

-^^ stat. 741. 

ENDANGERED  PLANTS 

SEC. 12. The  Secretary of the Smithsonian  Institution, in  conjunction 
with  other  affected  agencies, is authorized  and  directed  to review (1) 
species of plants  which  aie  now  or  may  become endangered  or  threat(cid:173)
ened  and  (2) methods  of adequately  conserving  such  species,  and to 

902 

PUBLIC  LAW 93-205-DEC.  28,  1973 

[87  STAT. 

Report to Con- 

^"^^^^^ 

repoi't to Coiigress, within  one year  after  the  date of the enactment  of 
this Act, the results of such review inchiding recommendations  for  new 
legislation  or the amendment of existing legislation. 

CONFORMING  AMENDMENTS 

SEC.  13. (a) Subsection  4(c)  of the Act of October  15,1966  (80  Stat. 
928,  16 U.S.C.  668dd(c)),  is further  amended  by revising  the second 
sentence thereof  to read as follows: "With  the exception of endangered 
species  and  threatened  species listed  by  the  Secretary  pursuant  to sec-
tjou  4 of the Endangered  Species  Act of  1973  in  States  wherein  a 
cooperative  agreement  does  not  exist  pursuant  to section  6(c)  of that 
Act, nothing in this Act shall be construed to authorize the Secretary  to 
control  or regulate  hunting  or  fishing  of resident  fish  and  wildlife  on 
lands not within the system. 

(b)  Subsection  10(a)  of the  Migratory  Bird  Conservation  Act (45 

gtjit.  1224,  16 U.S.C.  715i(a))  and subsection  401(a)  of the Act  of 
June  15, 1935  (49  Stat.  383,16 U.S.C. 715s(a)),  are  each  amended  by 
Striking out "threatened  with  extinction," and  inserting in lieu  thereof 
the  following:  "listed  pursuant  to section 4 of the  Endangered  Species 
Act of 1973 as endangered  species or threatened  species,". 

(c)  Section  7(a)(1)  of the Land  and Water  Conservation  Fund  Act 

of  1965  (16  U.S.C.  46019(a) (1))  is amended  by striking  out: 

"THREATENED  SPECIES.FoT  any national  area  which  may be 
authorized  for the  preservation  of species of  fish or wildlife  that 
are threatened  with  extinction." 

and inserting in lieu thereof  the  following: 

"ENDANGERED  SPECIES  AND  THREATENED  SPECIES.For  lands, 
waters, or interests  therein, the  acquisition  of which is authorized 
under  section  5 (a)  of the Endangered  Species Act of 1973, needed 
for  the  purpose of conserving  endangered  or threatened  species of 
fish  or  wildlife  or plants." 

(d) The first seuteucc of section 2 of the Act of September  28,1962, 
as  amended  (76 Stat.  653, 16 U.S.C.  460k-l),  is amended  to read as 
i  n 
follows: 

"The  Secretary  is authorized  to acquire  areas  of land,  or interests 

therein, which are suitable  for 

"(1)  incidental  fish  and  wildlife-oriented  recreational  develop(cid:173)

ment, 

" (2)  the protection of natural  resources, 
"(3)  the  conservation  of  endangered  species  or  threatened 
species  listed  by  the  Secretary  pursuant  to  section  4  of the 
Endangered  Species  Act of  1973, or 

" (4)  carrying  out two or more of the purposes set forth  in  para(cid:173)
graphs  (1) through  (3) of this  section,  and are adjacent  to, or 
within,  the  said  conservation  areas, except  that  the  acquisition  of 
any  land  or  interest  therein  pursuant  to  this  section  shall  be 
accomplished  only  with  such  funds  as may  be appropriated  there(cid:173)
for  by  the  Congress  or  donated  for  such  purposes,  but  such 
property  shall  not  be  acquired  with  funds  obtained  from  the  sale 
of Federal  migratory bird hunting  stamps." 

(e)  The  Marine  Mammal  Protection  Act  of 1972  (16  U.S.C.  1361-

1407)  isamended 

Ante,  p. 886. 

80 Stat. 929. 
78 Stat. 701; 

80 Stat. 930. 

78 Stat. 897; 

86 Stat. 459. 

Conservation 
^'r=.  .  in^, 
60  b t a t.  l U 6 o. 

86 Stat.  1027. 

87  STAT. ] 

PUBLIC  LAW 93-205-DEC.  28,  1973 

963 

(1)  by  striking  out  "Endangered  Species  Conservation  Act  of 
1969" in  section  3 (1) (B)  thereof  and  inserting  in lieu  thereof  the 
following: "Endangered  Species Act of  1973"; 

(2)  by  striking  out  "pursuant  to  the  Endangered  Species  Con(cid:173)

servation  Act  of  1969"  in  section  101(a)(3)(B) 
thereof  and 
inserting  in  lieu  thereof  the  following:  "or  threatened  species 
pursuant  to  the  Endangered  Species  Act  of  1973"; 

(3)  by  striking  out  "endangered  under  the  Endangered  Species 
Conservation  Act  of  1969"  in  section  102(b)(3) 
thereof  and 
inserting  in  lieu  thereof  the  following:  "an  endangered  species 
or  threatened  species  pursuant  to  the  Endangered  Species Act  of 
1973";  and 

(4)  by  striking  out  "of  the  Interior  such  revisions  of  the 
Endangered  Species  List,  authorized  by  the  Endangered  Species 
Conservation  Act  of  1969,"  in  section  202(a)(6) 
thereof  and 
inserting  in  lieu  thereof  the  following:  "such  revisions  of  the 
endangered  species  list  and  threatened  species  Jist  published 
pursuant  to  section  4(c)  (1)  of  the  Endangered  Species  Act  of 
1973". 

(f)  Section  2(1)  of  the  Federal  Environmental  Pesticide  Control 
Act  of  1972  (Public  Law  92-516)  is  amended  by  striking  out  the 
words  "by  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  under  Public  Law  91-135" 
and  inserting  in  lieu  thereof  the  words  "or  threatened  by  the  Secre(cid:173)
tary pursuant to the Endangered  Species Act of  1973". 

86  Stat.  1028. 
^ ^ ^ ^ 
16  u se  1362. 
Ant^e. p. ss^. 

le use 1371. 

le use 1372. 

16  u se  1402, 

fusc'isJnote 

REPEALER 

SEC.  14.  The  Endangered  Species  Conservation  Act  of  1969  (sec(cid:173)

tions  1  through  3  of  the  Act  of  October  15,  1966,  and  sections  1 
through  6 of  the Act  of  December  5,1969;  16 U.S.C.  668aa668cc-6), 
is  repealed. 

80  Stat.  926 
83  Stat.  275 

AUTHORIZATION  OF  APPROPRIATIONS 

SEC.  15.  Except  as  authorized  in  section  6  of  this  Act,  there  are 

authorized  to  be  appropriated 

(A)  not  to  exceed  $4,000,000  for  fiscal  year  1974, not  to  exceed 
$8,000,000  for  fiscal  year  1975  and  not  to  exceed  $10,000,000  for 
fiscal  year  1976, to  enable the  Department  of  the  Interior  to  carry 
out  such  functions  and  responsibilities  as  it  may  have  been  given 
under  this Act;  and 

(B)  not  to  exceed  $2,000,000  for  fiscal  year  1974, $1,500,000  for 
fiscal  year  1975  and  not  to  exceed  $2,000,000  for  fiscal  year  1976, 
to enable the Department  of  Commerce to carry out such  functions 
and  responsibilities  as  it  may  have  been  given  under  this  Act. 

SEC.  16. This  Act  shall  take  effect  on the  date  of  its  enactment. 

EFFECTIVE  DATE 

MARINE  MAMMAL  PROTECTION  ACT  OF  10  72 

SEC.  17.  Except  as  otherwise  provided  in  this  Act,  no  provision  of 
this  Act  shall  take  precedence  over  any  more  restrictive  conflicting 
provision  of  the  Marine  Mammal  Protection  Act  of  1972. 

A 
Approved  December  28,  1973. 

1  T^ 

, 

^^ stat. 1027. 
16  u se  1361 

note. 

