International Society for Ecological Economics
Internet Encyclopaedia of Ecological Economics

Sustainability and Sustainable Development
Jonathan M. Harris
February 2003
I. SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT: DEFINING A NEW PARADIGM
In 1987 the World Commission on Environment and Development sought to
address the problem of conflicts between environment and development goals
by formulating a definition of sustainable development:
Sustainable development is development which meets the needs of the
present without compromising the ability of future generations to meet their
own needs.
– World Commission on Environment and Development, 1987
In the extensive discussion and use of the concept since then (see e.g.
Holmberg, 1992; Reed, 1997; Harris et al., 2001), there has been a growing
recognition of three essential aspects of sustainable development:
* Economic: An economically sustainable system must be able to
produce goods and services on a continuing basis, to maintain manageable
levels of government and external debt, and to avoid extreme sectoral
imbalances which damage agricultural or industrial production.
* Environmental: An environmentally sustainable system must
maintain a stable resource base, avoiding over-exploitation of renewable
resource systems or environmental sink functions, and depleting nonrenewable resources only to the extent that investment is made in adequate
substitutes. This includes maintenance of biodiversity, atmospheric stability,
and other ecosystem functions not ordinarily classed as economic resources.
* Social: A socially sustainable system must achieve fairness in
distribution and opportunity, adequate provision of social services including
health and education, gender equity, and political accountability and
participation.
These three elements of sustainability introduce many potential
complications to the original, simple definition of economic development. The
goals expressed or implied are multidimensional, raising the issue of how to
balance objectives and how to judge success or failure. For example, what if
provision of adequate food and water supplies appears to require changes in
land use that will decrease biodiversity? What if non-polluting energy sources
are more expensive, thus increasing the burden on the poor, for whom they
represent a larger proportion of daily expenditure? Which goal will take
precedence?

1

In the real world, we can rarely avoid trade-offs, and as Norgaard
points out, we can maximize only one objective at a time: ‘it is impossible to
define sustainable development in an operational manner in the detail and
with the level of control presumed in the logic of modernity’ (Norgaard, 1994,
p. 22). The strongly normative nature of the sustainable development concept
makes it difficult to pin down analytically.
Despite these complications, the three principles outlined above do
have resonance at a common-sense level. Thus there is ample justification
for the elucidation of a theory of sustainable development, which must have
an interdisciplinary nature. Drawing on economic, ecological, and social
perspectives, we can identify some of the main themes that are integral to the
construction of a new paradigm:
* Economic sustainability requires that the different kinds of capital
that make economic production possible must be maintained or augmented.
These include manufactured capital, natural capital, human capital, and social
capital. Some substitutability may be possible among these kinds of capital,
but in broad terms they are complementary, so that the maintenance of all
four is essential over the long term.
* The conservation of ecosystems and natural resources is essential
for sustainable economic production and intergenerational equity. From an
ecological perspective, both human population and total resource demand
must be limited in scale, and the integrity of ecosystems and diversity of
species must be maintained. Market mechanisms often do not operate
effectively to conserve this natural capital, but tend to deplete and degrade it.
* Social equity, the fulfillment of basic health and educational needs,
and participatory democracy are crucial elements of development, and are
interrelated with environmental sustainability.
Taken together, these observations suggest new guidelines for the
development process. They also require modifications to the goal of
economic growth. Economic growth in some form is required for those who
lack essentials, but it must be subject to global limits and should not be the
prime objective for countries already at high levels of consumption (see e.g.
Daly, 1996). In terms of sustainability, a moderate level of consumption,
together with strong social institutions and a healthy environment, represents
a better ideal than ever-increasing consumption (Durning, 1992).
Sustainability, however, is more than limits on population or restraint in
consumption - though these are important. It means that the choice of goods
and technologies must be oriented to the requirements of ecosystem integrity
and species diversity as well as to social goals. Elements of all three
perspectives – economic, ecological, and social – are essential to an
understanding of the requirements for sustainability.
II. THE ECONOMIC PERSPECTIVE
From the point of view of neo-classical economic theory, sustainability
can be defined in terms of the maximization of welfare over time. (This is
assumed to be human welfare – the claims of the non-human world arise
when we consider the ecological perspective.) Most economists simplify
further by identifying the maximization of welfare with the maximization of
utility derived from consumption. While this may be criticized as an
oversimplification, it certainly includes many important elements of human

2

welfare (food, clothing, housing, transportation, health and education services,
etc.) and it has the analytical advantage of reducing the problem to a
measurable single-dimensional indicator.
A formal economic analysis then raises the question of whether
sustainability has any validity as an economic concept. According to standard
economic theory, efficient resource allocation should have the effect of
maximizing utility from consumption. If we accept the use of time discounting
as a method of comparing the economic values of consumption in different
time periods, then sustainability appears to mean nothing more than efficient
resource allocation – a concept already well established in economics.
One line of criticism of this reductionist approach to sustainability
centers on the use of discounting. At a discount rate of 10%, the value of *1
million one hundred years from now is the same as a mere *72 today. Thus it
would apparently be justifiable to impose costs of up to *1 million on people in
the year 2100 in order to enjoy *72 worth of consumption today. By this logic,
much resource depletion and environmental damage could be considered
acceptable, and even optimal, according to a criterion of economic efficiency.
The problem is that the use of a discount rate implicitly imposes a
specific choice regarding the relative welfare of present and future
generations. Howarth and Norgaard have shown that the choice of a discount
rate is equivalent to a choice of allocations among generations (Howarth and
Norgaard, 1993). Use of a current market discount rate gives undue weight to
the preferences of current consumers. When we consider issues such as soil
erosion or atmospheric buildup of greenhouse gases, where the most
damaging impacts are felt over decades or generations, this creates a strong
bias against sustainability. Thus to achieve intergenerational equity, we must
either impose a low discount rate or some kind of sustainability rule regarding
resource use and environmental impacts. Cline (1992), for example, has
suggested the use of a discount rate of 1.5% for balancing long-term costs
and benefits of global climate change abatement.
A related issue concerns the concept of natural capital. Soils and
atmospheric functions are aspects of natural capital, which consists of all the
natural resources and environmental services of the planet. In the neoclassical view, there is no special reason to conserve natural capital. The
‘Hartwick rule’, a well-known principle derived from work by Hartwick (1977)
and Solow (1986), states that consumption may remain constant, or increase,
with declining non-renewable resources provided that the rents from these
resources are reinvested in reproducible capital. This rule does not require
maintenance of any particular stock of natural capital.
The essential assumption involved in the Hartwick/Solow approach is
that of substitutability of different types of capital. If, for example, we cut down
forests but build factories, we are better off provided the economic value of
the new industrial plant exceeds the economic value of the lost forests. Daly’s
view is based on the opposite assumption, that ‘man-made and natural capital
are fundamentally complements and only marginally substitutes’ (Daly, 1994,
p. 25). If natural capital has a special and unique importance, then neoclassical economic efficiency will not suffice for sustainability.
The issue may be posed terms of weak and strong sustainability. Even
in the neo-classical perspective the principle of weak sustainability is
appropriate. In this approach, sustainability requires that the total value of

3

manufactured plus natural capital remain constant over time. El Serafy has
pointed out that in order to assess this value, there must be a full accounting
for natural capital depletion (El Serafy, 1993, 1997).
A strong sustainability approach is based on the idea that
substitutability between natural and manufactured capital is limited. Rather,
the two are seen as complements -- factors that must be used together to be
productive. For example, a fleet of fishing boats is of no use without a stock
of fish. In the case of critical natural capital (Pearce and Warford, 1993, p. 53)
-- for example essential water supplies -- substitutability is close to zero.
While it may be possible, for example, to compensate for some water pollution
with purification systems, life and economic activity is essentially impossible
without access to water. The strong sustainability approach implies that
specific measures distinct from the ordinary market process are necessary for
the conservation of natural capital. It also implies limits on macroeconomic
scale. The economic system cannot grow beyond the limitations set by the
regeneration and waste-absorption capacities of the ecosystem.
The distinction between weak and strong sustainability is discussed in
Daly (1994). Strong sustainability is defended by Daly (1995) and criticized
by Beckerman (1994, 1995), who rejects the concept of sustainability in
general. A defense of weak sustainability is offered by El Serafy (1996), while
Common (1996) argues that the distinction between weak and strong
sustainability is invalid. Limitations of the weak sustainability concept are
discussed by Gowdy and O’Hara (1997).
Costanza and Daly (1992) suggest that a minimum necessary
condition for sustainability can be expressed in terms of the conservation of
natural capital. This policy goal leads to two decision rules, one for renewable
and the other for non-renewable resources. For renewables, the rule is to
limit resource consumption to sustainable yield levels; for non-renewables the
rule is to re-invest the proceeds from non-renewable resource exploitation into
renewable natural capital. Following these two rules will maintain a constant
stock of natural capital. To maintain a constant per capita stock of natural
capital also requires a stable level of human population, a factor which Daly
has emphasized elsewhere (Daly 1991).
The rules suggested by Costanza and Daly for natural capital
conservation are rough guides rather than precise theoretical principles.
Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen, whose pathbreaking work The Entropy Law and
the Economic Process outlined the dependence of the economic system on
biophysical systems, argued that it is ultimately impossible to maintain a
constant stock of natural capital, since all planetary resources will eventually
degrade or be used up according to the Second Law of Thermodynamics
(Georgescu-Roegen 1971). But at a more practical level he proposed an
approach similar to Costanza and Daly’s, reasoning that ‘the enormous
disproportionality between the flow of solar energy and the much more limited
stock of terrestrial free energy suggests a bioeconomic program emphasizing
such factors as solar energy, organic agriculture, population limitation, product
durability, moderate consumption, and international equity’ (GeorgescuRoegen 1993; see also Cleveland and Ruth 1997).
Toman (1992) proposes that the difficulty in defining sustainability may
be resolved by recognizing that some issues can be appropriately dealt with
through neo-classical market efficiency, while others require the application of

4

Ciriancy-Wantrup’s (1952) concept of a ‘safe minimum standard’ approach to
protect essential resources and environmental functions. He suggests that
the criteria of possible severity and irreversibility of ecological damages
should be used to decide which theoretical framework is more appropriate.
This perspective implies that criteria other than the strictly economic – in
particular, principles drawn from the science of ecology – should be applied to
problems of long-term sustainability.
III. THE ECOLOGICAL PERSPECTIVE
Common and Perrings (1992) have suggested that the economic
perspective of ‘Solow-sustainability’ needs to be complemented by an
ecological approach of ‘Holling-sustainability’, following the work of Holling
(1973, 1986) on the resilience and stability of ecosystems.
Unlike
economists, whose models provide no upper bound on economic growth,
physical scientists and ecologists are accustomed to the idea of limits.
Natural systems must exist subject to the unyielding laws of thermodynamics,
and the science of population ecology has explored the implications of these
laws for living organisms. ‘Two of the fundamental axioms of ecological and
evolutionary biology are that organisms are exuberantly over-productive, and
that limits set by time, space, and energy are inevitably encountered’ (Holling,
1994). In an ecological perspective sustainability must involve limits on
population and consumption levels. These limits apply to all biological
systems. While humans may appear to evade them for a time, they must
ultimately accept the boundaries of a finite planet.
However, this simple assertion of limits does not fully capture the
contribution of ecologists to the discussion of sustainability. What Holling
identifies as a third axiom of ecology has even more significant implications.
The third axiom ‘concerns processes that generate variability and novelty’ –
the generation of genetic diversity and the resultant processes of evolution
and change in species and ecosystems.
Genetic diversity gives rise to resilience in ecosystems. Resilience is
the ‘bounce-back’ capacity that enables a system to respond to disturbances
or damage. A forest ecosystem, for example, may recover from a pest
infestation through an increase in the population of predators that control the
pest, an expansion of species unaffected by the pest, or possibly a
development of pest resistance in affected species. The patterns of response
will be widely variable, but the essential integrity of the ecosystem will be
preserved. The key to resilience is the existence of a wide variety of species,
interacting with each other and providing a reservoir of genetic forms that
provide the potential to adapt to changing conditions.
For the ecologist, sustainability should be defined in terms of the
maintenance of ecosystem resilience. This view of sustainability is clearly
different from the human-centered conceptions put forward by the World
Commission on Environment and Development and the consumption-based
principles proposed by economic theorists. Common and Perrings suggest
that ‘the concepts of Solow-sustainability and Holling-sustainability are largely
disjoint. This implies that there may be no close relationship between
economic efficiency and ecological sustainability’ (1992, p. 7). In order to
achieve ecological sustainability, it is likely to be necessary to modify current

5

consumption preferences and production techniques which, while efficient in
economic terms, threaten the ecological resilience of planetary systems.
IV. THE SOCIAL PERSPECTIVE
Advocates of sustainable development, as noted above, recognize the
social component of development as an essential part of the new paradigm.
A ‘human development’ approach emphasizing issues of basic needs and
equity is well grounded in the history of economic theory. Anand and Sen
(1996) point out that concerns for these dimensions of economic development
start with the earliest economic theorists, and contrast the human
development approach to the wealth maximization approach that has
dominated modern economics.
Basic needs and equity in development have been the focus of the
United Nations Development Programme’s series of Human Development
Reports. In addition to calculating the Human Development Index, which
offers a different measure of development success from per capita GNP or
GDP, the Human Development Reports focus each year on a different aspect
of social and economic development, such as democratic governance (1993),
gender inequity (1995), and poverty (1997).
While the HDI does not explicitly include any environmental measures,
the 1994 report discussed the relationship between sustainability and equity,
arguing that ‘the concept of sustainable development raises the issue of
whether present life-styles are acceptable and whether there is any reason to
pass them on to the next generation. Because intergenerational equity must
go hand in hand with intragenerational equity, a major restructuring of the
world’s income and consumption patterns may be a necessary precondition
for any viable strategy of sustainable development’ (UNDP, 1994).
The issue of environmental sustainability is intertwined with that of
poverty and inequity. The causative relationship runs both ways – increased
poverty and loss of rural livelihoods accelerates environmental degradation as
displaced people put greater pressure on forests, fisheries, and marginal
lands. Lipton (1997) and Scherr (1997) emphasize the relationship between
population growth, social, conditions, and resource degradation. Reed (1997)
notes that the social component of sustainability includes issues of
distributional equity, provision of social services, gender equity, population
stabilization, and political accountability and participation.
The relationship of the human development paradigm to sustainability is
discussed by Haq (1995) and Chambers (1992). Interrelationships between
development, population growth, and environmental sustainability are
prominent in the exposition of human development concepts by Sen (2000).
V. A SYNTHESIS OF PERSPECTIVES
The principles which emerge from this tripartite discussion of
sustainability include:
*
The conservation of natural capital is essential for sustainable
economic production and intergenerational equity. Market mechanisms do
not necessarily operate effectively to conserve natural capital, but may tend to
deplete and degrade it.

6

* From an ecological perspective, both population and total resource
demand must be limited in scale, and the integrity of ecosystems and diversity
of species must be maintained.
*
Practices consistent with sustainable development must remedy
social inequities and environmental damage, while maintaining a sound
economic base.
* Social equity, the fulfilment of basic health and educational needs,
and participatory democracy are crucial elements of development, and are
interrelated with environmental sustainability.
Taken together, these principles clearly suggest new guidelines for the
development process. They also require a modification of the goals of
economic growth (Arrow et al., 1995). The principles of sustainability imply
new goals and policies in all major areas of economic development, including:
* Population: Theorists of sustainable development have generally
rejected the concept of unlimited growth, whether of population or of
economic production. Even if a specific carrying capacity for humans is
difficult to identify, resource and environmental constraints will eventually be
reached, if they have not been already. A sustainable society must ultimately
imply a stable level of population. Thus population policy must become a
central element of economic development. Scherr (1997) suggests that
maintaining environmental integrity depends on slowing rates of population
growth in the developing world, and that policies to so require a focus on
social equity and women’s rights.
* Agriculture: The need to feed an expanding population at higher
per-capita levels of consumption is straining global soil and water systems
(Harris and Kennedy, 1999; Pinstrup-Andersen and Pandya-Lorch, 1998). A
transition to more sustainable agricultural systems requires changes on both
the production and consumption sides. On the production side, current highinput techniques which are leading to serious soil degradation and water
pollution and overdraft must be replaced by organic soil rebuilding, integrated
pest management, and efficient irrigation. This in turn implies much greater
reliance on local knowledge and participatory input into the development of
agricultural techniques (Pretty and Chambers, 2000). On the consumption
side, both limits on population growth and greater equity and efficiency in food
distribution are of central importance given probable resource limitations on
production.
* Energy: Both supply limits and environmental impacts, in particular
the accumulation of greenhouse gases, mean that it will be necessary to
accomplish a transition away from fossil fuels well before 2050 (MacKenzie,
1996; IPCC, 2001a, b). A non-fossil energy system would be significantly
more decentralized, adapted to local conditions and taking advantage of
opportunities for wind, biomass, and off-grid solar power systems. This is
unlikely to occur without a major mobilization of capital resources for
renewable energy development in countries now rapidly expanding their
energy systems (Johansson and Goldemberg, 2002).
*
Industry: As the scale of global industrial production increases
several-fold over current levels, which themselves represent a quadrupling
over 1950 levels, it is apparent that ‘end-of-pipe’ pollution control not be
adequate. The concept of ‘industrial ecology’ implies the restructuring of
whole industrial sectors based on a goal of reducing emissions and reusing

7

materials at all stages of the production cycle (Frosch and Gallopoulos, 1989;
Frosch, 1992; Ayres and Ayres, 1996; Socolow, 1994). Corporate reform and
‘greening’, as well as a broad cooperative effort between corporations and
governments, will be needed to achieve goal.
* Renewable Resource Systems: World fisheries, forests and water
systems are severely over-stressed. With even greater demands on all
systems expected in the next century, all levels of institutional management
must be urgently reformed. Multilateral agreements and global funding are
needed to conserve transboundary resources; national resource management
systems must be shifted from goals of exploitation to conservation and
sustainable harvesting; and local communities must be strongly involved in
resource conservation (UNEP, 2000, 2002; UNDP et al., 2000).
Each of these areas poses challenges that are social and institutional
as well as economic. The social component of sustainability is not just an
idealized goal, but also a necessity for achieving the economic and ecological
components. Existing institutions of all kinds, including corporations, local
and national government, and transnational organizations, will have to adapt
to the requirements of sustainable development if all the problems which
motivated the development of concept are not to grow worse. Democratic
governance, participation, and the satisfaction of basic needs are thus an
essential part of a new sustainable development synthesis.

8

References
Anand, Sudhir and Amartya K. Sen (1996), Sustainable Human Development:
Concepts and Priorities, United Nations Development Programme, Office of
Development Studies Discussion Paper Series.
Arrow, Kenneth et al. (1995), ‘Economic Growth, Carrying Capacity, and the
Environment’, Science 268, 520-521.
Ayres, Robert U. and Leslie W. Ayres (1996), Industrial Ecology: Closing the
Materials Cycle, Cheltenham UK: Edward Elgar.
Beckerman, Wilfred (1994), ‘Sustainable Development: Is it a Useful
Concept?’ Environmental Values 3, 191-209.
Beckerman, Wilfred (1995), ‘How Would You Like Your “Sustainability”, Sir?
Weak or Strong? A Reply to My Critics’, Environmental Values 4, 169-179.
Chambers, Robert (1992), ‘Sustainable Livelihoods: The Poor’s Reconciliation
of Environment and Development’, Chapter 7 in Paul Ekins and Manfred MaxNeef eds., Real-Life Economics: Understanding Wealth Creation, New York:
Routledge.
Ciriancy-Wantrup, S.V. (1952), Resource Conservation, Berkeley: University
of California Press.
Cleveland, Cutler J. and Matthias Ruth (1997), ‘When, Where, and by How
Much do Biophysical Limits Constrain the Economic Process?’ A Survey of
Georgescu-Roegen’s Contribution to Ecological Economics’, Ecological
Economics 22, 203-223.
Cline, William R (1992) The Economics of Global Warming, Washington DC:
Institute for International Economics.
Common, Mick (1996), ‘Beckerman and his Critics on Strong and Weak
Sustainability: Confusing Concepts and Conditions’, Environmental Values 5,
83-88.
Common, Mick, and Charles Perrings (1992) ‘Towards an Ecological
Economics of Sustainability’, Ecological Economics 6, 7-34.
Daly, Herman E. (1991), Steady State Economics, 2nd ed., Washington, D.C.:
Island Press.
Daly, Herman E. (1994), ‘Operationalizing Sustainable Development by
Investing in Natural Capital’, in AnnMari Jansson et al. eds., Investing in
Natural Capital: The Ecological Economics Approach to Sustainability,
Washington, D.C.: Island Press.

9

Daly, Herman E. (1995), ‘On Wilfred Beckerman’s Critique of Sustainable
Development’, Environmental Values 4, 49-55.
Daly, Herman E. (1996), Beyond Growth: The Economics of Sustainable
Development, Boston, Massachusetts: Beacon Press.
Durning, Alan (1992), How Much is Enough? The Consumer Society and the
Future of Earth. Worldwatch Environmental Alert Series, ed. Linda Starke,
New York: W.W. Norton.
El Serafy, Salah (1993), ‘The Environment as Capital’, in Ernst Lutz ed.,
Toward Improved Accounting for the Environment: An UNSTAT-World Bank
Symposium, Washington, D.C: The World Bank.
El Serafy Salah (1996), ‘In Defence of Weak Sustainability: A Response to
Beckerman’, Environmental Values 5, 75-81.
El Serafy, Salah (1997), ‘Green Accounting and Economic Policy’, Ecological
Economics 21, 217-229.
Frosch, Robert A. (1992), ‘Industrial Ecology: A Philosophical Introduction’,
Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 89, 800-3.
Frosch, Robert A. and Nicholas E. Gallopoulos (1989), ‘Strategies for
Manufacturing’, Scientific American 261 (3), 94-102.
Georgescu-Roegen, Nicholas (1971), The Entropy Law and the Economic
Process, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Harvard University Press.
Georgescu-Roegen, Nicholas (1993), ‘Energy and Economic Myths’, Chapter
4 in Herman E. Daly and Kenneth N. Townsend eds., Valuing the Earth:
Economics, Ecology, Ethics, Cambridge, Massachusetts: MIT Press.
Gowdy, John, and Sabine O’Hara (1997), ‘Weak Sustainability and Viable
Technologies’, Ecological Economics 22, 239-247.
Harris, Jonathan M., Timothy A Wise, Kevin P. Gallagher, and Neva R.
Goodwin eds. (2001), A Survey of Sustainable Development: Social and
Economic Dimensions, Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Harris, Jonathan M. and Scott Kennedy (1999). ‘Carrying Capacity in
Agriculture: Global and Regional Issues’, Ecological Economics 29, 443-461.
Hartwick, J.M. (1977), ‘Intergenerational Equity and the Investing of Rents
from Exhaustible Resources’, American Economic Review 66, 972-974.
Haq, Mahbub ul (1995), Reflections on Human Development, New York:
Oxford University Press.

10

Holling, C.S. (1973), ‘Resilience and Stability of Ecological Systems’, Annual
Review of Ecological Systems 4,1-24.
Holling, C.S. (1986), ‘The Resilience of Terrestrial Ecosystems: Local
Surprise and Global Change’, in W.C. Clark and R.E. Munn eds., Sustainable
Development of the Biosphere, Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University
Press.
Holling, C.S. (1994), ‘An Ecologist View of the Malthusian Conflict’, in Kerstin
Lindahl-Kiessling and Hans Landberg eds., Population, Economic
Development, and the Environment, New York and Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Holmberg, Johan ed. (1992), Making Development Sustainable: Redefining
Institutions, Policy, and Economics, Washington, D.C.: Island Press.
Howarth, Richard B. and Richard B. Norgaard (1993), ‘Intergenerational
Transfers and the Social Discount Rate’, Environmental and Resource
Economics 3, 337-58.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2001a), Climate Change 2001:
The Scientific Basis, New York: Cambridge University Press.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (2001b), Climate Change 2001:
Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability, New York: Cambridge University
Press.
Johansson, Thomas B. and José Goldemberg eds. (2002), Energy for
Sustainable Development: A Policy Agenda, New York: United Nations
Development Programme.
Lipton, Michael (1997), ‘Accelerated Resource Degradation by Agriculture in
Developing Countries? The Role of Population Change and Responses to It’,
in Stephen A. Vosti and Thomas Reardon eds., Sustainability, Growth and
Poverty Alleviation: A Policy and Agroecological Perspective, Baltimore:
Johns Hopkins University Press.
MacKenzie, James J. (1996), Oil as a Finite Resource: When will Global
Production Peak? Washington, D.C: World Resources Institute.
Norgaard, Richard B. (1994), Development Betrayed, London: Routledge.
Pearce and Warford (1993), World Without End: Economics, Environment,
and Sustainable Development, New York and Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
Pinstrup-Andersen, Per, and Rajul Pandya-Lorch (1998) ‘Food Security and
Sustainable Use of Natural Resources: A 2020 Vision’, Ecological Economics
26, 1-10.

11

Pretty, Jules, and Robert Chambers (2000) ‘Towards a Learning Paradigm:
New Professionalism and Institutions for Agriculture’, in Jonathan M. Harris
ed., Rethinking Sustainability: Power, Knowledge, and Institutions.
Ann
Arbor, Michigan: University of Michigan Press.
Reed, David ed. (1997), Structural Adjustment, the Environment and
Sustainable Development, London: Earthscan Publications.
Scherr, Sara J. (1997), ‘People and Environment: What is the Relationship
between Exploitation of Natural Resources and Population Growth in the
South?’ Forum for Development Studies (1), 33-58.
Sen, Amartya, (2000), Development as Freedom, New York: Alfred A. Knopf.
Socolow, Robert et al (1994), Industrial Ecology and Global Change, New
York and Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.
Solow, Robert M. (1986), ‘On the Intertemporal Allocation of Natural
Resources’, Scandinavian Journal of Economics 88, 141-149.
Toman, Michael A. (1992), ‘The Difficulty in Defining Sustainability’,
Resources 106, 3-6.
United Nations Development Programme (1990-2002), Human Development
Report, New York: Oxford University Press.
United Nations Development Programme, United Nations Environment
Programme, World Bank, and World Resources Institute (2000), World
Resources 2000-2001: People and Ecosystems: The Fraying Web of Life,
Washington, D.C.: World Resources Institute.
United Nations Environmental Programme (2000), Global Environmental
Outlook 2000: UNEP’s Millennium Report on the Environment, London:
Earthscan Publications, 1999.
United Nations Environmental Programme (2002), Global Environmental
Outlook 3: Past, Present and Future Perspectives, London: Earthscan
Publications, 2002.
World Commission on Environment and Development (1987), Our Common
Future, New York: Oxford University Press, 1987.

12

