Sustainability 2010, 2, 3436-3448; doi:10.3390/su2113436
OPEN ACCESS

sustainability
ISSN 2071-1050
www.mdpi.com/journal/sustainability
Review

What is Sustainability?
Tom Kuhlman 1,* and John Farrington 2
1

2

Agricultural Economics Research Institute, Wageningen University, P.O. Box 29703, 2502LS
The Hague, The Netherlands
Institute for Rural Research, Geography and Environment, University of Aberdeen, Elphinstone
Road, Aberdeen AB24 3UF, Scotland, UK; E-Mail: j.farrington@abdn.ac.uk

* Author to whom correspondence should be addressed; E-Mail: tom.kuhlman@wur.nl;
Tel.: +31-70-3358-232; Fax: +31-70-3615-624.
Received: 17 September 2010; in revised form: 15 October 2010 / Accepted: 19 October 2010 /
Published: 1 November 2010

Abstract: Sustainability as a policy concept has its origin in the Brundtland Report
of 1987. That document was concerned with the tension between the aspirations of
mankind towards a better life on the one hand and the limitations imposed by nature on the
other hand. In the course of time, the concept has been re-interpreted as encompassing three
dimensions, namely social, economic and environmental. The paper argues that this change
in meaning (a) obscures the real contradiction between the aims of welfare for all and
environmental conservation; (b) risks diminishing the importance of the environmental
dimension; and (c) separates social from economic aspects, which in reality are one and the
same. It is proposed instead to return to the original meaning, where sustainability is
concerned with the well-being of future generations and in particular with irreplaceable
natural resources—as opposed to the gratification of present needs which we call
well-being. A balance needs to be found between those two, but not by pretending they are
three sides of the same coin. Although we use up natural resources at the expense of future
generations, we also generate capital (including knowledge) which raises future well-being.
A major question is to what extent the one compensates for the other. This debate centres
around the problem of substitutability, which has been cast into a distinction between
‘weak’ and ‘strong’ sustainability. It is argued that these two do not need to be in
opposition but complement one another.

Sustainability 2010, 2

3437

Keywords: sustainability; well-being; welfare

1. Introduction
The term sustainability has become popular in policy-oriented research as an expression of what
public policies ought to achieve. The principal inspiration came from the Brundtland Report
of 1987 [1]. Since then the concept has shifted in meaning. This paper argues that the shift is
unfortunate in that it obscures the real contradiction which exists between long-term sustainability and
short-term welfare. Moreover, the distinction between three ‘pillars’of sustainability is conceptually
fuzzy. We propose a definition that reverts to the original sense in which the concept was intended.
However, this paper does not pretend to offer a comprehensive view of the problem of
sustainability. It presents a critical view of how the term is used in policy debate and in impact
assessment—the set of methods used in applied research to appraise policies and projects.
2. History of the Concept
The concept of sustainability was originally coined in forestry, where it means never harvesting
more than what the forest yields in new growth [2]. The word Nachhaltigkeit (the German term for
sustainability) was first used with this meaning in 1713 [3]. The concern with preserving natural
resources for the future is perennial, of course: undoubtedly our Palaeolithic ancestors worried about
their prey becoming extinct, and early farmers must have been apprehensive about maintaining soil
fertility. Traditional beliefs enjoined thinking in terms of stewardship and concern for future
generations, as expressed in the oft-quoted words of a Nigerian tribal chief who saw the community as
consisting of “many dead, few living and countless others unborn” [4,5]. Perhaps there have always
been two opposing views of the relation between humankind and nature: one which stresses adaptation
and harmony, and another which sees nature as something to be conquered. While this latter view may
have been rather dominant in Western civilization at least in recent centuries, its counterpoint has
never been absent.
Sustainability (without necessarily using the word) is a natural topic of study for economists: after
all, the scarcity of resources is of central concern to the dismal science. A famous example is the work
of Thomas Malthus, who published his theory about looming mass starvation (due to the inability of
available agricultural land to feed an expanding population) in 1798. A theory on the optimal rate of
exploitation of non-renewable resource which is still relevant today was formulated by Harold
Hotelling, an American economist, in 1931 [6]. We shall have more to say about his views later.
A milestone in capturing the attention of global public policy was the report of the Club of
Rome [7], which predicted that many natural resources crucial to our survival would be exhausted
within one or two generations. Such pessimism is unbecoming in public policy which is, after all,
supposed to be about improving things. Therefore, the report of the UN World Commission on
Environment and Development, better known as the Brundtland Report after its chairperson, was
welcomed for showing a way out of impending doom. It was this report which adopted the concept of
sustainability and gave it the widespread recognition it enjoys today.

Sustainability 2010, 2

3438

The question which Brundtland and her colleagues posed themselves was: how can the aspirations
of the world’s nations for a better life be reconciled with limited natural resources and the dangers of
environmental degradation? Their answer is sustainable development, in the Commission’s words:
development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of future
generations to meet their own needs [1].
Thus, environmental concerns are important, but the basic argument is one of welfare, seen in a
context of inter-generational equity. We should care for the environment not because of its intrinsic
value, but in order to preserve resources for our children.
Since that time, there have been two major developments in the concept of sustainability: one, its
interpretation in terms of three dimensions, which must be in harmony: social, economic and
environmental. Two, the distinction between ‘strong’ and ‘weak’ sustainability. These two
developments are discussed critically in the Sections 3–4 and 5–6, respectively.
3. People, Planet, Profit
The Brundtland report speaks of two concerns that should be reconciled: development and the
environment. They can also be interpreted as needs versus resources, or as the short versus the long
term. Today, however, sustainability is almost always seen in terms of three dimensions: social,
economic and environmental [8-11]. This is embodied in the definition of sustainability adopted by the
United Nations in its Agenda for Development:
Development is a multidimensional undertaking to achieve a higher quality of life for all
people. Economic development, social development and environmental protection are
interdependent and mutually reinforcing components of sustainable development [12].
But what are economic and social development and how are they different? Robert Gibson, a
political scientist, says that the distinction is needed because “material gains are not sufficient measures
or preservers of human well-being” [13]. The same author also suggests that the three dimensions or
‘pillars’ reflect the disciplines of those who study sustainability, adding for good measure that a
cultural and a political pillar could also be included [13]. Gibson himself, by the way, rejects the idea
of pillars altogether and instead formulates seven principles on which sustainability could be based.
The idea of sustainability having three dimensions stems from the Triple Bottom Line concept,
coined by Elkington [14]. As the term bottom line suggests, it originates from the world of
management science, and Elkington intended it as a way to operationalize corporate social
responsibility. To the conventional bottom line (profit) should be added care for the environment (the
planet) as well as being good to people, for instance by providing facilities for the handicapped and
hiring minorities (the social dimension).
The goals of business, however, are very different from those of public policy. Although, as in
business, revenue is needed to cover government expenditure, maximizing the excess of revenue over
expenditure is not normally considered an appropriate goal for government policy. Government is not
supposed to be a profit-making venture. The ‘profit’ pillar is therefore translated as the money made by
the entire country, expressed as gross domestic product (GDP). This then is the economic dimension,
and the social dimension (‘people’) is everything else connected with human aspirations: equity

Sustainability 2010, 2

3439

(translated as income distribution), inclusion (commonly operationalized as employment) and health
(expressed by an indicator such as life expectancy or access to medical services). However, the
equation of ‘economic’ with money is a very limited view of economics. Moreover, the view is further
restricted if we confine ourselves to the aggregate amount, and not with its distribution or with what
the money can buy.
GDP is intended as a measure of welfare, and as such it is a very useful but also a very incomplete
and biased one. It is useful for measuring the amount of economic activity and because there are
relatively good data for it; but it needs to complemented by other indices, such as the Human
Development Index. These are subjects of study for both economics and sociology, and there is no
good reason to call one aspect economic and the others social. The sociologist would ask what welfare
is and how it can be measured (an issue discussed in the next section), whereas the economist’s task
would be to assess, given human aspirations and the scarcity of resources, what course of action is
likely to produce the highest degree of satisfaction of those aspirations.
If there is good reason from a conceptual point of view to prefer a single socio-economic dimension,
what of its usefulness to policy analysts? Let us consider a hypothetical project which scores very well
on the environmental dimension but rather poorly on both the social and the economic one. This might
easily lead a policy-maker to conclude that the project is, on the whole, not a good idea. A
two-dimensional approach might bring about the opposite judgment: its environmental benefits come
at a cost in terms of welfare. The environmental dimension may thus receive less weight in a
three-dimensional approach. Indeed, some authors explicitly state that the three dimensions should
receive equal weight [15]. Since socio-economic aspects are mostly about the well-being of the present
generation and environmental ones are about caring for the future, this means the former become twice
as important as the latter—which violates the Brundtland requirement that development should not
take place at the expense of future generations.
Worse, perhaps, is that the contradiction between our desire for a better life and our concern for
what this may do to the environment is obscured by conceptualizing these two concerns into three
dimensions, and then suggesting that a solution is possible where all three are in harmony.
Sustainability then becomes a concept that is equivalent to ‘good’ and thus devoid of any specific
meaning—a blanket concept to assure stakeholders of the policy’s good intentions. The strength and
relevance of the original Brundtland concept was precisely that it posed the question of how to
reconcile one goal ‘development’ with another ‘sustainability’. The two goals are often in tension.
Therefore, we propose to use the word sustainability in the sense as it was intended by the
Brundtland Commission, and not as it has been coined later by corporate types and policy-makers. In
the words of Robert Solow [16]:
If ‘sustainability’ is anything more than a slogan or expression of emotion, it must amount
to an injunction to preserve productive capacity for the indefinite future.
Such a concept must be confronted with the socio-economic dimension of human aspirations for a
better life: welfare, well-being, development or some similar concept. Which of these concepts it
should be is the topic of the following section, before returning to our exploration of sustainability.

Sustainability 2010, 2

3440

4. Happiness, Well-being and Welfare
Any of the above words may be used to express a primary goal of government policy: to improve
people’s lives. In dictionaries (e.g., Merriam-Webster [17]), well-being, welfare and happiness are
commonly seen as synonyms, and offering any one of these three words is deemed sufficient to explain
the meaning of any other. We propose to consider happiness the broadest concept. A policy that would
make everybody happy would surely be considered a good one. It would also generally be considered
impossible to design. This is because it is very hard to know what makes people happy. Happiness is a
subjective state of mind which only partially depends on objective conditions [18]. It may even be at
variance with those conditions: a person may live in objectively very unfortunate circumstances, yet
manage to feel happy [19]. That is why ‘gross national happiness’ (a term coined by the former King of
Bhutan) has to be measured either by asking people how they feel [20] which is difficult to connect
with concrete policies; or, if measured by objective standards, turns out to be equivalent to what we
call well-being [21].
We propose to view happiness as a basic goal of human behaviour [22] but not of policy.
Individuals are responsible for their own happiness. Governments cannot make people happy.
However, to the extent that happiness does depend on objective conditions external to the individual,
policy can and indeed should promote them [23]. What, then, are those conditions and should we call
them well-being or welfare?
Of these two terms, well-being is commonly used in a broader sense than welfare [24]. If happiness
can be equated with ‘subjective well-being’ [18,19], then well-being refers to the objective conditions
that help to make people happy. It is equivalent to ‘livability of the environment’ in Veenhoven’s
scheme of ‘qualities of life’ [25], and it covers what policy can do to advance happiness. In Amartya
Sen’s view, well-being ought to be not about material goods or ‘basic needs’, but about capabilities to
achieve one’s potential [26]. If well-being is to be a policy goal, this means it should incorporate such
intangible needs as freedom, education, security, democracy and justice.
Welfare is then a more limited concept denoting prosperity in terms of material needs such as food,
water, health, and shelter. It tends to be easier to measure than well-being and can therefore serve as a
useful proxy—as long as we keep in mind that it does not cover all aspects [27]. Other ‘social’
indicators, often harder to quantify, refer to issues such as participation and cultural values [28]. These
fit perfectly into the concept of well-being.
Thus, we propose to replace the social and economic dimensions of sustainability as conventionally
used with a single dimension called well-being, which is a policy goal that must be balanced with
another one called sustainability. Measuring well-being and sustainability separately will enhance the
transparency of the policy formulation process, by bringing out in the open the two issues and
clarifying rather than obscuring the choices that have to be made. Of course this does not solve all
problems of policy evaluation: well-being has many aspects that need to be weighed against
one another.

Sustainability 2010, 2

3441

5. Sustainability: Resources and the Future
Sustainability may then be defined as maintaining well-being over a long, perhaps even an indefinite
period. This covers largely the environmental dimension of the triple bottom line, but environment and
sustainability are not synonymous. On the one hand, some forms of environmental degradation are both
relatively easily reversed and highly noxious in the present—many forms of air and water pollution, for
instance. These have a strong well-being aspect. Indeed, in the EU Guidelines for Impact Assessment
[10] they appear both under the environmental and the social dimension. On the other hand, what we
bequeath to future generations also includes cultural heritage: art and cultural landscapes as well as
infrastructure, technology and institutions.
Some of this heritage consists of resources needed for production or, to put it differently, for our
survival. It is not always easy to know which ones these are, as resources essential today may be
substituted by others tomorrow; and genetic resources potentially useful for medicine may be lost
before we have even identified them. Other resources are appreciated for their esthetic, scientific or
‘intrinsic’ value (such as the existence of orangutans, Picasso paintings, or knowledge of black holes).
Some of these are not easily lost or are well protected (knowledge, works of art); others are more
difficult to preserve (cultural-historical landscapes). Since man does not live by bread alone, there is no
fundamental reason to separate the two types. It makes more sense to distinguish between natural and
man-made resources, and between renewable and non-renewable ones [29]. Renewable man-made
resources are equivalent to what economists call capital, and we shall use the term capital in that
sense (Table 1).
Table 1. A Fourfold Classification of Natural and Cultural Resources.
Natural
Man-made

Non-renewable
e.g., soil, biodiversity, fossil fuels
e.g., paintings, landscapes

Renewable
e.g., water, forest, clean air
capital

As Robert Solow [16] has pointed out, we cannot avoid using up some non-renewable natural
resources, but this does not mean that these will necessarily become completely exhausted. In Solow’s
view, natural resources (whether renewable or non-renewable) can always be substituted by
capital [30]. This can take the form of new materials (say, plastic for steel) or smaller amounts of the
natural resource for the same amount of end product (e.g., energy efficiency). New natural resources
are harnessed while others become obsolete before they are depleted. An example is the substitution of
coke for charcoal in the iron industry as wood for charcoal was becoming scarce, or the transition from
hunting and gathering to agriculture in tandem with increasing population densities. In any case, capital
continues to increase as natural resources become scarcer.
We do not know, of course, whether technology will always be able to solve our resource problems,
and moreover there are resources that we just do not want to lose—such as the blue whale or the
Amazon forest. The question is, how much of our natural resources can we sacrifice? More precisely,
we should pose two questions: what resources should we preserve at all cost, and to what degree? And,
for those that can be substituted for by capital, how much capital should be created to compensate for
the loss of how much in terms of natural resources?

Sustainability 2010, 2

3442

The first question is beyond the purview of the economist. It is a decision of society what resources
are to be considered essential. Economic analysis can, of course, estimate the cost of their conservation
in terms of well-being foregone, to help in the decision-making process. The second question was first
analyzed by Harold Hotelling in 1931. Hotelling considered that the depletion of a natural resource
may be too slow as well as too fast: the present generation would probably not be better off if our
ancestors had limited the extraction of coal to 10% of what they actually used; the progress of
manufacturing would have been much slower, and even as it is we are not short of coal for a couple of
centuries yet. There is an optimum rate of exhaustion, in which the social cost of losing the resource is
outweighed by the social benefit which it yields over the period of use. This benefit can be expressed
as rent, which in economic theory means the payment for a production factor above what is needed to
keep it operating. In an ideal situation, where a mineral is freely accessible, the rent is the excess of the
price of the mineral over the cost of extracting it. Hotelling shows that this rent is maximized if the
increase in rent is equal to the discount rate [6]. That rate is an important quantity in welfare
economics: it expresses how the value of a future benefit compares to the same benefit in the present.
Social discount rates as used for public investments tend to be of the order of a few percentage points
per year; if we place a high value on caring for the future, we would use a low discount rate.
Hotelling’s theory was taken up taken up by Robert Solow in a lecture in 1974, where he proposes
that these resource rents (or Hotelling rents) must be invested in productive capital so as to compensate
future generations for their loss of the natural resource. This is also known as Hartwick’s rule [16].
Such thoughts are at the basis of funds that some resource-rich countries set up to invest the proceeds
of their resource for the future. The big unknown here is, of course, whether capital (including
technical progress) can indeed substitute for natural resources indefinitely [31]. While we do not know
this, technical progress may provide us with an objective basis for the social discount rate, i.e., the rate
that we should use as a society to discount future as compared to present well-being. That basis,
according to Randall [31] should be the marginal efficiency of capital, which in the long run is equal to
the productivity of society. That brings us closer to measuring sustainability—but not close enough.
The productivity of society can be measured only in terms of GDP, which as we saw is not a reliable
indicator of well-being. However, Randall is right in pointing out that artificially keeping the discount
rate low for the benefit of future generations may actually do those generations a disfavour by
misallocating resources today and bequeathing them a lower standard of well-being than they might
have enjoyed.
It will by now be clear how crucial the discount rate is for intergenerational equity, which we
propose to equate with sustainability. It could be argued that this rate should be zero, in which case the
welfare of future generations would be of equal importance to our own. The difficulty with this view is
that we do not know what the value of today’s natural resources (or of some of them, in any case) will
be in the future. A distinction should therefore be made between those resources which we are
convinced will always be important (biodiversity is a case in point) and those which depend on the
state of technology (for example, the need for oil).
Sustainability can now loosely be defined as a state of affairs where the sum of natural and
man-made resources remains at least constant for the foreseeable future, in order that the well-being of
future generations does not decline. Ideally, when we assess the potential impact of a proposed policy,
programme or project, it should both lead to higher well-being and to a positive or at least neutral

Sustainability 2010, 2

3443

effect on the overall state of resources for the future—in which case we can speak of sustainable
development [32].
6. Weak and Strong Sustainability
Sustainability, then, is a matter of what resources—natural resources, quality of the environment,
and capital—we bequeath to coming generations. As we saw, some loss of natural resources is
inevitable, but this may be compensated for by increased capital—at least in the view of Robert Solow
and his ilk. Others, however, oppose the idea that capital can substitute for natural resources and feel
that sustainability is a matter of preserving natural resources essential for our survival [33]. The two
views are eloquently stated in Pearce et al. [32]:
(i) That the next generation should inherit a stock of wealth, comprising man-made assets
and environmental assets, no less than the stock inherited by the previous generation;
(ii) That the next generation should inherit a stock of environmental assets no less than the
stock inherited by the previous generation.
These two views have been called ‘weak’ and ‘strong’ sustainability, respectively [34]. Although
the difference between them led to a heated debate [35,36], there is a place for both of them. Some
resources must fall under the requirement of strong sustainability, others under the weak variety.
Which of the two it is will depend on the degree to which they can be substituted by capital. The
depletion of fossil fuels, for instance, is an issue of weak sustainability: provided other sources of
energy are developed instead, we are not obliged to leave our descendants an undiminished stock of
petroleum. An extinct species, on the other hand, cannot, at the current state of scientific knowledge,
be recovered, and must therefore be considered a loss in terms of strong sustainability.
Strong sustainability can be seen as a series of thresholds that must not be crossed. In impact
assessment, any outcome of a proposed intervention must fall within those thresholds. Setting such
thresholds is largely a matter of socially and politically determined preferences, but also a matter of
resilience: to what extent is a system (for instance an ecosystem) able to recover from shocks
and stress?
We may think of strong sustainability as a space delimited by such thresholds. Weak sustainability
is then the yardstick by which policy outcomes within that space are judged. Given that the conditions
of strong sustainability are met, the most sustainable outcome will be that which leads to the largest
amount of both natural and man-made resources, i.e., environmental assets, valuable landscapes and
other forms of cultural heritage, science and technology, infrastructure, etc. Such an approach is
familiar to economists: in economic analysis, one of the constraints is always the legal system
governing an economy, by whose rules an economic agent must play. Strong sustainability is an aspect
of such rules.
Thus weak and strong sustainability each have a role to play in impact assessment. However, having
such a framework does not mean that there are no more disagreements. For each environmental issue
there can be arguments about its substitutability. Generally, ecologists and other natural scientists will
favour a larger role for strong sustainability (emphasizing non-substitutable ecosystem functions),
whereas economists tend to like weak sustainability as this gives them leeway to use their models.

Sustainability 2010, 2

3444

Strong sustainability puts them out of work. The strongest argument in favour of weak sustainability is
that it allows the calculation of the cost of preserving an environmental asset as well as its benefit.
For instance, if the cost of mitigating climate change is very high (say, hypothetically, sacrificing
1 percentage point of world economic growth annually in order to avoid 0.05° of temperature increase
over 50 years), one might decide to allocate resources to buying land for nature reserves instead. The
most crucial variables in sustainability assessment will be the thresholds of strong sustainability, the
social discount rate to be used, and the valuation of material benefits versus those of ‘intrinsic’ value.
Strong sustainability has two principal arguments, which we may call ecosystem services and
stewardship. According to the former, human life exists only by the grace of nature, which provides a
number of essential services termed ecosystem services [37]. We damage these systems at our peril.
The second argument is an ethical one, namely that we do not have the right to destroy the right to life
of other species, or that we must preserve the beauty and diversity of our natural environment for our
own enjoyment as well as for future generations. It is of course not possible for any policy-maker to
prevent completely the extinction of species, the decrease of natural habitats or the disappearance of
valuable landscapes; but this is not the point of strong sustainability. The point is that any action the
policy-maker considers can be assessed in advance for its impact on any aspect of natural resources.
The policy-maker can decide in advance what types of impact are tolerable, and for those that are,
to ascertain that a permissible negative impact is compensated for in terms of well-being [38].
7. Conclusions
Having reached this point, the reader may feel we have come no closer to solving the practical
problem of how to measure sustainability. Indeed we have aimed more at exploring the theoretical
basis for defining sustainability than providing a practical manual for measuring it. In spite of the large
body of literature on sustainability, we feel that there is still need for clarifying the concept. Since
sustainability is a topic of both policy appraisal and scientific study, its definition must be useful for
both fields of work.
We believe that separating the needs of the present from the needs of those who will come after us
is a sensible way to analyze scenarios and assess the impact of policies, because it clarifies the choices
that need to be made. We propose to call the former well-being and the latter sustainability. This
prevents sustainability from becoming an empty phrase indistinguishable from ‘goodness’. Well-being
mostly corresponds with the social and economic dimensions of the ‘triple bottom line’, sustainability
with the environmental dimension.
When assessing the impact of a policy on well-being, the distinction between social and economic
dimensions is not helpful and often impossible to make in practice. It is better to use sociological
insights to assign values to the different aspects of well-being, and economics to combine those values
into an overall assessment. In arriving at actual measurements (inevitable for comparing different
possible outcomes), some important but imponderable costs and benefits may have to be left out
because they cannot be expressed in quantitative terms. However, they should be left out only from the
measurement, not from the assessment. In this way, decision-makers can at least see how much an
unmeasured benefit will cost, or what has to be sacrificed for a certain increase in measured well-

Sustainability 2010, 2

3445

being. The concept of welfare may be useful as a subset of well-being—namely, that part of well-being
that can be quantified and valued in money terms.
When assessing sustainability, a distinction should be made between strong and weak sustainability.
Both can have a place in impact assessment: strong sustainability as thresholds that should not be
crossed, weak sustainability for those environmental amenities, natural resources or ecosystem services
(these three terms are more, or less, interchangeable) that are in principle substitutable for others. The
setting of the thresholds is a matter of policy, but must be informed by scientific knowledge on the
resilience of ecosystems. The thresholds can be set so restrictively that no sustainable outcome is
possible, and all that policy can do is to minimize the extent by which thresholds are exceeded. The
less restrictive they are, the larger the ‘sustainability space’, within which analysts can model and
compare different outcomes. Potschin’s and Haines-Young’s notion of sustainability choice space [39]
is a way of articulating this.
In such analysis the participation of natural and social scientists (including economists) is needed.
We see this as a possible way to resolve the perennial conflict between economists and ecologists
about sustainability, or at the very least a method to handle that conflict. The latter tend to baulk at
cost-benefit analysis in which natural resources may be substituted by man-made ones, pointing out
that natural resources can become lost forever and that such loss should therefore be prevented at all
cost. They therefore tend to prefer other tools of decision support, such as multi-criteria analysis. Social
cost-benefit analysis has one great advantage, however: once goals have been stated clearly, it shows
up the best choice among alternatives. This forces policy-makers to show their hand and put their
money where their mouth is, so to speak. Qualitative tools leave them the freedom to choose one
alternative over another more or less arbitrarily, though there are of course examples of political
decisions being made contrary to cost-benefit indications. The major disadvantages of cost-benefit
analysis are our ignorance of the future (especially technical progress) and the difficulty of quantifying
many variables. Hence we propose to identify some natural resources as belonging outside the domain
of cost-benefit analysis. That tool should be restricted to those resources where substitutability is
believed to be applicable. Which resources can be so treated remains, of course, a matter of debate and,
ultimately, of politics.
Those resources which we deem irreplaceable and which must therefore be preserved at all costs are
the domain of strong sustainability. Here we must ask ourselves not only what degree of well-being we
should bequeath to other generations, but even more profound questions relating to the long-term
survival of our species as well as our responsibilities towards other species [40]. This, however, is
beyond the scope of this paper.
The ideas advocated in this paper are not new. Indeed we have been inspired by the authors quoted,
last but not least by the Brundtland Report [1], which in the literature is generally recognized as the
initiator of the sustainability debate and to which we hark back. We believe, however, that the
particular way we propose to combine the various dimensions into well-being and sustainability is
more precise as well as more comprehensive than the way the concept of sustainability is commonly
used at present. Ultimately, the point of sustainability appraisal must be that a balance is sought
between the requirements of stewardship on the one hand and the desire for a better life on the
other—or even, the extent to which these can be reconciled.

Sustainability 2010, 2

3446

References and Notes
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.

14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.

World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED). Our Common Future; Oxford
University Press: New York, NY, USA, 1987.
Wiersum, K.F. 200 Years of Sustainability in Forestry: Lessons from History. Environ. Manage.
1995, 19, 321-329.
Wilderer, P.A. Sustainable water resource management: The science behind the scene. Sustain.
Sci. 2007, 2, 1-4.
Ike, D.N. The System of Land Rights in Nigerian Agriculture. Amer. J. Econ. Sociol. 1984, 43,
469-480.
Fukuyama, F. State building in the Solomon Islands. Pac. Econ. Bull. 2008, 23, 1-17.
Hotelling, H. The economics of exhaustible resources. J. Polit. Econ. 1931, 39, 137-175.
Meadows, D.H.; Meadows, D.L.; Randers, J.; Behrens, W.W., III. The Limits to Growth; Potomac
Associates, New American Library: Washington, DC, USA, 1972.
Sustainability Impact Assessment of Land Use Changes; Helming, K., Pérez-Soba, M.,
Tabbush, P., Eds.; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2008.
Kates, R.W.; Parris, T.M.; Leiserowitz, A.A. What is sustainable development? Goals, indicators,
values, and practice. Environ. Sci. Policy Sustain. Dev. 2005, 47, 8-21.
Impact Assessment Guidelines; EC Document No. SEC(2005) 791; European Commission:
Brussels, Belgium, 2005.
Strange, T.; Bayley, A. Sustainable Development. Linking Economy, Society, Environment;
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD): Paris, France, 2008.
Agenda for Development; United Nations: New York, NY, USA, 1997.
Gibson, R.B. Specification of Sustainability-based Environmental Assessment Decision Criteria
and Implications for Determining “Significance” in Environmental Assessment; Paper prepared
under a contribution agreement with the Canadian Environmental Assessment Agency Research
and Development Programme, Ottawa, Canada, 2001.
Elkington, J. Towards the sustainable corporation: Win-win-win business strategies for
sustainable development. Calif. Manage. Rev. 1994, 36, 90-100.
Pope, J.; Annandale, D.; Morrison-Saunders, A. Conceptualising sustainability assessment.
Environ. Impact Assess. Rev. 2004, 24, 595-616.
Solow, R.M. An Almost Practical Step Toward Sustainability; Resources for the Future:
Washington, DC, USA, 1992.
Merriam-Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary; Merriam-Webster: Springfield, MA, USA, 2004.
García Martín, M.A. Desde el concepto de felicidad al abordaje de las variables implicadas en el
bienestar subjetivo: un análisis conceptual. EF y Deportes, Revista Digital 2002, 48, 4.
Michalos, A.C. Education, Happiness and Wellbeing. Soc. Indic. Res. 2008, 87, 347-366.
Adler Braun, A. Gross National Happiness in Bhutan: A Living Example of an Alternative
Approach to Progress; Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania: Philadelphia, PA, USA,
2009.

Sustainability 2010, 2

3447

21. Yones, M. The American Pursuit of Unhappiness: Gross National Happiness (GNH)—A New
Economic Metric. In Executive White Paper; International Institute of Management: Las Vegas,
NV, USA, 2006.
22. Although not necessarily the only goal. A person may strive not for her own happiness, but for the
good of her community, the prestige of her family, or some other ideal; or she may wish to adhere
to a moral code superseding the pursuit of personal happiness. One might say that such a person
still strives for happiness, since these goals apparently make her happy. However, that would be a
tautology, implying that happiness is whatever a person strives for; it would render the concept of
happiness meaningless. Instead, we may say that everyone strives for what he considers ‘the good
life’, and one form of this is happiness.
23. On the empirical relation between those objective conditions and happiness, see Johns, H.;
Ormerod, P. Happiness, Economics and Public Policy; Institute of Economic Affairs: London,
UK, 2007.
24. Wood, G.; Newton, J. From welfare to well-being regimes: Engaging new agendas. Presented at
New Frontiers of Social Policy, Arusha, Tanzania, 12–15 December 2005.
25. Veenhoven, R. Happiness as an aim in public policy. The greatest happiness principle. In Positive
Psychology in Practice; Linley, A., Joseph, S., Eds.; John Wiley and Sons: Hoboken, NJ, USA,
2004; pp. 658-678.
26. Sen, A.K. Capability and well-being. In The Quality of Life; Nussbaum, M.C., Sen, A.K., Eds.;
Oxford University Press: Oxford, UK, 1993; pp. 30-53.
27. Economists often use the term utility to express the satisfaction people get from goods and
services. It is theoretically equivalent to well-being, although the way it is normally measured in
practice makes it more similar to welfare.
28. Slee, B. Social indicators of multifunctional rural land use: The case of forestry in the UK.
Agr. Ecosyst. Environ. 2007, 120, 31-40.
29. It is not always evident when a resource can be considered renewable. We propose that a resource
is non-renewable if it cannot be recovered or replenished with today’s technology neither at a
practicable cost nor within a reasonable time. It will be clear that renewable or non-renewable is
often a matter of degree—some renewable resources are replenished more easily than others.
30. This is not true in an absolute sense, of course. It is not possible to produce (or indeed to live)
without any natural resources at all [33] Solow’s point is that we need to study only those
situations where such substitution remains possible.
31. Randall, A. Reflections on Solow’s 1974 Richard T. Ely Address. J. Nat. Resour. Pol. Res. 2009,
1, 97-101.
32. Pearce, D.W.; Markandya, A.; Barbier, E.P. Blueprint for a Green Economy; Earthscan
Publications: London, UK, 1989.
33. Daly, H.E. Forum-Georgescu-Roegen versus Solow/Stiglitz. Ecol. Econ. 1997, 22, 261-266.
34. Ayres, R.U.; van den Bergh, J.C.J.M.; Gowdy, J.M. Viewpoint: Weak versus Strong Sustainability;
Tinbergen Institute Discussion Papers; Tinbergen Institute: Amsterdam, The Netherland, 1998;
pp. 98-103.
35. Solow, R.M. Reply-georgescu-roegen versus solow/stiglitz. Ecol. Econ. 1997, 22, 267-268.
36. Stiglitz, J.E. Reply-georgescu-roegen versus solow/stiglitz. Ecol. Econ. 1997, 22, 269-270.

Sustainability 2010, 2

3448

37. De Groot, R.S.; Wilson, M.A.; Boumans, R.M.S. A typology for the classification, description and
valuation of ecosystem functions, goods and services. Ecol. Econ. 2002, 41, 393-408.
38. The question may be asked whether human well-being is all that counts in policies. Is there not
something in the stewardship argument that goes beyond our own well-being? To this it could be
replied that “man is the measure of all things”, a statement ascribed to the Greek philosopher
Protagoras. However a policy is judged, it can only be judged by humans on the basis of values
attached by humans. If we think the great panda should not disappear, this is based on the
scientific, esthetic or ethical value we place on it.
39. Potschin, M.; Haines-Young, R. Sustainability impact assessments: Limits, thresholds and the
sustainability choice space. In Sustainability Impact Assessment of Land Use Changes;
Helming, K., Pérez-Soba, M., Tabbush, P., Eds.; Springer: Berlin, Germany, 2008; pp. 425-450.
40. Tonn, B.E. Futures sustainability. Futures 2007, 39, 1097-1116.
© 2010 by the authors; licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution license
(http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/).

