Sustainable Development in
Englands National Parks

Introduction

In recent years, National Parks have increasingly become seen as innovative places, trialling new approaches to policy and practice that deliver sustainable development. In fact for
many years, what National Park Authorities do has been based on the core principles of sustainable development  such as integrating economic, environmental and social issues;
finding solutions that reconcile conflicting needs; and addressing these within highly sensitive environments.

Since 2003 the Sustainable Development Fund (SDF) has been giving further encouragement to our work.The SDF seeks to promote sustainable development, partnership working
and social inclusion among communities and businesses in ways that support the two statutory purposes of the National Park designation. But the full picture of what National Park
Authorities do to deliver sustainable development goes far beyond the SDF. From the development of the National Park Management Plan to education programmes for schools;
from sustainable transport and tourism to business support and advice; from land management practice and advice to community support and development; from skills training to
renewable energy projects and funding; everything we do is based on our purposes and duty and so moves us towards fulfilling the Vision for National Parks by 2030 being places
where:

Sustainable development can be seen in action.The communities of the Parks take an active part in decisions about their future.They are known for having been
pivotal in the transformation to a low carbon society and sustainable living. Renewable energy, sustainable agriculture, low carbon transport and travel and healthy,
prosperous communities have long been the norm.
Extract from English National Parks and the Broads: UK Government Vision and Circular 2010, Defra, March 2010
http://archive.defra.gov.uk/rural/documents/national-parks/vision-circular2010.pdf

This booklet contains only one case study from each of the ten English National Parks to give a flavour of the variety of work we do.There are many more examples in all of the
National Parks in England (and those in Wales and Scotland) of individuals, organisations, businesses and communities working together to adopt sustainable lifestyles supported by
the National Park Authorities. If you would like to know more, do contact ENPAA, the individual National Park Authority or visit our website www.enpaa.org.uk

Lake District: Local Sustainable Transport

North York Moors: Apprenticeship Scheme
In 2002 the NPA set up its first team of conservation apprentices. The aim was to
address three key issues:
 A decline in traditional countryside management skills and the need for a pool of local
people with skills to conserve and manage the landscape in the future
 Loss of young people from local communities and the need to provide opportunities

for young people to earn a living locally

 Youth unemployment and the need for job creation

The NPA now employs 16 apprentices - 15% of its total workforce - and supports the
employment of a further 5 apprentices on National Park hill farms.

The scheme is a high quality 15-30 month training programme offering qualifications in
countryside management and Business Administration in partnership with local colleges.
The scheme is now supported by Forestry Commission, Environment Agency, Redcar
and Cleveland Council and the Princes Trust.

The apprenticeship scheme has an excellent record with a 100% success rate in
qualifications and almost 90% going directly into employment or further training.There
are now trained apprentices working for the NPA, the Forestry Commission,
landscaping firms and local estates. Others have gone on to set up businesses offering
services such as drystone walling. In recognition of the success of the scheme the NPA
has won several awards and this year was named by UK Skills as one of the UKs top
100 apprentice employers.

The Lake Districts Local Sustainable Transport Fund (LSTF) project is all about changing
the travel behaviour of the Lakes 16 million visitors. It is targeted squarely at exploiting
the opportunities for reducing carbon from visitor travel in ways that will trigger and
expand local business. Over the projects 4 years, we aim to produce a wholesale shift
in how people travel.This is probably the most effective way of transforming the quality
and affordability of transport for our residents as well.

From carbon foot printing work, the Lake District NPA knows that visitor travel to and
around the Lake District are the big emitters. It is also known that about half of visitors
would be more than happy to leave their cars behind at least some of the time.
Marrying these together through the LSTF project will be led by the Lake District NPA,
Cumbria County Council and Cumbria Tourism, with delivery being embedded in to a
wide range of partners from the public, private and third sectors.

Exmoor: Cutcombe Livestock Market
A livestock market has operated from the central moorland village of Cutcombe for
over 60 years.The business was bought by 194 local farmers in 1997.The market had a
very good reputation because of the high quality of stock that Exmoor produces
however, over past decades the market infrastructure had gradually deteriorated. 1m
was needed to redevelop the site and provide a modern market.

The Cutcombe Livestock Market is exceptionally important to Exmoor.The moorland
landscape has been created and maintained over centuries largely by the grazing of
sheep and cattle. Upland farming is already struggling and there is a need to support
farmers and their farming practices if the landscape and ecology of the National Park is
to be maintained.Without a modern and conveniently located livestock market there
would be increased costs to farmers to take their stock to market and less incentive to
continue farming at levels needed to control scrub encroachment.

The NPA worked with the Cattle Market, Somerset County Council and a local
developer to help facilitate the replacement market. Regional and European grant
opportunities were fully investigated but not available, so to help pay for the market the
NPA agreed to 13 open market houses as an exception to its planning policies, which
seek to provide only affordable homes for local people. The NPA gave a grant from the
Sustainable Development Fund to help pay for the sustainable and renewable energy
elements of the design of the new market building.The approved scheme incorporates a
new cattle market, business development, and 25 homes, 12 of which will be affordable
for local people.The Livestock Market building is finished and operational, and draws
customers from across the country to buy Exmoor stock.The market will bring social,
economic and landscape benefits in the National Park for years to come.

South Downs and New Forest: Our Land

Our Land is an innovative sustainable tourism initiative currently being rolled out across
nine protected landscapes in the south east, including the New Forest and South
Downs National Parks.The project aims to develop and market a unique blend of truly
sustainable tourism which will benefit visitors, communities and the landscapes
themselves. In essence Our Land with reconnect residents of the south east with these
iconic landscapes on their doorsteps by converting day visits to overnight stays and
promoting experiences and activities which are intertwined with the special qualities of
each of the protected landscapes.

The project is backed by nearly 1m of Rural Development Programme for England
(RDPE) funding and is a partnership between the nine landscapes and
ResponsibleTravel.com, an established commercial web based travel agency.The agency
has provided a new website to host the initiative at www.our-land.co.uk and established
a PR and marketing campaign across London and the south east.The website gives
details of accommodation and activity providers. Only the most sustainable of
businesses are eligible for Our Land; before going live on the site, each business must
demonstrate the highest levels of environmental sustainability, community engagement
and landscape awareness, which together form a promise to Our Land.

The support funding runs to August 2013, after which ResponsibleTravel.com will
continue Our Land on a commercial basis. Government has recently announced funding
to roll out the Our Land initiative with the protected landscapes of the North East.

Dartmoor: Converting Traditional Buildings
Traditional Farm Buildings are often better suited to conversion to an employment use
rather than housing and the authoritys policies support such use, always assuming that
normal planning considerations can be met.

Home Farm on the Delamore Estate at Cornwood in 2005 had a fine range of barns
and a listed building that had become redundant and semi derelict. Through discussion
on the future of the barns and an accommodating landowner, proposals emerged which
respected the character of the buildings and provided them with a new function. While
the proposals fell short of satisfying access requirements of the Highway Authority as
this would require substantial hedgebank and tree removal, it was felt that the benefits
of the development would outweigh the disadvantages and permission was granted.

The result has been that the listed barn has been converted to an Art Gallery which
supports the Delamore Estates successful arts programme. Other buildings have been
converted to create 8 offices, some of which have subsequently been amalgamated to
provide some larger units. Demand has been strong with a good level of occupancy.
Parking is provided for staff in the old walled garden and visitor parking in a landscaped
area outside.The courtyard is landscaped with a central sculpture.

Through sensible and sensitive compromise, the development has enabled the retention
of important and attractive traditional buildings while providing economic benefit to the
area.

Yorkshire Dales: Renewable Energy Training

GTEC Training, an established business run from Hawes in North Yorkshire, is set to
break the mould of traditional training environments by offering residential facilities as a
key part of every course. In delivering these courses the company had a mobile unit
that contained examples of renewable energy installations but were finding that as the
renewable energy technology developed this was not enough.The building in the heart
of the Yorkshire Dales National Park will set the standard for renewable technologies
by showcasing a host of systems and by linking them altogether for maximum efficiency.

Griff Thomas, Managing Director says We provide a one stop solution offering a
service that encompasses all of our clients needs. Creating a residential centre for
Electrotechnical apprenticeships and renewable technology training is a natural
progression. GTEC have made the centre an exemplar in integrating renewable
technologies with the support of a 55,000 grant from the Sustainable Development
Fund.

The company is an established provider in the delivery of accredited electrical training
(some already in the field of renewable energy installations) to over 4,000 people every
year. A key part of the project is that the company will target local electrical installers
to offer training, and there will be links made between the company and the NPA
(particularly planners and built conservation teams) to showcase technologies and
designs in the context of protected landscapes and buildings. There will also be
interpretation/information boards within the Centre putting the work in the context of
the National Park as a protected landscape.

Broads: Baseline on the Broads
This project, created in conjunction with Future Projects, the Broads Authority and
Norfolk County Council takes ex-offenders and provides them with a disciplined 5 day
a week working routine in and around the Norfolk Broads.

Thanks to the eternal optimism of Norwich charity organiser Dawn Jackson, the
inspirational leadership of former Para Dion Gilvey and the raw enthusiasm of the
recruits themselves, the project, Baseline on the Broads (Bob), has won widespread
acclaim  and even attracted the interest of the home secretary. The positive impact of
the Bob Boys has not escaped the attention of country park users who have been
quick to voice their gratitude regarding all the hard work undertaken.This has included
building steps and repairing fences, coppicing, bush management and even building otter
holts.

Partly funded by a 24,000 grant from the Broads Authoritys Sustainable Development
Fund, the scheme has provided six months of paid conservation work combined with
education and training at Easton College. One of the recruits has already found a full-
time gardening job while all the others are eager to land their first job.

Highlighting the beneficial impact of the natural environment, Ms Jackson said the group
had been in the middle of a huge row one day until a sparrowhawk swooped out of the
sky to take a pigeon when there was sudden, amazed silence.Project coordinator Mr
Gilvey agreed that working in the environment of the Broads had been an important
ingredient in the schemes success. He said:Growing up on an estate, two of the
recruits had not even seen a Broad before. One remarked this is something like you
see on films.

Northumberland: Bardon Mill Village Hall

A community organisation was set up in response to the lack of a village hall for both
Bardon Mill and Henshaw villages.The absence of a community venue was a significant
barrier to building social capital and capacity, and in preventing social exclusion.The
group successfully engaged with the communities, the Parish Councils and the NPA to
develop a scheme for a new village hall. Consultations included door-to-door canvassing
and leaflet drops, the development of a website, and a Planning for Real exercise.A
feasibility study was completed for the new hall and designs produced. In addition the
group secured a Sustainable Development Fund grant to reinvigorate 6 acres of low
grade woodland that surrounds the site to create a new social amenity area.

Local people set the design brief, short-listed the project architect, chose the
development site and decided what the village hall should look like and how it should
be run. The design of the building, set to become the UK's first earth-sheltered village
hall, was inspired by a local resident and will replicate an original mine entrance that
once stood on this site of the former Bardon Mill Colliery.The building's sustainable
design makes optimum use of passive solar gain and a large thermal mass, and will use
renewable energy generated onsite from solar panels, PV and air source heat pumps.

The group has secured 453,729 to help realise the dreams of both communities, and
create a sustainable village hall which will serve residents and wider rural communities.
Significant funding has been secured from HLF, Leader Uplands, the NPA, EDF Energy,
and national charitable funders.The site and design links directly to the proposed new
NNPA development of Once Brewed, and both reflect a 21st century approach to
sustainable, energy efficient, low carbon builds which can educate and inform the
general public. It is anticipated that the village hall will open to public use in 2012.

New Forest: Land Advice Service
In the New Forest land holdings are much smaller than elsewhere in the south east and
incomes marginal; this demographic results in landowners having less access to
professional advice. The New Forest Land Advice Service is a joint project between the
New Forest NPA, Natural England and The Hampshire and Isle of Wight Wildlife Trust.
The combination of a NPA, the statutory regulator and an NGO in an integrated Land
Advice Service is a unique arrangement within the UK.

Two officers provide access to free independent advice, support, training and grants
which promote sustainable land management practices. This will help improve the
condition of holdings across the national park and support the long term viability of
commoning that helps maintain the open forest landscape.

Local residents Leon Crouch and neighbour Amanda Otway recently bought a 47-acre
site at Lymington. They worked closely with the New Forest Land Advice Service to
create a wildlife haven and ensure the lands future as a Site of Importance for Nature
Conservation. It is now bustling with insects and wildflowers in the summer and
continues to support migrating birds over the winter.

Land Advice Service Manager Julie Stubbs said:When Leon approached us for advice
we knew it would be a great project. We developed a special seed mix to create wild
flower meadows and have restored the hedgerows through coppicing and replanting.

Landowner Leon Crouch said:I have received a great amount of support and advice.
This land was in very bad condition and needed a lot of work. I have had direct access
to experts who have been able to guide me through the whole process.

Peak District: Live & Work Rural

The Peak District NPAs Live & Work Rural Programme providing advice, training and
seedcorn funding has proved a positive asset to help local businesses develop and
thrive. Since its launch in 2009 it has:

 Approved 74 grants providing 101,440 of financial assistance to small and micro
businesses. Businesses have added to this, meaning the sector has had an overall
225,000 cash injection
 Created or safeguarded 106 jobs
 Helped 248 local businesses to improve their performance
 Given 1584 hours of training to 264 local business people
 Carried out environmental audits and given advice on energy efficiency and renewable
energy to 142 businesses
 Helped 3,919 people involved in community activities

Going forward, the Peak District NPA has prioritised funds for a rural business advisor
to help small businesses grow, protecting and creating jobs.This will include help with
applying for grants, expanding their businesses and developing the skills and training of
their staff.A partnership project will also create 50 apprenticeship jobs for young
people over a three year period.

The NPA will also continue to fund the Environmental Quality Mark scheme which
accredits environmentally friendly businesses and helps them use that accreditation to
market themselves to residents and visitors.

ENPAA
First Floor
2-4 Great Eastern Street
London EC2A 3NW
Tel: 020 7655 4812

enquiries@enpaa.org.uk
www.enpaa.org.uk
ENPAA is a not for profit company limited by guarantee, number 06521048,
registered in England.
Images copyright ENPAA / National Park Authorities

