  21% faster resolu-

tion times on 
major outages for 
SAL supported 
solutions vs. those 
without SAL1

  50%+ faster reso-

lution times on 
SAL supported 
Tier 4 engage-
ments vs. those 
without SAL2

Secure Access Link 2.2
Delivers Superior Support Capabilities

Secure Access Link (SAL) provides the best combination of functionality, 
increased security, and ease of service, bringing fast resolution time, control, 
cost reduction and extensive value-adds to your remote connectivity.

Benefits of Standardized 
Remote Connectivity
Avaya utilizes SAL as the standard 
remote connectivity methodology to 
bring differentiating value and 
capabilities for your enterprise, both in 
terms of services and offers. Having a 
standard remote access solution allows 
Avaya to engage in crucial activities to:

 Accelerate resolution through click to 

connect when support is required, 
leveraging data stored in Siebel, as 
opposed to figuring out the details of 
providing service at the time of trouble

 Integrate with automation and 

advanced diagnostics to deliver superb 
service in complex environments

 Collect and report on customer 

inventory for quotes, renewals, and 
accurate diagnostics

 Enable value-add services such as 

Operations Intelligence Suite (OIS), 
alarming, Avaya EXPERT SystemsSM, 
While You Were Sleeping 2.0, and more

Secure Access Link is  
the Standard of Choice
In determining a standard remote 
connectivity and alarming solution for 
Avaya Global Support Services, factors 
such as security, ease of deployment, 
features, and integration capabilities 
were weighed. SAL is a standout 

solution, which is demonstrated in the 
tables on pages 2 and 3. 

 Minimal connectivityencrypted sessions are 

established when support is required, with 
the session only between the support 
engineer providing service and the device

 Detailed logging and audits, showing 
individual names, protocols, devices, 
and time stamps. Event logs have been 
enhanced and now can be filtered and 
extracted into an excel spreadsheet.

 Extensive customer control 

mechanisms and policy capabilities

 Alarm validation and clearing 

functionality

 Flexible communication that can be 

wrapped in a customer defined Business 
to Business (B2B) and Virtual Private 
Network (VPN)

 Freedom to make network changes, no 

coordination with Avaya needed

 Minimal requirements, only requires 

SAL software and internet connection 

 SAL software is available at no 
additional cost to the customer

 Simple firewall rules, 443 outbound only

 Highly flexible deployment options

 Backup and restore features directly 

within the gateway

 Centralized, aggregated traffic

 High availability for Concentrator

1  Internal Avaya study of standard GSS case resolutions Oct.- Nov. 2011 (> 7000 cases) comparing key metrics between 
devices with SAL and those without.
2  Internal Avaya study of standard Tier 4 GSS case resolutions Oct. 2011 comparing key metrics between devices with SAL 

and those without.

avaya.com | 1

We believe Secure Access Link will save us time and money based on the added  
flexibility and productivity it brings to our team.

Barry Toole  Voice and Convergence Manager  MeadWestvaco Corporation

Security
SAL security practices follow industry standards, such as:

 Enterprises have complete control over when Avaya and/or other partners 

support their communications network.

 Logs provide you with a comprehensive report of auditable information about 
technicians accessing the network through the SAL Gateway, when the access 
occurred, who accessed it, what they accessed, and when they ended the session.

 Minimal connectivity requirements, with all connections initiated by the SAL 

Gateway to Avaya using HTTPS. Those connections are the conduit through which 
we tunnel application-layer protocols, such as SSH, from the engineers desktop to 
the products being serviced. This makes connectivity and installation simple and 
secure  generally requiring no firewall changes on the customer network.

 FIPS 140 Verisign issued 2048 bit public certification 2FA enables unique user logging.

 2048 bit version authentication and encryption

 Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability and Authentication, Authorization, 

and Accounting, with RADIUS and Syslog support.

 Alignment of Federal US guidelines with respect to cryptographic algorithms 

and key usage, such as NIST Special Publications and Federal Information 
Processing Standards.

 Compatibility with Avaya Data Center for alignment with policies and 

procedures to follow industry standards, such as ISO17799/27002.

 Partner Two Factor Authentication enablement for concentrators

 Enables service packs for security fixes to be bundled and deployed easily

  Over 150,000 

customer devices 
connected by SAL  
to Avaya

  Over 13,000 

customer locations 
managed by SAL

  Over 1,000 devices 

and 100 sites 
managed by SAL  
in the US Federal 
Government

Data as of August, 2012

 Supports: Red Hat Enterprise Linux 6.x, Red Hat Enterprise Linux 32 and 64 bit, and VMWare ESX5

Remote Connectivity Comparison Chart

Description

SAL

Matrix

Modem

B2B IPsec VPN

Customer-Based VPN, 
Remote Desktop, or  
Web Conferencing

2 | avaya.com

Avaya standardized IP based on-demand, high speed, secure SSL VPN session creation 
solution that integrates the customer and Avaya at the application layer, with advanced 
policy and audit capabilities. SAL has simple network integration over port 443.

The standardized VPN solution for Avaya managed services offers. Matrix provides deep 
level access between the customer and Avaya, effectively making Avaya a virtual 
extension of the customers IT organization.

Legacy on-demand access methodology using distributed access points. Modem lacks 
modern security features and centralization.

Internet Protocol Security (IPsec) B2B VPN bridges the customer and Avaya at the network 
layer with deeper network integration, requiring complex firewall management. Security 
feature functionality may be limited. Avaya offers SAC (SSG) VPN solutions. IP based.

Use of customer-based VPN making the Avaya technician a member of the customers 
network, web conference, or similar application (Log Me In) to utilize customer 
workstation. This solution is the most limiting in terms of functionality and requires a 
customer agent to manage the connection.

Customer-Based 
VPN or Remote 
Desktop

  Simple

  Web based

  Customer defined

Remote Connectivity Comparison Chart

SAL

Modem

B2B IPsec VPN

  Fast resolution through on demand 

  Reliable

  High speed

  Commonly 
understood 
technology

  Cheap hardware

  Easy engagement of 

any Service Partner

  Can enable tools 

and automation

  Security features 

available as add-on

  If tunnel is standardized 

and maintained to 
Avaya, tools and 
automation can be 
enabled

click to connect

  High speed

  Centralization

  2FA X.509 public certificate 

authentication at user level

  Customer managed advanced 

policy and security

  Firewall friendly

  Internet access utilized

  Traffic can be wrapped in B2B VPN

  Simple integration with services 

partners

  Enforces registration for future 

services availability

  Embedded in many Avaya products

  Lightweight application

  Customer manages network 

changes easily

  Flexible deployment choices

  Allows connections to Partners and 

Avaya

  Direct connections to products 
establishedno need for Avaya 
support to know network topology

  Tools and automation enabled

S
O
R
P

S
N
O
C

  Remote access methodology is 

  Slow speed

  Deep network level 

  Slowest resolution times

generally less well understood

  Security and audit 

features not 
available

  Modems can 

become unavailable, 
resulting in local 
troubleshooting

  For large 

deployments, 
requires many 
phone lines and 
many modems

  Must maintain 

modem number 
changes with Avaya 
records

integration rather than 
application level on 
demand integration

  High level of IT expertise 

and effort for setup, 
changes, and 
implementations in order 
to establish and maintain 
continuous connections

  Dedicated tunnel 

required per Partner

  Tools and automation 

only available with 
direct tunnel to Avaya

  Cost to create and 

maintain tunnels

  2FA not at user level

  Tools and automation 

cannot be used

  Startup time, 

coordination, and 
testing required at time 
of service

  Customer workstation 
or attendance required 
during service

  Minimal troubleshooting 

capability

  Management of Avaya 
changes and users may 
be required by 
customer

Cost

System Platform Based Products

Centralized SAL Gateway

  No cost

SAL is embedded in all Avaya Aura system platform based 
products. The configuration is provided as part of the overall 
product installation. As such, there is no additional cost for 
embedded SAL gateways. With SAL 2.2 you can choose to go 
with a Virtual SAL Appliance or a SAL Appliance that is loaded 
with the OS and SAL ready to go for faster deployments

  Software provided free as part of support coverage

  Physical or virtual server with Red Hat required

  Professional Services implementation optional

A centralized SAL can be used to aggregate traffic, allowing cus-
tomers to turn off embedded SAL gateways. This option also allows 
adding non-system platform products. The application is freely 
available and can be installed by customers or installed by Avaya 
Professional Services (APS).

avaya.com | 3

Customer Friendly On-boarding and Implementation
SAL continues to improve with enhanced automation and simplified, customer 
friendly implementation processes.

 Simple network integration, requiring only outbound Internet connectivity over 

port 443 to Avaya

 Simple customer management, including adding and removing SAL connected devices

 Freedom for customers to make network moves, additions, and changes without 

Avaya coordination

   IP address changes are simply updated by the customer within the SAL 

gateways user interface

 Avaya Professional Services offers comprehensive remote support at affordable 

prices to implement the SAL Gateway, configure devices and provide remote 
training to the IT Administrator

 SAL Gateway can register itself end-to-end automatically

 Provides the ability to import and configure Managed Elements

Learn More
To learn more about Avaya Secure Link (SAL) please contact your Avaya Account 
Manager or Avaya Authorized Partner. For additional information, you can also or 
visit us at avaya.com/services.

About Avaya

Avaya is a leading, global 
provider of customer and 
team engagement solutions 
and services available in a 
variety of flexible 
on-premise and cloud 
deployment options. 
Avayas fabric-based 
networking solutions help 
simplify and accelerate the 
deployment of business 
critical applications and 
services. For more 
information, please visit 
www.avaya.com.

4 | avaya.com

 2015 Avaya Inc. All Rights Reserved. 
All trademarks identified by , TM, or SM are registered marks, trademarks, and service marks, respectively, of Avaya Inc. 
04/15  SVC7088-04

