 What Is the Difference Between Endangered and Threatened?
The Federal Endangered Species Act of 1973 (Act) describes two categories of declining species of plants and animals
that need the Acts protections  endangered species and threatened species  and provides these definitions:

ENDANGERED - any species that is in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range;
THREATENED - any species that is likely to become an endangered species within the foreseeable future
throughout all or a significant portion of its range.

IN SIMPLE TERMS

Endangered species are at the brink of extinction now. 
Threatened species are likely to be at the brink in the near future.

All of the protections of the Act are provided to endangered species.  Many, but not all, of those protections also are
available to threatened species.  However, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Service) has the authority to determine
which protections should apply to each threatened species; in other words, we can select and fine tune the protections that
best meet the species recovery needs.

Threatened status benefits species and people in two situations:  (1) it provides Federal protection before a species reaches
the brink of extinction; and (2) in the case of species that were initially listed as endangered, threatened status also allows
scaling back Federal protection as they recover and no longer need the maximum protections of the Act.  

Other flexibility provided by threatened status under the ESA includes:

Increased Management Flexibility for States
State natural resource management agencies designated by the Service may take (kill, wound, trap, or move as defined
by the Act) individuals of a threatened species in pursuit of conservation programs for the species.  In contrast, those
agencies are prohibited from taking an endangered species if the action might kill or permanently disable the specimen,
move it to another state, move it beyond its historical range, or keep it in captivity for longer than 45 days.
    
Increased Permitting Authority for U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
The Service may issue permits to take endangered species for:  (1) scientific purposes, (2) enhancing its propagation or
survival, or (3) incidental taking, when done under the provisions of a Service-approved habitat conservation plan.  For
threatened species, permits can also be issued to take individuals for:  (4) zoological exhibition, (5) educational purposes,
or (6) special purposes consistent with the purposes of the Act.

Increased Flexibility via Special Regulations Under Section 4(d) of the Act
Section 4(d) of the Act allows the Service to implement special regulations that reduce or expand the normal protections
for threatened species, if the Secretary of the Interior deems the special regulations are necessary and advisable to
conserve the species.  Such special regulations cannot be developed for endangered species.  These special regulations
may provide important flexibility to address species-human conflicts as the species approaches recovery and becomes
more numerous and widespread.

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Region 3 - revised March 2003

