12

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

Co-ordinating Lead Authors
J.F.B. Mitchell, D.J. Karoly

Lead Authors
G.C. Hegerl, F.W. Zwiers, M.R. Allen, J. Marengo

Contributing Authors
V. Barros, M. Berliner, G. Boer, T. Crowley, C. Folland, M. Free, N. Gillett, P. Groisman, J. Haigh,
K. Hasselmann, P. Jones, M. Kandlikar, V. Kharin, H. Kheshgi, T. Knutson, M. MacCracken, M. Mann,
G. North, J. Risbey, A. Robock, B. Santer, R. Schnur, C. Schonwiese, D. Sexton, P. Stott, S. Tett,
K. Vinnikov, T. Wigley

Review Editors
F. Semazzi, J. Zillman

Contents

Executive Summary

697

12.1

Introduction
700
12.1.1 The Meaning of Detection and Attribution 700
12.1.2 Summary of the First and Second  

701

701

701
701
702
705
706

708
709

Assessment Reports

12.1.3 Developments since the Second 

Assessment Report

12.2 The Elements of Detection and Attribution

12.2.1  Observed Data
12.2.2  Internal Climate Variability
12.2.3  Climate Forcings and Responses
12.2.3.1 Natural climate forcing
12.2.3.2  Climatic response to natural 

forcing

12.2.3.3 Anthropogenic forcing
12.2.3.4  Climatic response to 
anthropogenic forcing

711
12.2.4  Some Important Statistical Considerations 712

12.3 Qualitative Comparison of Observed and 

Modelled Climate Change
12.3.1  Introduction
12.3.2  Thermal Indicators
12.3.3 Hydrological Indicators
12.3.4  Circulation
12.3.5  Combined Evidence

713
713
714
715
715
715

12.4 Quantitative Comparison of Observed and 

Modelled Climate Change
716
12.4.1  Simple Indices and Time-series Methods 716
718
12.4.2  Pattern Correlation Methods
718
12.4.2.1 Horizontal patterns 
12.4.2.2 Vertical patterns
720
721
721

12.4.3  Optimal Fingerprint Methods

12.4.3.1 Single pattern studies
12.4.3.2 Optimal detection studies that use 

multiple fixed signal patterns

722
723

12.4.3.3 Space-time studies
12.4.3.4 Summary of optimal fingerprinting 

studies

12.5 Remaining Uncertainties

12.6 Concluding Remarks

Appendix 12.1: Optimal Detection is Regression

Appendix 12.2: Three Approaches to Optimal 
Detection

Appendix 12.3: Pattern Correlation Methods

Appendix 12.4: Dimension Reduction

Appendix 12.5: Determining the Likelihood of 
Outcomes (p-values)

References

728

729

730

732

733

733

734

734

735

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

697

Executive Summary

The  IPCC  WG1  Second  Assessment  Report  (IPCC, 1996)
(hereafter  SAR)  concluded, the  balance  of  evidence  suggests
that there is a discernible human influence on global climate. It
noted that the detection and attribution of anthropogenic climate
change  signals  can  only  be  accomplished  through  a  gradual
accumulation  of  evidence.  The  SAR  authors  also  noted
uncertainties in a number of factors, including the magnitude and
patterns  of  internal  climate  variability, external  forcing  and
climate system response, which prevented them from drawing a
stronger conclusion. The results of the research carried out since
1995  on  these  uncertainties  and  other  aspects  of  detection  and
attribution are summarised below. 

A longer and more closely scrutinised observational record
Three of the five years (1995, 1996 and 1998) added to the instru-
mental record since the SAR are the warmest in the instrumental
record of global temperatures, consistent with the expectation that
increases  in  greenhouse  gases  will  lead  to  continued  long-term
warming. The  impact  of  observational  sampling  errors  has  been
estimated for the global and hemispheric mean surface temperature
record and found to be small relative to the warming observed over
the 20th century. Some sources of error and uncertainty in both the
Microwave  Sounding  Unit  (MSU)  and  radiosonde  observations
have been identified that largely resolve discrepancies between the
two  data  sets.  However, current  climate  models  cannot  fully
account  for  the  observed  difference  in  the  trend  between  the
surface and lower-tropospheric temperatures over the last twenty
years even when all known external influences are included. New
reconstructions of the surface temperature record of the last 1,000
years indicate that the temperature changes over the last 100 years
are  unlikely  to  be  entirely  natural  in  origin, even  taking  into
account the large uncertainties in palaeo-reconstructions. 

New model estimates of internal variability
Since  the  SAR, more  models  have  been  used  to  estimate  the
magnitude  of  internal  climate  variability.  Several  of  the  models
used for detection show similar or larger variability than observed
on  interannual  to  decadal  time-scales, even  in  the  absence  of
external  forcing.  The  warming  over  the  past  100  years  is  very
unlikely  to  be  due  to  internal  variability  alone  as  estimated  by
current models. Estimates of variability on the longer time-scales
relevant  to  detection  and  attribution  studies  are  uncertain.
Nonetheless, conclusions  on  the  detection  of  an  anthropogenic
signal  are  insensitive  to  the  model  used  to  estimate  internal
variability  and  recent  changes  cannot  be  accounted  for  as  pure
internal  variability  even  if  the  amplitude  of  simulated  internal
variations is increased by a factor of two or more. In most recent
studies, the  residual  variability  that  remains  in  the  observations
after removal of the estimated anthropogenic signals is consistent
with  model-simulated  variability  on  the  space-  and  time-scales
used for detection and attribution. Note, however, that the power
of the consistency test is limited. Detection studies to date have
shown that the observed large-scale changes in surface tempera-
ture in recent decades are unlikely (bordering on very unlikely) to
be entirely the result of internal variability. 

New estimates of responses to natural forcing
Fully coupled ocean-atmosphere models have used reconstruc-
tions of solar and volcanic forcings over the last one to three
centuries  to  estimate  the  contribution  of  natural  forcing  to
climate variability and change. Including their effects produces
an increase in variance on all time-scales and brings the low-
frequency  variability  simulated  by  models  closer  to  that
deduced  from  palaeo-reconstructions.  Assessments  based  on
physical principles and model simulations indicate that natural
forcing alone is unlikely to explain the increased rate of global
warming  since  the  middle  of  the  20th  century  or  changes  in
vertical temperature structure. The reasons are that the trend in
natural  forcing  has  likely  been  negative  over  the  last  two
decades and natural forcing alone is unlikely to account for the
observed  cooling  of  the  stratosphere.  However,
there  is
evidence  for  a  detectable  volcanic  influence  on  climate.  The
available  evidence  also  suggests  a  solar  influence  in  proxy
records  of  the  last  few  hundred  years  and  also  in  the  instru-
mental record of the early 20th century. Statistical assessments
confirm that natural variability (the combination of internal and
naturally forced) is unlikely to explain the warming in the latter
half of the 20th century. 

Improved representation of anthropogenic forcing
Several  studies  since  the  SAR  have  included  an  explicit
representation of greenhouse gases (as opposed to an equivalent
increase  in  carbon  dioxide  (CO2)).  Some  have  also  included
tropospheric  ozone  changes, an  interactive  sulphur  cycle, an
explicit  radiative  treatment  of  the  scattering  of  sulphate
aerosols, and  improved  estimates  of  the  changes  in  stratos-
pheric ozone. While detection of the climate response to these
other anthropogenic factors is often ambiguous, detection of the
influence of greenhouse gas increases on the surface tempera-
ture changes over the past 50 years is robust.

Sensitivity to estimates of climate change signals
Since the SAR, more simulations with increases in greenhouse
gases and some representation of aerosol effects have become
available. In some cases, ensembles of simulations have been
run  to  reduce  noise  in  the  estimates  of  the  time-dependent
response.  Some  studies  have  evaluated  seasonal  variation  of
the  response.  Uncertainties  in  the  estimated  climate  change
signals have made it difficult to attribute the observed climate
change  to  one  specific  combination  of  anthropogenic  and
natural  influences.  Nevertheless, all  studies  since  the  SAR
have found a significant anthropogenic contribution is required
to account for surface and tropospheric trends over at least the
last 30 years.

Qualitative  consistencies  between  observed  and  modelled
climate changes
There  is  a  wide  range  of  evidence  of  qualitative  consisten-
cies between observed climate changes and model responses
to  anthropogenic  forcing,
including  global  warming,
increasing  land-ocean  temperature  contrast, diminishing
Arctic sea-ice extent, glacial retreat and increases in precip-
itation in Northern Hemisphere high latitudes. Some qualita-

698

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

tive  inconsistencies  remain, including  the  fact  that  models
predict  a  faster  rate  of  warming  in  the  mid-  to  upper
troposphere  which  is  not  observed  in  either  satellite  or
radiosonde tropospheric temperature records. 

A wider range of detection techniques
A major advance since the SAR is the increase in the range
of techniques used, and the evaluation of the degree to which
the  results  are  independent  of  the  assumptions  made  in
applying  those  techniques.  There  have  been  studies  using
pattern  correlations, optimal  detection  studies  using  one  or
more fixed patterns and time-varying patterns, and a number
of  other  techniques.  Evidence  of  a  human  influence  on
climate is obtained using all these techniques. 

Results are sensitive to the range of temporal and spatial
scales  that  are  considered.  Several  decades  of  data  are
necessary  to  separate  the  forced  response  from  internal
variability. Idealised studies have demonstrated that surface
temperature  changes  are  detectable  only  on  scales  greater
than 5,000 km. Studies also show that the level of agreement
found  between  simulations  and  observations  in  pattern
correlation  studies  is  close  to  what  one  would  expect  in
theory.

in 

included 

Attribution studies have applied multi-signal techniques
to  address  whether  or  not  the  magnitude  of  the  observed
response to a particular forcing agent is consistent with the
modelled response and separable from the influence of other
forcing agents. The inclusion of time-dependent signals has
helped  to  distinguish  between  natural  and  anthropogenic
forcing agents. As more response patterns are included, the
problem  of  degeneracy  (different  combinations  of  patterns
yielding  near  identical  fits  to  the  observations)  inevitably
arises. Nevertheless, even with the responses to all the major
the  analysis, a  distinct
forcing  factors 
greenhouse  gas  signal  remains  detectable.  Overall,
the
magnitude  of  the  model-simulated  temperature  response  to
greenhouse gases is found to be consistent with the observed
greenhouse  response  on  the  scales  considered.  However,
there  remain  discrepancies  between  the  modelled  and
observed  responses  to  other  natural  and  anthropogenic
factors, and  estimates  of  signal  amplitudes  are  model-
dependent. Most studies find that, over the last 50 years, the
estimated rate and magnitude of warming due to increasing
concentrations  of  greenhouse  gases  alone  are  comparable
with, or  larger  than, the  observed  warming.  Furthermore,
most model estimates that take into account both greenhouse
gases and sulphate aerosols are consistent with observations
over this period.

The  increase  in  the  number  of  studies, the  breadth  of
techniques, increased rigour in the assessment of the role of
anthropogenic forcing in climate, the robustness of results to
the  assumptions  made  using  those  techniques, and  consis-
tency of results lead to increased confidence in these results.
Moreover, to be consistent with the signal observed to date,
the rate of anthropogenic warming is likely to lie in the range
0.1  to  0.2C/decade  over  the  first  half  of  the  21st  century
under the IS92a (IPCC, 1992) emission scenario.

Remaining uncertainties
A number of important uncertainties remain. These include:

 Discrepancies  between  the  vertical  profile  of  temperature
change  in  the  troposphere  seen  in  observations  and  models.
These  have  been  reduced  as  more  realistic  forcing  histories
have been used in models, although not fully resolved. Also,
the  difference  between  observed  surface  and  lower-tropos-
pheric  trends  over  the  last  two  decades  cannot  be  fully
reproduced by model simulations.

 Large  uncertainties  in  estimates  of  internal  climate  variability
from models and observations, though as noted above, these are
unlikely  (bordering  on  very  unlikely)  to  be  large  enough  to
nullify the claim that a detectable climate change has taken place. 

 Considerable  uncertainty  in  the  reconstructions  of  solar  and
volcanic forcing which are based on proxy or limited observa-
tional  data  for  all  but  the  last  two  decades.  Detection  of  the
influence of greenhouse gases on climate appears to be robust
to possible amplification of the solar forcing by ozone/solar or
solar/cloud interactions, provided these do not alter the pattern
or  time  dependence  of  the  response  to  solar  forcing.
Amplification of the solar signal by these processes, which are
not yet included in models, remains speculative. 

 Large  uncertainties  in  anthropogenic  forcing  are  associated
with the effects of aerosols. The effects of some anthropogenic
factors,
including  organic  carbon, black  carbon, biomass
aerosols, and changes in land use, have not been included in
detection  and  attribution  studies.  Estimates  of  the  size  and
geographic pattern of the effects of these forcings vary consid-
erably, although individually their global effects are estimated
to be relatively small.

 Large differences in the response of different models to the same
forcing. These differences, which are often greater than the differ-
ence  in  response  in  the  same  model  with  and  without  aerosol
effects, highlight the large uncertainties in climate change predic-
tion and the need to quantify uncertainty and reduce it through
better observational data sets and model improvement. 

Synopsis
The  SAR  concluded: The  balance  of  evidence  suggests  a
discernible human influence on global climate. That report also
noted that the anthropogenic signal was still emerging from the
background  of  natural  climate  variability.  Since  the  SAR,
progress has been made in reducing uncertainty, particularly with
respect  to  distinguishing  and  quantifying  the  magnitude  of
responses to different external influences. Although many of the
sources of uncertainty identified in the SAR still remain to some
degree, new  evidence  and  improved  understanding  support  an
updated conclusion.

 There  is  a  longer  and  more  closely  scrutinised  temperature
record  and  new  model  estimates  of  variability. The  warming
over the past 100 years is very unlikely to be due to internal

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

699

variability  alone,
as  estimated  by  current  models.
Reconstructions  of  climate  data  for  the  past  1,000  years  also
indicate  that  this  warming  was  unusual  and  is  unlikely  to  be
entirely natural in origin. 

 There are new estimates of the climate response to natural and
anthropogenic forcing, and new detection techniques have been
applied.  Detection  and  attribution  studies  consistently  find
evidence for an anthropogenic signal in the climate record of the
last 35 to 50 years. 

 Simulations of the response to natural forcings alone (i.e., the
response  to  variability  in  solar  irradiance  and  volcanic
eruptions) do not explain the warming in the second half of the
20th century. However, they indicate that natural forcings may
have contributed to the observed warming in the first half of the
20th century. 

 The  warming  over  the  last  50  years  due  to  anthropogenic
greenhouse  gases  can  be  identified  despite  uncertainties  in
forcing  due  to  anthropogenic  sulphate  aerosol  and  natural
factors  (volcanoes  and  solar  irradiance).  The  anthropogenic
sulphate aerosol forcing, while uncertain, is negative over this
period and therefore cannot explain the warming. Changes in
natural forcing during most of this period are also estimated to
be negative and are unlikely to explain the warming.

 Detection  and  attribution  studies  comparing  model  simulated
changes  with  the  observed  record  can  now  take  into  account

uncertainty in the magnitude of modelled response to external
forcing,
in  particular  that  due  to  uncertainty  in  climate
sensitivity.

 Most  of  these  studies  find  that, over  the  last  50  years, the
estimated  rate  and  magnitude  of  warming  due  to  increasing
concentrations of greenhouse gases alone are comparable with,
or larger than, the observed warming. Furthermore, most model
estimates  that  take  into  account  both  greenhouse  gases  and
sulphate  aerosols  are  consistent  with  observations  over  this
period.

 The  best  agreement  between  model  simulations  and  observa-
tions over the last 140 years has been found when all the above
anthropogenic and natural forcing factors are combined. These
results show that the forcings included are sufficient to explain
the  observed  changes, but  do  not  exclude  the  possibility  that
other forcings may also have contributed.

In the light of new evidence and taking into account the remaining
uncertainties, most of the observed warming over the last 50 years
is  likely  to  have  been  due  to  the  increase  in  greenhouse  gas
concentrations.

Furthermore, it is very likely that the 20th century warming
has contributed significantly to the observed sea level rise, through
thermal expansion of sea water and widespread loss of land ice.
Within  present  uncertainties, observations  and  models  are  both
consistent with a lack of significant acceleration of sea level rise
during the 20th century. 

700

12.1 Introduction

12.1.1 The Meaning of Detection and Attribution

The response to anthropogenic changes in climate forcing occurs
against  a  backdrop  of  natural  internal  and  externally  forced
climate variability that can occur on similar temporal and spatial
scales.  Internal  climate  variability, by  which  we  mean  climate
variability not forced by external agents, occurs on all time-scales
from  weeks 
to  centuries  and  millennia.  Slow  climate
components, such as the ocean, have particularly important roles
on decadal and century time-scales because they integrate high-
frequency  weather  variability  (Hasselmann, 1976)  and  interact
with faster components. Thus the climate is capable of producing
long  time-scale  internal  variations  of  considerable  magnitude
without  any  external  influences.  Externally  forced  climate
variations may be due to changes in natural forcing factors, such
as solar radiation or volcanic aerosols, or to changes in anthro-
pogenic  forcing  factors, such  as  increasing  concentrations  of
greenhouse gases or sulphate aerosols. 

Definitions
The  presence  of  this  natural  climate  variability  means  that  the
detection  and  attribution  of  anthropogenic  climate  change  is  a
statistical signal-in-noise problem. Detection is the process of
demonstrating that an observed change is significantly different
(in a statistical sense) than can be explained by natural internal
variability. However, the detection of a change in climate does
not necessarily imply that its causes are understood. As noted in
the SAR, the unequivocal attribution of climate change to anthro-
pogenic  causes  (i.e., the  isolation  of  cause  and  effect)  would
require  controlled  experimentation  with  the  climate  system  in
which  the  hypothesised  agents  of  change  are  systematically
varied  in  order  to  determine  the  climates  sensitivity  to  these
agents.  Such  an  approach  to  attribution  is  clearly  not  possible.
Thus, from  a  practical  perspective, attribution  of  observed
climate  change  to  a  given  combination  of  human  activity  and
natural influences requires another approach. This involves statis-
tical  analysis  and  the  careful  assessment  of  multiple  lines  of
evidence to demonstrate, within a pre-specified margin of error,
that the observed changes are:

 unlikely to be due entirely to internal variability;

 consistent with the estimated responses to the given combina-

tion of anthropogenic and natural forcing; and 

 not  consistent  with  alternative, physically  plausible  explana-
tions of recent climate change that exclude important elements
of the given combination of forcings.

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

tial  impact  on  near-surface  temperature  changes  over  the  20th
century. Any statement that a model simulation is consistent with
observed changes can only apply to a subset of model-simulated
variables, such as large-scale near-surface temperature trends: no
numerical model will ever be perfect in every respect. To attribute
all or part of recent climate change to human activity, therefore,
we  need  to  demonstrate  that  alternative  explanations, such  as
pure  internal  variability  or  purely  naturally  forced  climate
change, are unlikely to account for a set of observed changes that
can be accounted for by human influence. Detection (ruling out
that observed changes are only an instance of internal variability)
is  thus  one  component  of  the  more  complex  and  demanding
process of attribution. In addition to this general usage of the term
detection (that some climate change has taken place), we shall
also discuss the detection of the influence of individual forcings
(see Section 12.4). 

Detection and estimation
The basic elements of this approach to detection and attribution
were recognised in the SAR. However, detection and attribution
studies  have  advanced  beyond  addressing  the  simple  question
have  we  detected  a  human  influence  on  climate? to  such
questions as how large is the anthropogenic change? and is the
magnitude of the response to greenhouse gas forcing as estimated
in the observed record consistent with the response simulated by
climate models? The task of detection and attribution can thus be
rephrased  as  an  estimation  problem, with  the  quantities  to  be
estimated being the factor(s) by which we have to scale the model-
simulated response(s) to external forcing to be consistent with the
observed  change.  The  estimation  approach  uses  essentially  the
same tools as earlier studies that considered the problem as one of
hypothesis  testing, but  is  potentially  more  informative  in  that  it
allows  us  to  quantify, with  associated  estimates  of  uncertainty,
how  much  different  factors  have  contributed  to  recent  observed
climate changes. This interpretation only makes sense, however, if
it can be assumed that important sources of model error, such as
missing or incorrectly represented atmospheric feedbacks, affect
primarily the amplitude and not the structure of the response to
external forcing. The majority of relevant studies suggest that this
is the case for the relatively small-amplitude changes observed to
date, but  the  possibility  of  model  errors  changing  both  the
amplitude  and  structure  of  the  response  remains  an  important
caveat.  Sampling  error  in  model-derived  signals  that  originates
from the models own internal variability also becomes an issue if
detection and attribution is considered as an estimation problem 
some investigations have begun to allow for this, and one study
has estimated the contribution to uncertainty from observational
sampling and instrumental error. The robustness of detection and
attribution  findings  obtained  with  different  climate  models  has
been assessed. 

Limitations
It  is  impossible, even  in  principle,
to  distinguish  formally
between  all  conceivable  explanations  with  a  finite  amount  of
data. Nevertheless, studies have now been performed that include
all  the  main  natural  and  anthropogenic  forcing  agents  that  are
generally accepted (on physical grounds) to have had a substan-

Extensions
It is important to stress that the attribution process is inherently
open-ended, since we have no way of predicting what alternative
explanations for observed climate change may be proposed, and
be accepted as plausible, in the future. This problem is not unique
to  the  climate  change  issue, but  applies  to  any  problem  of

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

701

establishing cause and effect given a limited sample of observa-
tions. The possibility of a confounding explanation can never be
ruled out completely, but as successive alternatives are tested and
found to be inadequate, it can be seen to become progressively
more unlikely. There is growing interest in the use of Bayesian
methods (Dempster, 1998; Hasselmann, 1998; Leroy, 1998; Tol
and de Vos, 1998; Barnett et al., 1999; Levine and Berliner, 1999;
Berliner et al., 2000). These provide a means of formalising the
process of incorporating additional information and evaluating a
range  of  alternative  explanations  in  detection  and  attribution
studies.  Existing  studies  can  be  rephrased  in  a  Bayesian
formalism  without  any  change  in  their  conclusions, as
demonstrated  by  Leroy  (1998).  However, a  number  of  statisti-
cians  (e.g., Berliner  et  al., 2000)  argue  that  a  more  explicitly
Bayesian approach would allow greater flexibility and rigour in
the treatment of different sources of uncertainty. 

12.1.2 Summary of the First and Second Assessment Reports

The  first  IPCC  Scientific  Assessment  in  1990  (IPCC, 1990)
concluded  that  the  global  mean  surface  temperature  had
increased by 0.3 to 0.6C over the previous 100 years and that the
magnitude  of  this  warming  was  broadly  consistent  with  the
predictions  of  climate  models  forced  by  increasing  concentra-
tions of greenhouse gases. However, it remained to be established
that the observed warming (or part of it) could be attributed to the
enhanced greenhouse effect. Some of the reasons for this were
that there was only limited agreement between model predictions
and observations, because climate models were still in the early
stages  of  development;  there  was  inadequate  knowledge  of
natural  variability  and  other  possible  anthropogenic  effects  on
climate and there was a scarcity of suitable observational data,
particularly long, reliable time-series. 

By the time of the SAR in 1995, considerable progress had
been  made  in  attempts  to  identify  an  anthropogenic  effect  on
climate.  The  first  area  of  significant  advance  was  that  climate
models  were  beginning  to  incorporate  the  possible  climatic
effects  of  human-induced  changes  in  sulphate  aerosols  and
stratospheric  ozone. The  second  area  of  progress  was  in  better
defining the background variability of the climate system through
multi-century  model  experiments  that  assumed  no  changes  in
forcing. These provided important information about the possible
characteristics  of  the  internal  component  of  natural  climate
variability. The third area of progress was in the application of
pattern-based  methods  that  attempted  to  attribute  some  part  of
the  observed  changes  in  climate  to  human  activities, although
these studies were still in their infancy at that time. 

The  SAR  judged  that  the  observed  trend  in  global  climate
over the previous 100 years was unlikely to be entirely natural in
origin. This led to the following, now well-known, conclusion:
Our ability to quantify the human influence on global climate is
currently  limited  because  the  expected  signal  is  still  emerging
from  the  noise  of  natural  variability, and  because  there  are
uncertainties  in  key  factors.  Nevertheless,
the  balance  of
evidence suggests that there is a discernible human influence on
global climate. It also noted that the magnitude of the influence
was uncertain.

12.1.3 Developments since the Second Assessment Report

In the following sections, we assess research developments since
the SAR in areas crucial to the detection of climate change and the
attribution of its causes. First, in Section 12.2, we review advances
in  the  different  elements  that  are  needed  in  any  detection  and
attribution study, including observational data, estimates of internal
climate variability, natural and anthropogenic climate forcings and
their simulated responses, and statistical methods for comparing
observed and modelled climate change. We draw heavily on the
assessments in earlier chapters of this report, particularly Chapter
2   Observed  Climate  Variability  and  Change, Chapter  6  
Radiative  Forcing  of  Climate  Change, Chapter  8   Model
Evaluation, and Chapter 9  Projections of Future Climate Change. 
In Section 12.3, a qualitative assessment is made of observed
and  modelled  climate  change,
identifying  general  areas  of
agreement and difference. This is based on the observed climate
changes  identified  with  most  confidence  in  Chapter  2  and  the
model projections of climate change from Chapter 9. 

Next, in  Section  12.4, advances  obtained  with  quantitative
methods for climate change detection and attribution are assessed.
These  include  results  obtained  with  time-series  methods, pattern
correlation  methods, and  optimal  fingerprint  methods.  The
interpretation of optimal fingerprinting as an estimation problem,
finding  the  scaling  factors  required  to  bring  the  amplitude  of
model-simulated changes into agreement with observed changes, is
discussed. Some remaining uncertainties are discussed in Section
12.5 and the key findings are drawn together in Section 12.6.

12.2 The Elements of Detection and Attribution

12.2.1 Observed Data

Ideally, a detection and attribution study requires long records of
observed data for climate elements that have the potential to show
large  climate  change  signals  relative  to  natural  variability.  It  is
also necessary that the observing system has sufficient coverage
so that the main features of natural variability and climate change
can  be  identified  and  monitored.  A  thorough  assessment  of
observed climate change, climate variability and data quality was
presented  in  Chapter  2.  Most  detection  and  attribution  studies
have used near-surface air temperature, sea surface temperature
or upper air temperature data, as these best fit the requirement
above. 

The quality of observed data is a vital factor. Homogeneous
data series are required with careful adjustments to account for
changes  in  observing  system  technologies  and  observing
practices. Estimates of observed data uncertainties due to instru-
ment errors or variations in data coverage (assessed in Chapter 2)
are included in some recent detection and attribution studies. 

There  have  been  five  more  years  of  observations  since  the
SAR. Improvements in historical data coverage and processing
are described in Chapter 2. Confidence limits for observational
sampling  error  have  been  estimated  for  the  global  and
hemispheric mean temperature record. Applications of improved
pre-instrumental proxy data reconstructions are described in the
next two sections.

702

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

12.2.2 Internal Climate Variability

Detection  and  attribution  of  climate  change  is  a  statistical
signal-in-noise problem, it requires an accurate knowledge of
the properties of the noise. Ideally, internal climate variability
would be estimated from instrumental observations, but a number
of problems make this difficult. The instrumental record is short
relative to the 30 to 50 year time-scales that are of interest for
detection  and  attribution  of  climate  change, particularly  for
variables  in  the  free  atmosphere.  The  longest  records  that  are
available  are  those  for  surface  air  temperature  and  sea  surface
temperature. Relatively long records are also available for precip-
itation  and  surface  pressure, but  coverage  is  incomplete  and
varies  in  time  (see  Chapter  2).  The  instrumental  record  also
contains  the  influences  of  external  anthropogenic  and  natural
forcing.  A  record  of  natural  internal  variability  can  be
reconstructed by removing estimates of the response to external
forcing  (for  example, Jones  and  Hegerl, 1998;  Wigley  et  al.,
1998a).  However, the  accuracy  of  this  record  is  limited  by
incomplete knowledge of the forcings and by the accuracy of the
climate model used to estimate the response.

Estimates using palaeoclimatic data
Palaeo-reconstructions provide an additional source of informa-
tion on climate variability that strengthens our qualitative assess-
ment  of  recent  climate  change.  There  has  been  considerable
progress  in  the  reconstruction  of  past  temperatures.  New
reconstructions with annual or seasonal resolution, back to 1000
AD, and some spatial resolution have become available (Briffa et
al., 1998; Jones et al., 1998; Mann et al., 1998, 2000; Briffa et
al., 2000; Crowley and Lowery, 2000; see also Chapter 2, Figure
2.21).  However, a  number  of  difficulties,
including  limited
coverage, temporal  inhomogeneity, possible  biases  due  to  the
palaeo-reconstruction process, uncertainty regarding the strength
of the relationships between climatic and proxy indices, and the
likely  but  unknown  influence  of  external  forcings  inhibit  the
estimation  of  internal  climate  variability  directly  from  palaeo-
climate  data. We  expect, however, that  the  reconstructions  will
continue  to  improve  and  that  palaeo-data  will  become  increas-
ingly  important  for  assessing  natural  variability  of  the  climate
system. One of the most important applications of this palaeo-
climate data is as a check on the estimates of internal variability
from  coupled  climate  models, to  ensure  that  the  latter  are  not
underestimating the level of internal variability on 50 to 100 year
time-scales (see below). The limitations of the instrumental and
palaeo-records  leave  few  alternatives  to  using  long  control
simulations with coupled models (see Figure 12.1) to estimate the
detailed structure of internal climate variability.

Estimates of the variability of global mean surface temperature
Stouffer et al. (2000) assess variability simulated in three 1,000-
year control simulations (see Figure 12.1). The models are found
to simulate reasonably well the spatial distribution of variability
and  the  spatial  correlation  between  regional  and  global  mean
variability, although there is more disagreement between models
at long time-scales (>50 years) than at short time-scales. None of
the  long  model  simulations  produces  a  secular  trend  which  is

comparable to that observed. Chapter 8, Section 8.6.2. assesses
model-simulated variability in detail. Here we assess the aspects
that  are  particularly  relevant  to  climate  change  detection.  The
power  spectrum  of  global  mean  temperatures  simulated  by  the
most  recent  coupled  climate  models  (shown  in  Figure  12.2)
compares  reasonably  well  with  that  of  detrended  observations
(solid black line) on interannual to decadal time-scales. However,
uncertainty of the spectral estimates is large and some models are
clearly  underestimating  variability  (indicated  by  the  asterisks).
Detailed  comparison  on  inter-decadal  time-scales  is  difficult
because observations are likely to contain a response to external
forcings  that  will  not  be  entirely  removed  by  a  simple  linear
trend.  At  the  same  time,
the  detrending  procedure  itself
introduces  a  negative  bias  in  the  observed  low-frequency
spectrum. 

Both  of  these  problems  can  be  avoided  by  removing  an
independent estimate of the externally forced response from the
observations  before  computing  the  power  spectrum.  This
independent  estimate  is  provided  by  the  ensemble  mean  of  a
coupled model simulation of the response to the combination of
natural  and  anthropogenic  forcing  (see  Figure  12.7c).  The
resulting spectrum of observed variability (dotted line in Figure
12.2) will not be subject to a negative bias because the observed
data  have  not  been  used  in  estimating  the  forced  response.  It
will, however, be inflated by uncertainty in the model-simulated
forced response and by noise due to observation error and due to
incomplete  coverage  (particularly  the  bias  towards  relatively
noisy Northern Hemisphere land temperatures in the early part
of the observed series). This estimate of the observed spectrum
is therefore likely to overestimate power at all frequencies. Even
so, the  more  variable  models  display  similar  variance  on  the
decadal to inter-decadal time-scales important for detection and
attribution.

Estimates of spatial patterns of variability
Several  studies  have  used  common  empirical  orthogonal
function  (EOF)  analysis  to  compare  the  spatial  modes  of
climate  variability  between  different  models.  Stouffer  et  al.
(2000)  analysed  the  variability  of  5-year  means  of  surface
temperature  in  500-year  or  longer  simulations  of  the  three
models most commonly used to estimate internal variability in
formal  detection  studies.  The  distribution  of  the  variance
between  the  EOFs  was  similar  between  the  models  and  the
observations. HadCM2 tended to overestimate the variability in
the main modes, whereas GFDL and ECHAM3 underestimated
the variability of the first mode. The standard deviations of the
dominant modes of variability in the three models differ from
observations  by  less  than  a  factor  of  two, and  one  model
(HadCM2) has similar or more variability than the observations
in  all  leading  modes.  In  general, one  would  expect  to  obtain
conservative  detection  and  attribution  results  when  natural
variability  is  estimated  with  such  a  model.  One  should  also
expect control simulations to be less variable than observations
because they do not contain externally forced variability. Hegerl
et  al. (2000)  used  common  EOFS  to  compare  50-year  June-
July-August  (JJA)  trends  of  surface  temperature  in  ECHAM3
and HadCM2. Standard deviation differences between models

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

703

)

C


l

(
 
y
a
m
o
n
a

 

e
r
u

t

a
r
e
p
m
e

t
 
r
i
a
e
c
a

 

f
r
u
s
 
n
a
e
m

 
l
a
b
o
G

l

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4

0

0

0

HadCM2

1850

1950

200

400

600

800

1000

1850

1950

GFDL

200

400

600

800

1000

1850

1950

HAM3L

200

400

600

800

1000

Years

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4

0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4

Figure 12.1: Global mean surface air temperature anomalies from 1,000-year control simulations with three different climate models,
HadCM2, GFDL R15 and ECHAM3/LSG (labelled HAM3L), compared to the recent instrumental record (Stouffer et al., 2000). No model
control simulation shows a trend in surface air temperature as large as the observed trend. If internal variability is correct in these models, the
recent warming is likely not due to variability produced within the climate system alone.

were  marginally  larger  on  the  50-year  time-scale  (less  than  a
factor of 2.5). Comparison with direct observations cannot be
made on this time-scale because the instrumental record is too
short.

Variability of the free atmosphere
Gillett et al. (2000a) compared model-simulated variability in the
free  atmosphere  with  that  of  detrended  radiosonde  data.  They
found  general  agreement  except  in  the  stratosphere, where
present  climate  models  tend  to  underestimate  variability  on  all
time-scales  and,
in  particular, do  not  reproduce  modes  of
variability  such  as  the  quasi-biennial  oscillation  (QBO).  On
decadal  time-scales, the  model  simulated  less  variability  than
observed in some aspects of the vertical patterns important for the
detection  of  anthropogenic  climate  change.  The  discrepancy  is
partially resolved by the inclusion of anthropogenic (greenhouse
gas, sulphate  and  stratospheric  ozone)  forcing  in  the  model.
However, the authors also find evidence that solar forcing plays a
significant role on decadal time-scales, indicating that this should
be taken into account in future detection studies based on changes
in  the  free  atmosphere  (see  also  discussion  in  Chapter  6  and
Section 12.2.3.1 below).

Comparison of model and palaeoclimatic estimates of variability
Comparisons  between  the  variability  in  palaeo-reconstruc-
tions  and  climate  model  data  have  shown  mixed  results  to
date. Barnett et al. (1996) compared the spatial structure of
climate variability of coupled climate models and proxy time-
series for (mostly summer) decadal temperature (Jones et al.,
1998). They found that the model-simulated amplitude of the
dominant  proxy  mode  of  variation  is  substantially  less  than
that  estimated  from  the  proxy  data.  However, choosing  the
EOFs  of  the  palaeo-data  as  the  basis  for  comparison  will
maximise the variance in the palaeo-data and not the models,
and so bias the model amplitudes downwards. The neglect of
naturally forced climate variability in the models might also
be responsible for part of the discrepancy noted in Barnett et
al. (1996) (see also Jones et al., 1998). The limitations of the
temperature  reconstructions  (see  Chapter  2, Figure  2.21),
including for example the issue of how to relate site-specific
palaeo-data  to  large-scale  variations, may  also  contribute  to
this discrepancy. Collins et al. (2000) compared the standard
deviation  of  large-scale  Northern  Hemisphere  averages  in  a
model  control  simulation  and  in  tree-ring-based  proxy  data
for  the  last  600  years  on  decadal  time-scales. They  found  a

704

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

)
r
y
/
C


(
 
y
t
i
s
n
e
d
 
l
a
r
t
c
e
p
s
 
r
e
w
o
P

Figure 12.2: Coloured lines: power spectra of global mean temperatures in the unforced control integrations that are used to provide estimates of
internal climate variability in Figure 12.12. All series were linearly detrended prior to analysis, and spectra computed using a standard Tukey
window with the window width (maximum lag used in the estimate) set to one-fifth of the series length, giving each spectral estimate the same
uncertainty range, as shown (see, e.g., Priestley, 1981). The first 300 years were omitted from ECHAM3-LSG, CGCM1 and CGCM2 models as
potentially trend-contaminated. Solid black line: spectrum of observed global mean temperatures (Jones et al., 2001) over the period 1861 to 1998
after removing a best-fit linear trend. This estimate is unreliable on inter-decadal time-scales because of the likely impact of external forcing on
the observed series and the negative bias introduced by the detrending. Dotted black line: spectrum of observed global mean temperatures after
removing an independent estimate of the externally forced response provided by the ensemble mean of a coupled model simulation (Stott et al.,
2000b, and Figure 12.7c). This estimate will be contaminated by uncertainty in the model-simulated forced response, together with observation
noise and sampling error. However, unlike the detrending procedure, all of these introduce a positive (upward) bias in the resulting estimate of the
observed spectrum. The dotted line therefore provides a conservative (high) estimate of observed internal variability at all frequencies. Asterisks
indicate models whose variability is significantly less than observed variability on 10 to 60 year time-scales after removing either a best-fit linear
trend or an independent estimate of the forced response from the observed series. Significance is based on an F-test on the ratio observed/model
mean power over this frequency interval and quoted at the 5% level. Power spectral density (PSD) is defined such that unit-variance uncorrelated
noise would have an expected PSD of unity (see Allen et al., 2000a, for details). Note that different normalisation conventions can lead to different
values, which appear as a constant offset up or down on the logarithmic vertical scale used here. Differences between the spectra shown here and
the corresponding figure in Stouffer et al. (2000) shown in Chapter 8, Figure 8.18 are due to the use here of a longer (1861 to 2000) observational
record, as opposed to 1881 to 1991 in Figure 8.18. That figure also shows 2.5 to 97.5% uncertainty ranges, while for consistency with other
figures in this chapter, the 5 to 95% range is displayed here.

factor of less than two difference between model and data if
the  tree-ring  data  are  calibrated  such  that  low-frequency
variability is better retained than in standard methods (Briffa
et al., 2000). It is likely that at least part of this discrepancy
can be resolved if natural forcings are included in the model
simulation.  Crowley  (2000)  found  that  41  to  69%  of  the
variance in decadally smoothed Northern Hemisphere mean
surface  temperature  reconstructions  could  be  externally
forced (using data from Mann et al. (1998) and Crowley and

Lowery  (2000)).  The  residual  variability  in  the  reconstruc-
tions, after subtracting estimates of volcanic and solar-forced
signals, showed  no  significant  difference  in  variability  on
decadal  and  multi-decadal  time-scales  from  three  long
coupled model control simulations. In summary, while there
is substantial uncertainty in comparisons between long-term
palaeo-records of surface temperature and model estimates of
multi-decadal  variability,
there  is  no  clear  evidence  of  a
serious discrepancy.

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

705

Summary
These  findings  emphasise  that  there  is  still  considerable
uncertainty  in  the  magnitude  of  internal  climate  variability.
Various approaches are used in detection and attribution studies
to  account  for  this  uncertainty.  Some  studies  use  data  from  a
number of coupled climate model control simulations (Santer et
al., 1995; Hegerl et al., 1996, 1997, North and Stevens, 1998) and
choose the most conservative result. In other studies, the estimate
of  internal  variance  is  inflated  to  assess  the  sensitivity  of
detection and attribution results to the level of internal variance
(Santer et al., 1996a, Tett et al., 1999; Stott et al., 2001). Some
authors  also  augment  model-derived  estimates  of  natural
variability with estimates from observations (Hegerl et al., 1996).
A  method  for  checking  the  consistency  between  the  residual
variability in the observations after removal of externally forced
signals  (see  equation A12.1.1, Appendix  12.1)  and  the  natural
internal  variability  estimated  from  control  simulations  is  also
available (e.g., Allen and Tett, 1999). Results indicate that, on the
scales considered, there is no evidence for a serious inconsistency
between  the  variability  in  models  used  for  optimal  fingerprint
studies and observations (Allen and Tett, 1999; Tett et al., 1999;
Hegerl et al., 2000, 2001; Stott et al., 2001). The use of this test
and  the  use  of  internal  variability  from  the  models  with  the
greatest  variability  increases  confidence  in  conclusions  derived
from optimal detection studies.

12.2.3 Climate Forcings and Responses

The global mean change in radiative forcing (see Chapter 6) since
the  pre-industrial  period  may  give  an  indication  of  the  relative
importance of the different external factors influencing climate
over the last century. The temporal and spatial variation of the
forcing from different sources may help to identify the effects of
individual factors that have contributed to recent climate change. 

The need for climate models
To detect the response to anthropogenic or natural climate forcing
in observations, we require estimates of the expected space-time
pattern  of  the  response.  The  influences  of  natural  and  anthro-
pogenic forcing on the observed climate can be separated only if
the spatial and temporal variation of each component is known.
These patterns cannot be determined from the observed instru-
mental  record  because  variations  due  to  different  external
forcings are superimposed on each other and on internal climate
variations. Hence climate models are usually used to estimate the
contribution  from  each  factor.  The  models  range  from  simpler
energy balance models to the most complex coupled atmosphere-
ocean  general  circulation  models  that  simulate  the  spatial  and
temporal variations of many climatic parameters (Chapter 8). 

The models used
Energy balance models (EBMs) simulate the effect of radiative
climate  forcing  on  surface  temperature.  Climate  sensitivity  is
included as an adjustable parameter. These models are computa-
tionally  inexpensive  and  produce  noise-free  estimates  of  the
climate  signal.  However, EBMs  cannot  represent  dynamical
components  of  the  climate  signal, generally  cannot  simulate

(a)

Aerosol forcing (Wm2)

(b)

 T (C) due to aerosol forcing

(c)

 T (C) due to CO2 doubling

Figure 12.3: Latitude-month plot of radiative forcing and model
equilibrium response for surface temperature. (a) Radiative forcing
(Wm2) due to increased sulphate aerosol loading at the time of CO2
doubling. (b) Change in temperature due to the increase in aerosol
loading. (c) Change in temperature due to CO2 doubling. Note that the
patterns of radiative forcing and temperature response are quite
different in (a) and (b), but that the patterns of large-scale temperature
responses to different forcings are similar in (b) and (c). The experi-
ments used to compute these fields are described by Reader and Boer
(1998).

variables other than surface temperature, and may omit some of
the important feedback processes that are accounted for in more
complex  models.  Most  detection  and  attribution  approaches
therefore  apply  signals  estimated  from  coupled  Atmosphere
Ocean  General  Circulation  Models  (AOGCMs)  or  atmospheric
General  Circulation  Models  (GCMs)  coupled  to  mixed-layer
ocean models. Forced simulations with such models contain both
the  climate  response  to  external  forcing  and  superimposed
internal  climate  variability.  Estimates  of  the  climate  response

706

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

computed  from  model  output  will  necessarily  contain  at  least
some noise from this source, although this can be reduced by the
use  of  ensemble  simulations.  Note  that  different  models  can
produce quite different patterns of response to a given forcing due
to  differences  in  the  representation  of  feedbacks  arising  from
changes  in  cloud  (in  particular), sea  ice  and  land  surface
processes.

The relationship between patterns of forcing and response
There  are  several  reasons  why  one  should  not  expect  a  simple
relationship between the patterns of radiative forcing and temper-
ature response. First, strong feedbacks such as those due to water
vapour and sea ice tend to reduce the difference in the tempera-
ture response due to different forcings. This is illustrated graphi-
cally  by  the  response  to  the  simplified  aerosol  forcing  used  in
early  studies.  The  magnitude  of  the  model  response  is  largest
over the Arctic in winter even though the forcing is small, largely
due  to  ice-albedo  feedback. The  large-scale  patterns  of  change
and their temporal variations are similar, but of opposite sign, to
that  obtained  in  greenhouse  gas  experiments  (Figure  12.3, see
also  Mitchell  et  al., 1995a).  Second, atmospheric  circulation
tends to smooth out temperature gradients and reduce the differ-
ences in response patterns. Similarly, the thermal inertia of the
climate  system  tends  to  reduce  the  amplitude  of  short-term
fluctuations  in  forcing.  Third, changes  in  radiative  forcing  are
more effective if they act near the surface, where cooling to space
is  restricted, than  at  upper  levels, and  in  high  latitudes, where
there  are  stronger  positive  feedbacks  than  at  low  latitudes
(Hansen et al., 1997a). 

In practice, the response of a given model to different forcing
patterns  can  be  quite  similar  (Hegerl  et  al., 1997;  North  and
Stevens, 1998;  Tett  et  al., 1999).  Similar  signal  patterns  (a
condition  often  referred  to  as  degeneracy)  can  be  difficult  to
distinguish  from  one  another. Tett  et  al. (1999)  find  substantial
degeneracy between greenhouse gas, sulphate, volcanic and solar
patterns they used in their detection study using HadCM2. On the
other hand, the greenhouse gas and aerosol patterns generated by
ECHAM3 LSG (Hegerl et al., 2000) are more clearly separable,
in part because the patterns are more distinct, and in part because
the aerosol response pattern correlates less well with ECHAM3
LSGs  patterns  of  internal  variability.  The  vertical  patterns  of
temperature  change  due  to  greenhouse  gas  and  stratospheric
ozone forcing are less degenerate than the horizontal patterns.

Summary
Different models may give quite different patterns of response for
the same forcing, but an individual model may give a surprisingly
similar response for different forcings. The first point means that
attribution studies may give different results when using signals
generated from different models. The second point means that it
may  be  more  difficult  to  distinguish  between  the  response  to
different factors than one might expect, given the differences in
radiative forcing. 

12.2.3.1 Natural climate forcing
Since the SAR, there has been much progress in attempting to
understand  the  climate  response  to  fluctuations  in  solar

luminosity  and  to  volcanism.  These  appear  to  be  the  most
important  among  a  broad  range  of  natural  external  climate
forcings at decadal and centennial time-scales. The mechanisms
of these forcings, their reconstruction and associated uncertain-
ties  are  described  in  Chapter  6, and  further  details  of  the
simulated responses are given in Chapter 8, Section 8.6.3. 

Volcanic forcing
The radiative forcing due to volcanic aerosols from the recent El
Chichon  and  Mt.  Pinatubo  eruptions  has  been  estimated  from
satellite  and  other  data  to  be  3  Wm2 (peak  forcing;  after
Hansen  et  al., 1998).  The  forcing  associated  with  historic
eruptions  before  the  satellite  era  is  more  uncertain.  Sato  et  al.
(1993)  estimated  aerosol  optical  depth  from  ground-based
observations  over  the  last  century  (see  also  Stothers, 1996;
Grieser  and  Schoenwiese, 1999).  Prior  to  that, reconstructions
have been based on various sources of data (ice cores, historic
documents  etc.;  see  Lamb, 1970;  Simkin  et  al., 1981;  Robock
and  Free, 1995;  Crowley  and  Kim, 1999;  Free  and  Robock,
1999). There is uncertainty of about a factor of two in the peak
forcing in reconstructions of historic volcanic forcing in the pre-
satellite era (see Chapter 6). 

Solar forcing
The variation of solar irradiance with the 11-year sunspot cycle
has been assessed with some accuracy over more than 20 years,
although measurements of the magnitude of modulations of solar
irradiance between solar cycles are less certain (see Chapter 6).
The estimation of earlier solar irradiance fluctuations, although
based on physical mechanisms, is indirect. Hence our confidence
in the range of solar radiation on century time-scales is low, and
confidence  in  the  details  of  the  time-history  is  even  lower
(Harrison and Shine, 1999; Chapter 6). Several recent reconstruc-
tions  estimate  that  variations  in  solar  irradiance  give  rise  to  a
forcing at the Earths surface of about 0.6 to 0.7 Wm2 since the
Maunder Minimum and about half this over the 20th century (see
Chapter  6, Figure  6.5;  Hoyt  and  Schatten, 1993;  Lean  et  al.,
1995;  Lean, 1997;  Froehlich  and  Lean, 1998;  Lockwood  and
Stamper, 1999). This is larger than the 0.2 Wm2 modulation of
the 11-year solar cycle measured from satellites. (Note that we
discuss here the forcing at the Earths surface, which is smaller
than that at the top of the atmosphere, due to the Earths geometry
and albedo.) The reconstructions of Lean et al. (1995) and Hoyt
and  Schatten  (1993), which  have  been  used  in  GCM  detection
studies, vary in amplitude and phase. Chapter 6, Figure 6.8 shows
time-series of reconstructed solar and volcanic forcing since the
late  18th  century.  All  reconstructions  indicate  that  the  direct
effect  of  variations  in  solar  forcing  over  the  20th  century  was
about 20 to 25% of the change in forcing due to increases in the
well-mixed greenhouse gases (see Chapter 6). 

Reconstructions  of  climate  forcing  in  the  20th  century
indicate that the net natural climate forcing probably increased
during the first half of the 20th century, due to a period of low
volcanism  coinciding  with  a  small  increase  in  solar  forcing.
Recent decades show negative natural forcing due to increasing
volcanism, which overwhelms the direct effect, if real, of a small
increase in solar radiation (see Chapter 6, Table 6.13). 

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

707

)

C


l

 

(
 
y
a
m
o
n
a
e
r
u
a
r
e
p
m
e
T

t

)

C


l

 

(
 
y
a
m
o
n
a
e
r
u
a
r
e
p
m
e
T

t

(a)

Global lower stratospheric temperature anomalies

Model
MSU T4

Year

(b)

Global lower tropospheric temperature anomalies

Model
MSU T2LT

Year

(a) Solar variability experiments

(b) CO2 experiment

Figure 12.4: (a) Observed microwave sounding unit
(MSU) global mean temperature in the lower strato-
sphere, shown as dashed line, for channel 4 for the
period 1979 to 97 compared with the average of
several atmosphere-ocean GCM simulations starting
with different atmospheric conditions in 1979 (solid
line). The simulations have been forced with
increasing greenhouse gases, direct and indirect
forcing by sulphate aerosols and tropospheric ozone
forcing, and Mt. Pinatubo volcanic aerosol and
stratospheric ozone variations. The model simula-
tion does not include volcanic forcing due to El
Chichon in 1982, so it does not show stratospheric
warming then. (b) As for (a), except for 2LT
temperature retrievals in the lower troposphere.
Note the steady response in the stratosphere, apart
from the volcanic warm periods, and the large
variability in the lower troposphere (from Bengtsson
et al., 1999).

Figure 12.5: (a) Response (covariance, normalised
by the variance of radiance fluctuations) of zonally
averaged annual mean atmospheric temperature to
solar forcing for two simulations with
ECHAM3/LSG. Coloured regions indicate locally
significant response to solar forcing. (b) Zonal
mean of the first EOF of greenhouse gas-induced
temperature change simulated with the same
model (from Cubasch et al., 1997). This indicates
that for ECHAM3/LSG, the zonal mean temp-
erature response to greenhouse gas and solar
forcing are quite different in the stratosphere but
similar in the troposphere. 

708

(a)

)

C


(
 
s
e

i
l

 

a
m
o
n
a
e
r
u
a
r
e
p
m
e
T

t

1.0

0.5

0.0

-0.5

-1.0

1850

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

Anthropogenic

Volcanic and Solar

(b)

1.0

)

C


(
 
s
e

i
l

 

a
m
o
n
a
e
r
u
a
r
e
p
m
e
T

t

1900

1950

2000

1850

1900

1950

2000

Date (year)

Date (year)

Figure 12.6: (a) Five-year running mean Northern Hemisphere temperature anomalies since 1850 (relative to the 1880 to 1920 mean) from an
energy-balance model forced by Dust Veil volcanic index and Lean et al. (1995) solar index (see Free and Robock, 1999). Two values of climate
sensitivity to doubling CO2 were used; 3.0C (thin solid line), and 1.5C (dashed line). Also shown are the instrumental record (thick red line) and a
reconstruction of temperatures from proxy records (crosses, from Mann et al., 1998). The size of both the forcings and the proxy temperature
variations are subject to large uncertainties. Note that the Mann temperatures do not include data after 1980 and do not show the large observed
warming then. (b) As for (a) but for simulations with volcanic, solar and anthropogenic forcing (greenhouse gases and direct and indirect effects of
tropospheric aerosols). The net anthropogenic forcing at 1990 relative to 1760 was 1.3 Wm2, including a net cooling of 1.3 Wm2 due to aerosol
effects.

12.2.3.2 Climatic response to natural forcing
Response to volcanic forcing
The  climate  response  to  several  recent  volcanic  eruptions  has
been  studied  in  observations  and  simulations  with  atmospheric
GCMs  (e.g., Robock  and  Mao, 1992, 1995;  Graf  et  al., 1996;
Hansen et al., 1996; Kelly et al., 1996; Mao and Robock, 1998;
Kirchner  et  al., 1999). The  stratosphere  warms  and  the  annual
mean surface and tropospheric temperature decreases during the
two to three years following a major volcanic eruption. A simula-
tion  incorporating  the  effects  of  the  Mt.  Pinatubo  eruption  and
observed  changes  in  stratospheric  ozone  in  addition  to  anthro-
pogenic forcing approximately reproduces the observed stratos-
pheric variations (Figure 12.4; Bengtsson et al., 1999). It shows
stratospheric warming after the volcanic eruption, superimposed
on a long-term cooling trend. Although the surface temperature
response in the Northern Hemisphere warm season following a
volcanic eruption is dominated by global scale radiative cooling,
some  models  simulate  local  warming  over  Eurasia  and  North
America in the cold season due to changes in circulation (e.g.,
Graf et al., 1996; Kirchner et al., 1999). Variability from other
sources  makes  assessment  of  the  observed  climate  response
difficult, particularly as the two most recent volcanic eruptions
(Mt.  Pinatubo  and  El  Chichon)  occurred  in  El  Nino-Southern
Oscillation (ENSO) warm years. Simulations with simple models
(Bertrand  et  al., 1999;  Crowley  and  Kim, 1999;  Grieser  and
Schoenwiese, 2001) and AOGCMs (Tett et al., 1999; Stott et al.,
2001)  produce  a  small  decadal  mean  cooling  in  the  1980s  and
1990s due to several volcanic eruptions in those decades. Some
simulations  also  produce  global  warming  in  the  early  20th
century as a recovery from a series of strong eruptions around the
turn of the 20th century. It is unclear whether such a long-term
response is realistic. 

Response to solar forcing
Since the SAR, there have been new modelling and observational
studies on the climate effects of variations in solar irradiance. The
surface temperature response to the 11-year cycle is found to be
small (e.g., Cubasch et al., 1997; White et al., 1997; North and
Stevens, 1998; Crowley and Kim, 1999; Free and Robock, 1999).
Low-frequency solar variability over the last few hundred years
gives  a  stronger  surface  temperature  response  (Cubasch  et  al.,
1997; Drijfhout et al., 1999; Rind et al., 1999; Tett et al., 1999;
Stott et al., 2001). Model results show cooling circa 1800 due to
the hypothesised solar forcing minimum and some warming in the
20th  century, particularly  in  the  early  20th  century.  Time-
dependent experiments produce a global mean warming of 0.2 to
0.5C  in  response  to  the  estimated  0.7  Wm2 change  of  solar
radiative forcing from the Maunder Minimum to the present (e.g.,
Lean and Rind, 1998, Crowley and Kim, 1999). 

Ozone changes in the Earths atmosphere caused by the 11-
year solar cycle could affect the temperature response in the free
atmosphere. A relation between 30 hPa geopotential and a solar
index has been shown over nearly four solar cycles by Labitzke
and van Loon (1997). Van Loon and Shea (1999, 2000) found a
related  connection  between  upper  to  middle  tropospheric
temperature  and  a  solar  index  over  the  last  40  years, which  is
particularly  strong  in  July  and  August.  Variations  in  ozone
forcing related to the solar cycle may also affect surface temper-
ature  via  radiative  and  dynamical  processes  (see  discussion  in
Chapter 6; Haigh, 1999; Shindell et al., 1999, 2001), but observa-
tional  evidence  remains  ambiguous  (e.g., van  Loon  and  Shea,
2000). The assessment of ozone-related Sun-climate interactions
is uncertain as a result of the lack of long-term, reliable observa-
tions.  This  makes  it  difficult  to  separate  effects  of  volcanic
eruptions  and  solar  forcing  on  ozone.  There  has  also  been

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

709

speculation that the solar cycle might influence cloudiness and
hence surface temperature through cosmic rays (e.g., Svensmark
and Friis-Christensen, 1997; Svensmark, 1998). The latter effect
is difficult to assess due to limitations in observed data and the
shortness of the correlated time-series.

As  discussed  earlier  in  Section  12.2.3, differences  between
the response to solar and greenhouse gas forcings would make it
easier  to  distinguish  the  climate  response  to  either  forcing.
However, the spatial response pattern of surface air temperature
to an increase in solar forcing was found to be quite similar to that
in response to increases in greenhouse gas forcing (e.g., Cubasch
et al., 1997). The vertical response to solar forcing (Figure 12.5)
includes  warming  throughout  most  of  the  troposphere.  The
response  in  the  stratosphere  is  small  and  possibly  locally
negative, but  less  so  than  with  greenhouse  gas  forcing, which
gives tropospheric warming and strong stratospheric cooling. The
dependence of solar forcing on wavelength and the effect of solar
fluctuations  on  ozone  were  generally  omitted  in  these  simula-
tions. Hence, the conclusion that changes in solar forcing have
little  effect  on  large-scale  stratospheric  temperatures  remains
tentative.

The  different  time-histories  of  the  solar  and  anthropogenic
forcing  should  help  to  distinguish  between  the  responses.  All
reconstructions  suggest  a  rise  in  solar  forcing  during  the  early
decades of the 20th century with little change on inter-decadal
time-scales in the second half. Such a forcing history is unlikely
to  explain  the  recent  acceleration  in  surface  warming, even  if
amplified by some unknown feedback mechanism. 

Studies linking forcing and response through correlation
techniques
A number of authors have correlated solar forcing and volcanic
forcing  with  hemispheric  and  global  mean  temperature  time-
series  from  instrumental  and  palaeo-data  (Lean  et  al., 1995;
Briffa et al., 1998; Lean and Rind, 1998; Mann et al., 1998) and
found statistically significant correlations. Others have compared
the simulated response, rather than the forcing, with observations
and found qualitative evidence for the influence of natural forcing
on climate (e.g., Crowley and Kim, 1996; Overpeck et al., 1997;
Wigley et al., 1997; Bertrand et al., 1999) or significant correla-
tions  (e.g., Schonwiese  et  al., 1997;  Free  and  Robock, 1999;
Grieser and Schonwiese, 2001). Such a comparison is preferable
as the climate response may differ substantially from the forcing.
The results suggest that global scale low-frequency temperature
variations are influenced by variations in known natural forcings.
However, these  results  show  that  the  late  20th  century  surface
warming cannot be well represented by natural forcing (solar and
volcanic  individually  or  in  combination)  alone  (for  example
Figures 12.6, 12.7; Lean and Rind, 1998; Free and Robock, 1999;
Crowley, 2000; Tett et al., 2000; Thejll and Lassen, 2000). 

Mann et al. (1998, 2000) used a multi-correlation technique
and found significant correlations with solar and, less so, with the
volcanic  forcing  over  parts  of  the  palaeo-record.  The  authors
concluded that natural forcings have been important on decadal-
to-century time-scales, but that the dramatic warming of the 20th
century  correlates  best  and  very  significantly  with  greenhouse
gas  forcing.  The  use  of  multiple  correlations  avoids  the

possibility  of  spuriously  high  correlations  due  to  the  common
trend  in  the  solar  and  temperature  time-series  (Laut  and
Gunderman, 1998).  Attempts  to  estimate  the  contributions  of
natural  and  anthropogenic  forcing  to  20th  century  temperature
evolution simultaneously are discussed in Section 12.4.

Summary
We conclude that climate forcing by changes in solar irradiance
and  volcanism  have  likely  caused  fluctuations  in  global  and
hemispheric  mean  temperatures.  Qualitative  comparisons
suggest that natural forcings produce too little warming to fully
explain the 20th century warming (see Figure 12.7). The indica-
tion  that  the  trend  in  net  solar  plus  volcanic  forcing  has  been
negative in recent decades (see Chapter 6) makes it unlikely that
natural forcing can explain the increased rate of global warming
since  the  middle  of  the  20th  century.  This  question  will  be
revisited in a more quantitative manner in Section 12.4. 

12.2.3.3  Anthropogenic forcing 
In the SAR (Santer et al., 1996c), pattern-based detection studies
took into account changes in well-mixed greenhouse gases (often
represented by an equivalent increase in CO2), the direct effect of
sulphate aerosols (usually represented by a seasonally constant
change in surface albedo) and the influence of changes in strato-
spheric  ozone.  Recent  studies  have  also  included  the  effect  of
increases  in  tropospheric  ozone  and  a  representation  of  the
indirect  effect  of  sulphate  aerosols  on  cloud  albedo.  Many
models now include the individual greenhouse gases (as opposed
to a CO2 equivalent) and include an interactive sulphur cycle and
an  explicit  treatment  of  scattering  by  aerosols  (as  opposed  to
using prescribed changes in surface albedo). Note that represen-
tation of the sulphur cycle in climate models is not as detailed as
in  the  offline  sulphur  cycle  models  reported  in  Chapter  5.
Detection  and  attribution  studies  to  date  have  not  taken  into
account  other  forcing  agents  discussed  in  Chapter  6, including
biogenic aerosols, black carbon, mineral dust and changes in land
use.  Estimates  of  the  spatial  and  temporal  variation  of  these
factors  have  not  been  available  long  enough  to  have  been
included in model simulations suitable for detection studies. In
general, the neglected forcings are estimated to be small globally
and there may be a large degree of cancellation in their global
mean effect (see Chapter 6, Figure 6.8). It is less clear that the
individual forcings will cancel regionally. As discussed in Section
12.4, this  will  add  further  uncertainty  in  the  attribution  of  the
response to individual forcing agents, although we believe it is
unlikely to affect our conclusions about the effects of increases in
well-mixed greenhouse gases on very large spatial scales. 

Global mean anthropogenic forcing
The largest and most certain change in radiative forcing since the
pre-industrial period is an increase of about 2.3 Wm2 due to an
increase in well-mixed greenhouse gases (Chapter 6, Figure 6.8
and  Table  6.1).  Radiative  forcing  here  is  taken  to  be  the  net
downward  radiative  flux  at  the  tropopause  (see  Chapter  6).
Smaller, less  certain  contributions  have  come  from  increases  in
tropospheric  ozone  (about  0.3  Wm2),
the  direct  effect  of
increases in sulphate aerosols (about 0.4 Wm2) and decreases in

710

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

Figure 12.7: Global mean surface temperature anomalies relative to
the 1880 to 1920 mean from the instrumental record compared with
ensembles of four simulations with a coupled ocean-atmosphere
climate model (from Stott et al., 2000b; Tett et al., 2000) forced (a)
with solar and volcanic forcing only, (b) with anthropogenic forcing
including well mixed greenhouse gases, changes in stratospheric and
tropospheric ozone and the direct and indirect effects of sulphate
aerosols, and (c) with all forcings, both natural and anthropogenic.
The thick line shows the instrumental data while the thin lines show
the individual model simulations in the ensemble of four members.
Note that the data are annual mean values. The model data are only
sampled at the locations where there are observations. The changes
in sulphate aerosol are calculated interactively, and changes in
tropospheric ozone were calculated offline using a chemical transport
model. Changes in cloud brightness (the first indirect effect of
sulphate aerosols) were calculated by an offline simulation (Jones et
al., 1999) and included in the model. The changes in stratospheric
ozone were based on observations. The volcanic forcing was based
on the data of Sato et al. (1993) and the solar forcing on Lean et al.
(1995), updated to 1997. The net anthropogenic forcing at 1990 was
1.0 Wm2 including a net cooling of 1.0 Wm2 due to sulphate
aerosols. The net natural forcing for 1990 relative to 1860 was 0.5
Wm2, and for 1992 was a net cooling of 2.0 Wm2 due to Mt.
Pinatubo. Other models forced with anthropogenic forcing give
similar results to those shown in b (see Chapter 8, Section 8.6.1,
Figure 8.15; Hasselmann et al., 1995; Mitchell et al., 1995b;
Haywood et al., 1997; Boer et al., 2000a; Knutson et al., 2000).

(a)
NATURAL : Annual global mean temperatures (1.5m)

1.0

)

C


(
 
s
e

i
l

a
m
o
n
a
e
r
u

 

t

a
r
e
p
m
e
T

0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

1850

MODEL
OBSERVATIONS

1900

Year

1950

2000

(b)
ANTHROPOGENIC : Annual global mean temperatures (1.5m)

1.0

)

C


(
 
s
e

i
l

a
m
o
n
a
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
T

0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

1850

MODEL
OBSERVATIONS

1900

1950

2000

Year

(c)
ALL FORCINGS : Annual global mean temperatures (1.5m)

)

C


(
 
s
e

i
l

 

a
m
o
n
a
e
r
u
a
r
e
p
m
e
T

t

1.0

0.5

0.0

0.5

1.0

1850

MODEL
OBSERVATIONS

1900

Year

1950

2000

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

711

stratospheric ozone (about 0.2 Wm2). There is a very uncertain
and possibly large negative contribution from the indirect effects
of aerosols. Other factors such as that due to increases in fossil
fuel organic carbon, aviation, changes in land use and mineral dust
are very poorly known and not yet incorporated into simulations
used in formal detection studies. Their contribution is generally
believed  to  be  small  relative  to  well-mixed  greenhouse  gases,
though they could be of importance on regional scales.

In  order  to  assess  temperature  changes  over  the  last  two
decades, Hansen et al. (1997b) estimated the net radiative forcing
due  to  changes  in  greenhouse  gases  (including  ozone), solar
variations and stratospheric aerosols from 1979 to 1995 from the
best available measurements of the forcing agents. The negative
forcing  due  to  volcanoes  and  decreases  in  stratospheric  ozone
compensated  for  a  substantial  fraction  of  the  increase  in
greenhouse gas forcing in this period (see Chapter 6, Table 6.13). 

Patterns of anthropogenic forcing
Many of the new detection studies take into account the spatial
variation of climate response, which will depend to some extent
on the pattern of forcing (see also Section 12.2.3). The patterns of
forcing  vary  considerably  (see  Chapter  6, Figure  6.7).  The
magnitude of the overall forcing due to increases in well-mixed
greenhouse gases varies from almost 3 Wm2 in the sub-tropics
to about 1 Wm2 around the poles. The warming due to increases
in tropospheric ozone is mainly in the tropics and northern sub-
tropics. Decreases in stratospheric ozone observed over the last
couple of decades have produced negative forcing of up to about
0.5  Wm2 around  Antarctica.  The  direct  effect  of  sulphate
aerosols  predominates  in  the  Northern  Hemisphere  industrial
regions where the negative forcing may exceed 2 Wm2 locally.

Temporal variations in forcing
Some of the new detection studies take into account the temporal
as  well  as  spatial  variations  in  climate  response  (see  Section
12.4.3.3).  Hence  the  temporal  variation  of  forcing  is  also
important. The forcing due to well-mixed greenhouse gases (and
tropospheric ozone) has increased slowly in the first half of the
century, and  much  more  rapidly  in  recent  decades  (Chapter  6,
Figure  6.8).  Contributions  from  other  factors  are  smaller  and
more uncertain. Sulphur emissions increased steadily until World
War I, then levelled off, and increased more rapidly in the 1950s,
though not as fast as greenhouse gas emissions. This is reflected
in estimates of the direct radiative effect of increases in sulphate
aerosols. Given the almost monotonic increase in greenhouse gas
forcing  in  recent  decades, this  means  the  ratio  of  sulphate  to
greenhouse gas forcing has probably been decreasing since about
1960 (see Chapter 6, Figure 6.8). This should be borne in mind
when  considering  studies  that  attempt  to  detect  a  response  to
sulphate aerosols. The decreases in stratospheric ozone have been
confined to the last two to three decades.

Uncertainties in aerosol forcing
Some  recent  studies  have  incorporated  the  indirect  effect  of
increases in tropospheric aerosols. This is very poorly understood
(see Chapter 6), but contributes a negative forcing which could be
negligible or exceed 2 Wm2. The upper limit would imply very

little change in net global mean anthropogenic forcing over the
last  century  although  there  would  still  be  a  quite  strong  spatial
pattern of heating and cooling which may be incompatible with
recent observed changes (see, for example, Mitchell et al., 1995a).
A negligible indirect sulphate effect would imply a large increase
in anthropogenic forcing in the last few decades. There is also a
large  range  in  the  inter-hemispheric  asymmetry  in  the  different
estimates of forcing (see Chapter 6, Table 6.4). Given this high
level of uncertainty, studies using simulations including estimates
of indirect sulphate forcing should be regarded as preliminary. 

Summary
Well-mixed greenhouse gases make the largest and best-known
contribution to changes in radiative forcing over the last century
or  so.  There  remains  a  large  uncertainty  in  the  magnitude  and
patterns  of  other  factors, particularly  those  associated  with  the
indirect effects of sulphate aerosol.

12.2.3.4 Climatic response to anthropogenic forcing
We  now  consider  the  simulated  response  to  anthropogenic
forcing.  Models  run  with  increases  in  greenhouse  gases  alone
give a warming which accelerates in the latter half of the century.
When  a  simple  representation  of  aerosol  effects  is  included
(Mitchell  et  al., 1995b;  Cubasch  et  al., 1996;  Haywood  et  al.,
1997; Boer et al., 2000a,b) the rate of warming is reduced (see
also  Chapter  8, Section  8.6.1).  The  global  mean  response  is
similar  when  additional  forcings  due  to  ozone  and  the  indirect
effect  of  sulphates  are  included.  GCM  simulations  (Tett  et  al.,
1996; Hansen et al., 1997b) indicate that changes in stratospheric
ozone  observed  over  the  last  two  decades  yield  a  global  mean
surface temperature cooling of about 0.1 to 0.2C. This may be
too  small  to  be  distinguishable  from  the  models  internal
variability and is also smaller than the warming effects due to the
changes in the well-mixed greenhouse gases over the same time
period (about 0.2 to 0.3C). The lack of a statistically significant
surface  temperature  change  is  in  contrast  to  the  large  ozone-
induced  cooling  in  the  lower  stratosphere  (WMO, 1999;
Bengtsson et al. 1999).

The response of the vertical distribution of temperature to
anthropogenic forcing
Increases  in  greenhouse  gases  lead  to  a  warming  of  the
troposphere and a cooling of the stratosphere due to CO2 (IPCC,
1996). Reductions in stratospheric ozone lead to a further cooling,
particularly  in  the  stratosphere  at  high  latitudes. Anthropogenic
sulphate  aerosols  cool  the  troposphere  with  little  effect  on  the
stratosphere. When these three forcings are included in a climate
model (e.g., Tett et al., 1996, 2000) albeit in a simplified way, the
simulated changes show tropospheric warming and stratospheric
cooling, as  observed  and  as  expected  on  physical  principles
(Figure 12.8). Note that this structure is distinct from that expected
from natural (internal and external) influences. 

The response of surface temperature to anthropogenic forcing
The spatial pattern of the simulated surface temperature response
to a steady increase in greenhouse gases is well documented (e.g.,
Kattenberg et al., 1996; Chapter 10). The warming is greater over

712

(a)

-0.2

0.2

0.4

0.4

-0.4

100
200
300

500

800

0.6

)
a
P
h
(
 

e
r
u
s
s
e
r

P

G
-0.4

0.6

0.6

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

-0.2

0.0

0.2

0.2

(b)

100
200
300

500

800

)
a
P
h
(
 

e
r
u
s
s
e
r

P

-0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.4

GS

-0.4

0.6

0.6

-0.8

0.0

-0.2

0.4

0.2

0.2

90oN

60oN

30oN

30oS

60oS

90oS

0.6
90oN

60oN

30oN

0

Latitude

30oS

60oS

90oS

0

Latitude

GSO
-1.3

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.2

(c)

100
200
300

500

800

)
a
P
h
(
 

e
r
u
s
s
e
r

P

-1.0

-0.2
0.0

0.2

-2.2

-0.2

0.0

0.2

(d)

)
a
P
h
(
 
e
r
u
s
s
e
r

P

100
200
300

-0.9

-0.4
-0.2

500

0.0
0.0

0.2
0.2

0.4

800

Obser vat ions

-1.2

0.0

0.6

-0.2

0.0

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.4

0.2

0.0

0.2

0.4

0.4

0.2

90oN

60oN

30oN

0

30oS

60oS

o

90 S

90oN

60oN

30oN

0

30oS

60oS

90oS

Latitude

Latitude

-1.2

-0.8

-0.4

0

0.4

0.8

1.2

-1.2

-0.8

-0.4

0

0.4

0.8

1.2

Figure 12.8: Simulated and observed zonal mean temperature change as a function of latitude and height from Tett et al. (1996). The contour
interval is 0.1C. All signals are defined to be the difference between the 1986 to 1995 decadal mean and the 20 year 1961 to 1980 mean. (a),
increases in CO2 only (G); (b), as (a), but with a simple representation of sulphate aerosols added (GS); (c), as (b), with observed changes in
stratospheric ozone (GSO); (d), observed changes.

land than over ocean and generally small during the 20th century
over  the  Southern  Ocean  and  northern  North  Atlantic  where
mixing extends to considerable depth. The warming is amplified
in high latitudes in winter by the recession of sea ice and snow,
and is close to zero over sea ice in summer. 

Despite the qualitative consistency of these general features,
there is considerable variation from model to model. In Chapter
9, it was noted that the spatial correlation between the transient
response to increasing CO2 in different models in scenarios to the
middle  of  the  21st  century  was  typically  0.65.  In  contrast, the
spatial  correlation  between  the  temperature  response  to
greenhouses gases only, and greenhouse gases and aerosols in the
same model was typically 0.85 (see Chapter 9, Table 9.2). Hence,
attempts to detect separate greenhouse gas and aerosol patterns in
different  models  may  not  give  consistent  results  (see  Section
12.4.3.2).

12.2.4  Some Important Statistical Considerations

Most recent studies (Hegerl et al., 1996, 1997, 2000, 2001; North
and Stevens, 1998; Allen and Tett, 1999; Tett et al., 1999, 2000;
Berliner et al., 2000; North and Wu, 2001; Stott et al., 2001) have
used a regression approach in which it is assumed that observa-

tions  can  be  represented  as  a  linear  combination  of  candidate
signals  plus  noise  (see  Appendices  12.1  and  12.2).  Other
approaches, such  as  pattern  correlation  (Santer  et  al., 1995,
1996a;  see  also  Appendix  12.3), complement  the  regression
approach, being  particularly  valuable  in  cases  where  model-
simulated  response  patterns  are  particularly  uncertain.  In  all
cases, the signal patterns are obtained from climate models. In the
regression  approach,
the  unknown  signal  amplitudes  are
estimated from observations. The uncertainty of these estimates
that  is  caused  by  natural  variability  in  the  observations  is
expressed with confidence intervals. Detection of an individual
signal is achieved when the confidence interval for its amplitude
does  not  include  zero.  Overall  detection  (that  some  climate
change  has  taken  place)  is  achieved  when  the  joint  confidence
interval on the signals considered does not encompass the origin.

Attribution and consistency
Detecting  that  some  climate  change  has  taken  place  does  not
immediately  imply  that  we  know  the  cause  of  the  detected
change. The practical approach to attribution that has been taken
by climatologists includes a demand for consistency between the
signal  amplitudes  projected  by  climate  models  and  estimated
from  observations  (Hasselmann, 1997).  Consequently, several

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

713

studies, including Hegerl et al. (1997, 2000) and Tett et al. (1999,
2000)  have  performed  an  attribution consistency  test  that  is
designed  to  detect  inconsistency  between  observed  and  model
projected  signal  amplitudes.  This  test  is  a  useful  adjunct  to
detection because it provides an objective means of identifying
model-simulated signal amplitudes that are significantly different
from those estimated from observations. However, the test does
not give the final word on attribution because it is designed to
identify  evidence  of  inconsistency  rather  than  evidence  for
consistency between modelled and observed estimates of signal
strength.  A  further  refinement  (e.g., Stott  et  al., 2001)  is  to
consider the full range of signals believed, on physical grounds,
to  be  likely  to  have  had  a  significant  impact  on  recent  climate
change  and  to  identify  those  subsets  of  these  signals  that  are
consistent with recent observations. If all these subsets contain an
anthropogenic component, for example, then at least part of the
observed  change  can  be  attributed  to  anthropogenic  influence.
Levine and Berliner (1999) point out that a test that searches for
consistency is available (Brown et al., 1995), but it has not yet
been used in attribution studies. Bayesian statisticians approach
the problem more directly by estimating the posterior probability
that the signal amplitudes projected by climate models are close
to those in the observed climate. Berliner et al. (2000) provides a
demonstration.

The use of climate models to estimate natural internal variability
Climate models play a critical role in these studies because they
provide  estimates  of  natural  internal  variability  as  well  as  the
signals. In most studies an estimate of natural internal variability
is needed to optimise the search for the signal and this is usually
obtained from a long control simulation. In addition, a separate
estimate  of  natural  variability  is  required  to  determine  the
uncertainty of the amplitude estimates. Unfortunately, the short
instrumental record gives only uncertain estimates of variability
on the 30 to 50 year time-scales that are important for detection
and  attribution  and  palaeo-data  presently  lacks  the  necessary
spatial  coverage  (see  Section  12.2.2).  Thus  a  second  control
integration  is  generally  used  to  estimate  the  uncertainty  of  the
amplitude  estimates  that  arises  from  natural  climate  variability
(e.g., Hegerl et al., 1996; Tett et al., 1999). 

Fixed and temporally-varying response patterns
Detection and attribution studies performed up to the SAR used
fixed signal patterns that did not evolve with time. These studies
were hampered because the mean large-scale response of climate
to different types of anomalous forcing tends to be similar (e.g.,
Mitchell et al., 1995a; Reader and Boer, 1998; see also Figure
12.3). Recent studies have been able to distinguish more clearly
between  signals  from  anthropogenic  and  other  sources  by
including information from climate models about their temporal
evolution. Tett et al. (1999, 2000) and Stott et al. (2001) in related
studies  have  used  a  space-time approach  in  which  the  signal
pattern evolves on the decadal time-scale over a 50-year period.
North and Wu (2001) also use a space-time approach. North and
Stevens  (1998)  used  a  related  space-frequency approach  (see
Appendix 12.2). 

Allowance for noise in signal patterns
Most  studies  have  assumed  that  signal  patterns  are  noise  free.
This  is  a  reasonable  assumption  for  fixed  pattern  studies  (see
Appendix  12.2)  but  space-time  estimates  of  the  20th  century
climate change obtained from small ensembles of forced climate
simulations are contaminated by the models internal variability.
Allen and Tett (1999) point out that noise in the signal patterns
will  tend  to  make  the  standard  detection  algorithm  (e.g.,
Hasselmann, 1993, 1997)  somewhat  conservative.  Methods  for
accommodating this source of noise have been available for more
than a century (Adcock, 1878; see also Ripley and Thompson,
1987). Allen and Stott (2000) recently applied such a method and
found that, while the question of which signals could be detected
was generally unaffected, the estimated amplitude of individual
signals  was  sensitive  to  this  modification  of  the  procedure.
Another  source  of  uncertainty  concerns  differences  in  signal
patterns between different models. Recent studies (Allen et al.,
2000a,b; Barnett et al., 2000; Hegerl et al., 2000) consider the
sensitivity of detection and attribution results to these differences. 

12.3 Qualitative Comparison of Observed and Modelled 

Climate Change 

12.3.1 Introduction

Temporal and spatial scales used in detection studies
While  a  growing  number  of  long  control  simulations  are
becoming available, there remain limitations on the spatial scales
that  can  be  included  in  global  scale  detection  and  attribution
studies. Present day control simulations, which range from 300 to
about 2,000 years in length, are not long enough to simultane-
ously estimate internal variability on the 30 to 50 year time-scale
over a broad range of spatial scales.  Consequently, detection and
attribution studies are conducted in a reduced space that includes
only  large  spatial  scales.  This  space  is  selected  so  that  it
represents  the  signals  well  and  allows  reliable  estimation  of
internal  variability  on  the  scales  retained  (see Appendix  12.4).
Recently, the scale selection process has been augmented with a
statistical procedure that checks for consistency between model
simulated and observed variability on the scales that are retained
(Allen and Tett, 1999).

This  section  presents  a  qualitative  assessment  of  consistencies
and inconsistencies between the observed climate changes identi-
fied in Chapter 2 and model projections of anthropogenic climate
change described in Chapter 9. 

Most formal detection and attribution studies concentrate on
variables  with  high  climate  change  signal-to-noise  ratios, good
observational data coverage, and consistent signals from different
model simulations, mainly using mean surface air temperatures
or zonal mean upper-air temperatures. To enhance the signal-to-
noise  ratio, they  generally  consider  variations  on  large  spatial
scales and time-scales of several decades or longer.

There are many studies that have identified areas of qualita-
tive  consistency  and  inconsistency  between  observed  and
modelled  climate  change.  While  the  evidence  for  an  anthro-
pogenic influence on climate from such studies is less compelling
than from formal attribution studies, a broad range of evidence of

714

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

qualitative consistency between observed and modelled climate
change is also required. In addition, areas of qualitative consis-
tency may suggest the possibility for further formal detection and
attribution study. 

12.3.2 Thermal Indicators

Surface temperature
Global  mean  surface  air  temperature  has  been  used  in  many
climate  change  detection  studies.  The  warming  shown  in  the
instrumental observations over the last 140 years is larger than that
over  a  comparable  period  in  any  of  the  multi-century  control
simulations carried out to date (e.g., Figure 12.1; Stouffer et al.,
2000). If the real world internal variability on this time-scale is no
greater than that of the models, then the temperature change over
the  last  140  years  has  been  unusual  and  therefore  likely  to  be
externally forced. This is supported by palaeo-reconstructions of
the last six centuries (Mann et al., 1998) and the last 1,000 years
(Briffa  et  al., 1998;  2000;  Jones  et  al., 1998;  Crowley, 2000;
Crowley and Lowery, 2000; Mann et al., 2000), which show that
the  20th  century  warming  is  highly  unusual.  Three  of  the  five
years  (1995, 1996  and  1998)  added  to  the  instrumental  record
since the SAR are the warmest globally in the instrumental record,
consistent with the expectation that increases in greenhouse gases
will lead to sustained long-term warming.

When anthropogenic factors are included, models provide a
plausible explanation of the changes in global mean temperature
over the last hundred years (Figure 12.7). It is conceivable that
this agreement between models and observations is spurious. For
example, if a models response to greenhouse gas increases is too
large (small) and the sulphate aerosol forcing too large (small),
these errors could compensate. Differences in the spatio-temporal
patterns  of  response  to  greenhouse  gases  and  sulphate  forcing
nevertheless  allow  some  discrimination  between  them, so  this
compensation is not complete. On the other hand, when forced
with known natural forcings, models produce a cooling over the
second half of the 20th century (see Figure 12.7) rather than the
warming trend shown in the observed record. The discrepancy is
too  large  to  be  explained  through  model  estimates  of  internal
variability  and  unlikely  to  be  explained  through  uncertainty  in
forcing  history  (Tett  et  al., 2000).  Schneider  and  Held  (2001)
applied  a  technique  to  isolate  those  spatial  patterns  of  decadal
climate  change  in  observed  surface  temperature  data  over  the
20th century which are most distinct from interannual variability.
They find a spatial pattern which is similar to model-simulated
greenhouse gas and sulphate aerosol fingerprints in both July and
December.  The  time  evolution  of  this  pattern  shows  a  strong
trend  with  little  influence  of  interannual  variability.  (Note  that
this technique is related to optimal fingerprinting, but does not
use prior information on the pattern of expected climate change.)

Other thermal indicators
While most attention in formal detection and attribution studies
has been paid to mean surface air temperatures, a number of other
thermal  indicators  of  climate  variations  are  also  discussed  in
Chapter 2. Many of these, including warming in sub-surface land
temperatures measured in bore holes, warming indicators in ice

cores  and  corresponding  bore  holes, warming  in  sub-surface
ocean temperatures, retreat of glaciers, and reductions in Arctic
sea-ice extent and in snow cover, are consistent with the recent
observed  warming  in  surface  air  temperatures  and  with  model
projections of the response to increasing greenhouse gases. Other
observed changes in thermal indicators include a reduction in the
mean annual cycle (winters warming faster than summers) and in
the mean diurnal temperature range (nights warming faster than
days)  over  land  (see  Chapter  2).  While  the  changes  in  annual
cycle are consistent with most model projections, the observed
changes in diurnal temperature range are larger than simulated in
most models for forcings due to increasing greenhouse gases and
sulphate aerosols this century (see Chapters 2 and 8). However,
the spatial and temporal coverage of data for changes in observed
diurnal  temperature  range  is  less  than  for  changes  in  mean
temperatures, leading  to  greater  uncertainty  in  the  observed
global  changes  (Karoly  and  Braganza, 2001;  Schnur, 2001).
Also, the  observed  reductions  in  diurnal  temperature  range  are
associated with increases in cloudiness (see Chapter 2), which are
not simulated well by models. Few models include the indirect
effects of sulphate aerosols on clouds. 

Changes  in  sea-ice  cover  and  snow  cover  in  the  transition
seasons  in  the  Northern  Hemisphere  are  consistent  with  the
observed  and  simulated  high  latitude  warming.  The  observed
trends  in  Northern  Hemisphere  sea-ice  cover  (Parkinson  et  al.,
1999) are consistent with those found in climate model simula-
tions  of  the  last  century  including  anthropogenic  forcing
(Vinnikov  et  al., 1999).  Sea-ice  extent  in  the  Southern
Hemisphere does not show any consistent trends.

Compatibility of surface and free atmosphere temperature trends
There  is  an  overall  consistency  in  the  patterns  of  upper  air
temperature  changes  with  those  expected  from  increasing
greenhouse  gases  and  decreasing  stratospheric  ozone  (tropo-
spheric warming and stratospheric cooling). It is hard to explain
the observed changes in the vertical in terms of natural forcings
alone, as  discussed  in  Section  12.2.3.2  (see  Figure  12.8).
However, there are some inconsistencies between the observed
and  modelled  vertical  patterns  of 
temperature  change.
Observations indicate that, over the last three to four decades, the
tropical atmosphere has warmed in the layer up to about 300 hPa
and cooled above (Parker et al., 1997; Gaffen et al., 2000). Model
simulations of the recent past produce a warming of the tropical
atmosphere to about 200 hPa, with a maximum at around 300 hPa
not  seen  in  the  observations.  This  discrepancy  is  less  evident
when co-located model and radiosonde data are used (Santer et
al., 2000), or if volcanic forcing is taken into account, but does
not  go  away  entirely  (Bengtsson  et  al., 1999;  Brown  et  al.,
2000b). The MSU satellite temperature record is too short and
too poorly resolved in the vertical to be of use here.

Comparison  of  upper  air  and  surface  temperature  data  in
Chapter 2 shows that the lower to mid-troposphere has warmed
less than the surface since 1979. The satellite-measured tempera-
ture over a broad layer in the lower troposphere around 750 hPa
since 1979 shows no significant trend, in contrast to the warming
trend  measured  over  the  same  time  period  at  the  surface.  This
disparity  has  been  assessed  recently  by  a  panel  of  experts

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

715

(National Academy of Sciences, 2000). They concluded that the
troposphere actually may have warmed much less rapidly than the
surface from 1979 to the late 1990s, due both to natural causes
(e.g., the sequence of volcanic eruptions that occurred within this
particular 20-year period) and human activities (e.g., the cooling
in  the  upper  troposphere  resulting  from  ozone  depletion  in  the
stratosphere) (see also Santer et al., 2000). They also concluded
that it is not currently possible to determine whether or not there
exists a fundamental discrepancy between modelled and observed
atmospheric temperature changes since the advent of satellite data
in 1979. Over the last 40 years, observed warming trends in the
lower troposphere and at the surface are similar, indicating that the
lower troposphere warmed faster than the surface for about two
decades prior to 1979 (Brown et al., 2000a; Gaffen et al., 2000).
However, in  the  extra-tropical  Eurasian  winter  some  additional
warming of the surface relative to the lower or mid-troposphere
might  be  expected  since  1979.  This  is  due  to  an  overall  trend
towards  an  enhanced  positive  phase  of  the  Arctic  Oscillation
(Thompson et al., 2000) which has this signature.

Model simulations of large-scale changes in tropospheric and
surface temperatures are generally statistically consistent with the
observed changes (see Section 12.4). However, models generally
predict  an  enhanced  rate  of  warming  in  the  mid-  to  upper
troposphere  over  that  at  the  surface  (i.e., a  negative  lapse-rate
feedback  on  the  surface  temperature  change)  whereas  observa-
tions  show  mid-tropospheric  temperatures  warming  no  faster
than surface temperatures. It is not clear whether this discrepancy
arises  because  the  lapse-rate  feedback  is  consistently  over-
represented in climate models or because of other factors such as
observational  error  or  neglected  forcings  (Santer  et  al., 2000).
Note  that  if  models  do  simulate  too  large  a  negative  lapse-rate
feedback, they  will  tend  to  underestimate  the  sensitivity  of
climate to a global radiative forcing perturbation. 

Stratospheric trends
A  recent  assessment  of  temperature  trends  in  the  stratosphere
(Chanin and Ramaswamy, 1999) discussed the cooling trends in
the lower stratosphere described in Chapter 2. It also identified
large cooling trends in the middle and upper stratosphere, which
are  consistent  with  anthropogenic  forcing  due  to  stratospheric
ozone  depletion  and  increasing  greenhouse  gas  concentrations.
An increase in water vapour, possibly due to increasing methane
oxidation, is another plausible explanation for the lower strato-
spheric cooling (Forster and Shine, 1999) but global stratospheric
water vapour trends are poorly understood.

12.3.3 Hydrological Indicators

As discussed in Chapter 2, there is less confidence in observed
variations in hydrological indicators than for surface temperature,
because of the difficulties in taking such measurements and the
small-scale  variations  of  precipitation. There  is  general  consis-
tency between the changes in mean precipitation in the tropics
over  the  last  few  decades  and  changes  in  ENSO.  There  is  no
general consistency between observed changes in mean tropical
precipitation and model simulations. In middle and high latitudes
in the Northern Hemisphere, the observed increase in precipita-

tion  is  consistent  with  most  model  simulations.  Observed
changes  in  ocean  salinity  in  the  Southern  Ocean  appear  to  be
consistent  with  increased  precipitation  there, as  expected  from
model simulations (Wong et al., 1999; Banks et al., 2000).

The observed increases in the intensity of heavy precipitation
in  the  tropics  and  in  convective  weather  systems  described  in
Chapter 2 are consistent with moist thermodynamics in a warmer
atmosphere and model simulations. Observed increases of water
vapour in the lower troposphere in regions where there is adequate
data  coverage  are  also  consistent  with  model  simulations.  As
discussed  in  Chapter  7, different  theories  suggest  opposite
variations  of  water  vapour  in  the  upper  troposphere  associated
with  an  increased  greenhouse  effect  and  surface  warming.  The
quality, amount and coverage of water vapour data in the upper
troposphere do not appear to be sufficient to resolve this issue.

12.3.4  Circulation

In middle and high latitudes of both hemispheres, there has been
a trend over the last few decades towards one phase of the North
Atlantic Oscillation/Arctic Oscillation and of the Antarctic high
latitude  mode, sometimes  also  referred  to  as  annular  modes,
(Chapter  2;  Thompson  et  al., 2000).  These  are  approximately
zonally  symmetric  modes  of  variability  of  the  atmospheric
circulation.  Both  trends  have  been  associated  with  reduced
surface  pressure  at  high  latitudes, stronger  high  latitude  jets, a
stronger polar vortex in the winter lower stratosphere and, in the
Northern Hemisphere, winter warming over the western parts of
the  continents  associated  with  increased  warm  advection  from
ocean regions. The trend is significant and cannot be explained
by  internal  variability  in  some  models  (Gillett  et  al., 2000b).
These  dynamical  changes  explain  only  part  of  the  observed
Northern Hemisphere warming (Gillett et al., 2000b; Thompson
et  al., 2000).  Modelling  studies  suggest  a  number  of  possible
causes  of  these  circulation  changes, including  greenhouse  gas
increases (Fyfe  et  al., 1999; Paeth  et  al., 1999; Shindell  et  al.,
1999)  and  stratospheric  ozone  decreases  (Graf  et  al., 1998;
Volodin  and  Galin, 1999).  Some  studies  have  also  shown  that
volcanic  eruptions  (Graf  et  al., 1998;  Mao  and  Robock, 1998;
Kirchner et al., 1999) can induce such changes in circulation on
interannual  time-scales.  Shindell  et  al. (2001)  show  that  both
solar  and  volcanic  forcing  are  unlikely  to  explain  the  recent
trends in the annular modes. 

The  majority  of  models  simulate  the  correct  sign  of  the
observed  trend  in  the  North Atlantic  or Arctic  Oscillation  when
forced  with  anthropogenic  increases  in  greenhouse  gases  and
sulphate aerosols, but almost all underestimate the magnitude of
the trend (e.g., Osborn et al., 1999; Gillett et al., 2000b; Shindell et
al., 1999). Some studies suggest that a better resolved stratosphere
is  necessary  to  simulate  the  correct  magnitude  of  changes  in
dynamics involving the annular modes (e.g., Shindell et al., 2001).

12.3.5 Combined Evidence

The combination of independent but consistent evidence should
strengthen  our  confidence  in  identifying  a  human  influence  on
climate. The physical and dynamical consistency of most of the

716

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

thermal and hydrological changes described above supports this
conclusion. However, it is important to bear in mind that much of
this evidence is associated with a global and regional pattern of
warming  and  therefore  cannot  be  considered  to  be  completely
independent evidence. 

An elicitation of individual experts subjective assessment
of  evidence  for  climate  change  detection  and  attribution  is
being carried out (Risbey et al., 2000). This will help to better
understand the nature of the consensus amongst experts on the
subject of climate change attribution. 

12.4 Quantitative Comparison of Observed and Modelled 

Climate Change

A major advance since the SAR has been the increase in the
range of techniques used to assess the quantitative agreement
between  observed  and  modelled  climate  change, and  the
evaluation of the degree to which the results are independent
of the assumptions made in applying those techniques (Table
12.1).  Also, some  studies  have  based  their  conclusions  on
estimates  of  the  amplitude  of  anthropogenic  signals  in  the
observations  and  consideration  of  their  consistency  with
model projections. Estimates of the changes in forcing up to
1990 used in these studies, where available, are given in Table
12.2. In this section we assess new studies using a number of
techniques, ranging  from  descriptive  analyses  of  simple
indices  to  sophisticated  optimal  detection  techniques  that
incorporate the time and space-dependence of signals over the
20th century. 

We  begin  in  Section  12.4.1  with  a  brief  discussion  of
detection  studies  that  use  simple  indices  and  time-series
analyses. In Section 12.4.2 we discuss recent pattern correla-
tion studies (see Table 12.1) that assess the similarity between
observed  and  modelled  climate  changes.  Pattern  correlation
studies  were  discussed  extensively  in  the  SAR, although
subsequently they received some criticism. We therefore also
consider  the  criticism  and  studies  that  have  evaluated  the
performance  of  pattern  correlation  techniques.  Optimal
detection  studies  of  various  kinds  are  assessed  in  Section
12.4.3. We consider first studies that use a single fixed spatial
signal pattern (Section 12.4.3.1) and then studies that simul-
taneously  incorporate  more  than  one  fixed  signal  pattern
(Section 12.4.3.2). Finally, optimal detection studies that take
into account temporal as well as spatial variations (so-called
space-time techniques) are assessed in Section 12.4.3.3. 

We provide various aids to the reader to clarify the distinc-
tion between the various detection and attribution techniques
that  have  been  used.  Box  12.1  in  Section  12.4.3  provides  a
simple  intuitive  description  of  optimal  detection.  Appendix
12.1 provides a more technical description and relates optimal
detection  to  general  linear  regression.  The  differences
between  fixed  pattern, space-time  and  space-frequency
optimal detection methods are detailed in Appendix 12.2 and
the  relationship  between  pattern  correlation  and  optimal
detection methods is discussed in Appendix 12.3. Dimension
reduction, a  necessary  part  of  optimal  detection  studies, is
discussed in Appendix 12.4.

12.4.1 Simple Indices and Time-series Methods

An index used in many climate change detection studies is global
mean  surface  temperature, either  as  estimated  from  the  instru-
mental record of the last 140 years, or from palaeo-reconstruc-
tions. Some studies of the characteristics of the global mean and
its relationship to forcing indices are assessed in Section 12.2.3.
Here  we  consider  briefly  some  additional  studies  that  examine
the spatial structure of observed trends or use more sophisticated
time-series analysis techniques to characterise the behaviour of
global, hemispheric and zonal mean temperatures. 

Spatial patterns of trends in surface temperature
An  extension  of  the  analysis  of  global  mean  temperature  is  to
compare the spatial structure of observed trends (see Chapter 2,
Section  2.2.2.4)  with  those  simulated  by  models  in  coupled
control  simulations.  Knutson  et  al. (2000)  examined  observed
1949  to  1997  surface  temperature  trends  and  found  that  over
about half the globe they are significantly larger than expected
from  natural  low-frequency  internal  variability  as  simulated  in
long control simulations with the GFDL model (Figure 12.9). A
similar result was obtained by Boer et al. (2000a) using 1900 to
1995  trends.  The  level  of  agreement  between  observed  and
simulated  trends  increases  substantially  in  both  studies  when
observations  are  compared  with  simulations  that  incorporate
transient greenhouse gases and sulphate aerosol forcing (compare
Figure 12.9c with Figure 12.9d, see also Chapter 8, Figure 8.18).
While there are areas, such as the extra-tropical Pacific and North
Atlantic  Ocean, where  the  GFDL  model  warms  significantly
more than has been observed, the anthropogenic climate change
simulations  do  provide  a  plausible  explanation  of  temperature
trends  over  the  last  century  over  large  areas  of  the  globe.
Delworth and Knutson (2000) find that one in five of their anthro-
pogenic climate change simulations showed a similar evolution
of global mean surface temperature over the 20th century to that
observed, with strong warming, particularly in the high latitude
North Atlantic, in the first half of the century. This would suggest
that  the  combination  of  anthropogenic  forcing  and  internal
variability may be sufficient to account for the observed early-
century  warming  (as  suggested  by, e.g., Hegerl  et  al., 1996),
although other recent studies have suggested that natural forcing
may  also  have  contributed  to  the  early  century  warming  (see
Section 12.4.3).

Correlation structures in surface temperature
Another extension is to examine the lagged and cross-correlation
structure of observed and simulated hemispheric mean tempera-
ture  as  in  Wigley  et  al., (1998a).  They  find  large  differences
between the observed and model correlation structure that can be
explained by accounting for the combined influences of anthro-
pogenic and solar forcing and internal variability in the observa-
tions.  Solar  forcing  alone  is  not  found  to  be  a  satisfactory
explanation  for  the  discrepancy  between  the  correlation
structures  of  the  observed  and  simulated  temperatures.  Karoly
and Braganza (2001) also examined the correlation structure of
surface  air  temperature  variations.  They  used  several  simple
indices,
the  meridional

including  the  land-ocean  contrast,

Study

Signals

Santer et al.,
1996

G, GS, O
etc.

Hegerl,
1996, 1997

G, GS

G, GS,
GSO
G, GS,
Vol,  Sol

G, GS,
GSO
G,GS,
Sol, Vol

Tett et al.,
1996
Hegerl et
al., 2000

Allen and
Tett, 1999
Tett et al.,
1999
Stott et al.,
2001
North and
Stevens, 1998
Leroy, 1998

North and
Wu, 2001
Barnett et
al., 1999

Signal
source
Equilibrium
/ future
LLNL,
GFDL R15,
HadCM2
Future
ECHAM3,
HadCM2

Historical
HadCM2
Future,
ECHAM3,
HadCM2

Historical
HadCM2
Historical
HadCM2

Noise
source
GFDL R15,
HadCM2,
ECHAM1

GFDL R15,
ECHAM1,
HadCM2;
observation
HadCM2

ECHAM3,
HadCM2

HadCM2

HadCM2

GFDL
ECHAM1,
EBM

Same+Had
CM2
ECHAM3,
ECHAM4,
HadCM2,
GFDL R15

F,
Pattern

F,
Corr
F,
Pattern

F,
pattern
Time-
space

Freq-
Space

Time-
space
F,
Pattern

G, GS,
Sol, Vol

Historical
EBM

G, GS,
GSIO
Sol+vol

Future
ECHAM3,
ECHAM4,
HadCM2,
GFDL R15

S

V

S

V

S

S

S

V

S

Internal
variability

Internal
variability
Internal
variability;
model
uncertainty
Internal
variability
Internal
variability,
2 solar signals

Internal
variability

Observed
sampling
error, model
uncertainty,
internal
variability

Internal
variability
Internal
variability

1, 2

30, 50 years
Annual and
JJA

35 years

1

30, 50 years
Annual and
JJA

35 years
Annual
50 years
decadal and
seasonal

Annual and
hemispheric
summer

Annual

50 years
JJA trends

35 years
annual
50, 100 years
decadal

1, 2

1, 2

2  or more

4

2

3

2  or more

G,
GS,
S

GSO

GS, G, S
(not all
cases)

GSO and
also G
G, GS,
Sol (Vol)

G, S, Vol

G, Vol

GS, G, S
(S not
all cases)

G

G, SIT,
GSTIO
and Nat

GSTI

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

717

Table 12.1: Summary of the main detection and attribution studies considered.

Method

F,
Corr

S, V  Sources of
uncertainty
Internal
variability

V

No. of
patterns
1

Detect

GSO

Time-scale

25 year
Annual and
seasonal

Hill  et al.,
2001
Tett et al.,
2000

G, GSO,Sol Historical
HadCM2
Historical
HadCM3

G,GSTI,
GSTIO, Nat

HadCM2

F, pattern

HadCM3

Time-
space

F, pattern

V

Internal
variability

35 years,
annual

2

The columns contain the following information:
Study :
Signals :

Signal  source :

the main reference to the study.
outlines the principal signals considered: G-greenhouse gases, S-sulphate aerosol direct effect, T-tropospheric ozone,
I-sulphate aerosol indirect effect, O-stratospheric ozone, Sol-solar, Vol-volcanoes, Nat-solar and volcanoes.
historical indicates the signal is taken from a historical hindcast simulation, future indicates that the pattern is 
taken from a prediction.
origin of the noise estimates.
F means fixed spatial pattern, corr indicates a correlation study, pattern an optimal detection study.
V indicates a vertical temperature pattern, S a horizontal temperature pattern.

Noise source :
Method :
S, V :
Sources of uncertainty : any additional uncertainties allowed for are indicated. Modelled internal variability is allowed for in all studies.
Time-scale :
No. of patterns :
Detect :

the lengths of time interval considered. (JJA= June-July-August)
the number of patterns considered simultaneously.
signals detected.

718

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

Table 12.2: Estimated forcing from pre-industrial period to 1990 in simulations used in detection studies (Wm2). GS indicates only direct
sulphate forcing included, GSI indicates both direct and indirect effects included. Other details of the detection studies are given in Table 12.1.
Details of the models are given in Chapter 8, Table 8.1.

Model

Aerosol

Baseline
forcing

1990 aerosol
forcing

HadCM2
HadCM3
ECHAM3/LSG
ECHAM4/OPYC
GFDL_R30
CGCM1,2

GS
GSI
GS
GSI
GS
GS

1760
1860
1880
1760
1760
1760

0.6
1.0
0.7
0.9
0.6
~ 1.0

1990
greenhouse
gas forcing
1.9
2.0
1.7
2.2
2.1
~2.2

Source of estimate

Mitchell and Johns, 1997
Tett et al., 2000
Roeckner
Roeckner et al., 1999
Stouffer
Boer et al., 2000a,b

gradient, and  the  magnitude  of  the  seasonal  cycle, to  describe
global climate variations and showed that for natural variations,
they contain information independent of the global mean temper-
ature. They found that the observed trends in these indices over
the  last  40  years  are  unlikely  to  have  occurred  due  to  natural
climate variations and that they are consistent with model simula-
tions of anthropogenic climate change.

Statistical models of time-series
Further  extensions  involve  the  use  of  statistical  models of
global, hemispheric  and  regional  temperature  time-series.  Note
however, that  the  stochastic  models  used  in  these  time-series
studies are generally not built from physical principles and are
thus not as strongly constrained by our knowledge of the physical
climate  system  as  climate  models. All  these  studies  depend  on
inferring  the  statistical  properties  of  the  time-series  from  an
assumed  noise  model  with  parameters  estimated  from  the
residuals. As such, the conclusions depend on the appropriateness
or otherwise of the noise model.

Tol  and  de  Vos  (1998), using  a  Bayesian  approach, fit  a
hierarchy  of  time-series  models  to  global  mean  near-surface
temperature. They find that there is a robust statistical relation-
ship between atmospheric CO2 and global mean temperature and
that  natural  variability  is  unlikely  to  be  an  explanation  for  the
observed temperature change of the past century. Tol and Vellinga
(1998)  further  conclude  that  solar  variation  is  also  an  unlikely
explanation.  Zheng  and  Basher  (1999)  use  similar  time-series
models and show that deterministic trends are detectable over a
large part of the globe. Walter et al. (1998), using neural network
models, estimate that the warming during the past century due to
greenhouse  gas  increases  is  0.9  to  1.3C  and  that  the  counter-
balancing  cooling  due  to  sulphate  aerosols  is  0.2  to  0.4C.
Similar  results  are  obtained  with  a  multiple  regression  model
(Schonwiese et al., 1997). Kaufmann and Stern (1997) examine
the lagged-covariance structure of hemispheric mean temperature
and find it consistent with unequal anthropogenic aerosol forcing
in  the  two  hemispheres.  Smith  et  al. (2001), using  similar
bivariate time-series models, find that the evidence for causality
becomes weak when the effects of ENSO are taken into account.
Bivariate  time-series  models  of  hemispheric  mean  temperature
that  account  for  boxdiffusion  estimates  of  the  response  to
anthropogenic and solar forcing are found to fit the observations

significantly better than competing statistical models. All of these
studies draw conclusions that are consistent with those of earlier
trend detection studies (as described in the SAR).

In summary, despite various caveats in each individual result,
time-series  studies  suggest  that  natural  signals  and  internal
variability alone are unlikely to explain the instrumental record,
and  that  an  anthropogenic  component  is  required  to  explain
changes in the most recent four or five decades.

12.4.2  Pattern Correlation Methods

12.4.2.1 Horizontal patterns
Results  from  studies  using  pattern  correlations  were  reported
extensively in the SAR (for example, Santer et al., 1995, 1996c;
Mitchell et al., 1995b). They found that the patterns of simulated
surface  temperature  change  due  to  the  main  anthropogenic
factors  in  recent  decades  are  significantly  closer  to  those
observed than expected by chance. Pattern correlations have been
used because they are simple and are insensitive to errors in the
amplitude of the spatial pattern of response and, if centred, to the
global mean response. They are also less sensitive than regres-
sion-based optimal detection techniques to sampling error in the
model-simulated response. The aim of pattern-correlation studies
is to use the differences in the large-scale patterns of response, or
fingerprints, to distinguish between different causes of climate
change. 

Strengths and weaknesses of correlation methods
Pattern  correlation  statistics  come  in  two  types    centred  and
uncentred (see Appendix 12.3). The centred (uncentred) statistic
measures the similarity of two patterns after (without) removal of
the global mean. Legates and Davis (1997) criticised the use of
centred correlation in detection studies. They argued that correla-
tions could increase while observed and simulated global means
diverge. This was precisely the reason centred correlations were
introduced (e.g., Santer et al., 1993): to provide an indicator that
was  statistically  independent  of  global  mean  temperature
changes. If both global mean changes and centred pattern correla-
tions point towards the same explanation of observed temperature
changes, it  provides  more  compelling  evidence  than  either  of
these indicators in isolation. An explicit analysis of the role of the
global mean in correlation-based studies can be provided by the

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

719

s
a
g

 
e
s
u
o
h
n
e
e
r
g

 
r
e
b
m
e
m
-
e
v
i
f
 
a
 
m
o
r
f
 

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e
 
s
a
 

d
o
i
r
e
p

 
e
m
a
s
 
e
h
t
 
r
o
f
 
s
d
n
e
r
t
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t
 
r
i
a
 
e
c
a
f
r
u
s
 

d
e
t
a
l
u
m
S
 
)
b
(
 
.

i

7
9
9
1

 

o
t
 

9
4
9
1

 
r
o
f
 
s
d
n
e
r
t
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t
 
r
i
a
 
e
c
a
f
r
u
s
 

d
e
v
r
e
s
b
O

 
)
a
(
 
:
9
2
1

.

 
e
r
u
g
i
F

 

0
3
R
L
D
F
G
 
e
h
t
 

m
o
r
f
 

d
e
t
a
m

i
t
s
e
 
s
a
 
s
d
n
u
o
b

 
e
c
n
e
d
i
f
n
o
c
 

y
t
i
l
i
b
a
i
r
a
v

 
l
a
r
u
t
a
n
%
0
9

 

 
e
h
t
 
e
d
i
s
t
u
o

 
e
i
l
 
t
a
h
t
 
)
r
u
o
l
o
c
 

n
i
(
 
s
d
n
e
r
t
 

d
e
v
r
e
s
b
O

 

 
)
c
(
 
.
l
e
d
o
m
0
3
R
L
D
F
G
 
e
h
t
 

 

h
t
i

 

w
n
u
r
 
e
l
b
m
e
s
n
e
 
e
t
a
h
p
l
u
s
 
s
u
l
p

7
9
9
1

 

o
t
 

9
4
9
1

 

d
e
v
r
e
s
b
o

 

g
n
i
w
o
h
s
 
t
u
b

 
)
c
(
 
r
o
f
 
s
A

 
)
d
(
 
.

n
u
r
 
l
o
r
t
n
o
c
 
e
h
t
 

n
i
 
s
d
n
e
r
t
 
e
r
u
t
a
r
e
p
m
e
t
 
r
a
e
y
-
9
4

 
l
a
c
o
l
 
e
h
t
 

h
t
i

w

 
t
n
e
t
s
i
s
n
o
c
 
e
r
a
 
s
d
n
e
r
t
 

d
e
v
r
e
s
b
o

 
e
h
t
 
e
r
e
h
w
 
s
n
o
i
g
e
r
 

w
o
h
s
 
s
a
e
r
a
 

y
e
r
G

 
.

n
u
r
 
l
o
r
t
n
o
c

L
D
F
G
 
e
h
t
 

h
t
i

 

w
d
e
m
r
o
f
r
e
p

 
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
m

i
s
 
l
o
s
o
r
e
a
 
s
u
l
p

 
s
a
g

 
e
s
u
o
h
n
e
e
r
g

 
e
h
t
 

y
b

 

d
e
t
a
l
u
m

i
s
 
e
s
o
h
t
 

m
o
r
f
 
)
l
e
v
e
l
 

%
0
1

 
e
h
t
 
t
a
 
t
s
e
t
-
t
 
a
 

h
t
i

 

w
d
e
n
i
m
r
e
t
e
d

 
s
a
(
 
t
n
e
r
e
f
f
i
d

 

y
l
t
n
a
c
i
f
i
n
g
i
s
 
e
r
a
 
t
a
h
t
 
)
r
u
o
l
o
c
 

n
i
(
 
s
d
n
e
r
t

s
n
o
i
g
e
r
 
r
e
g
r
a
l
 
r
e
v
o

 
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
m

i
s
 

d
e
c
r
o
f
 
c
i
n
e
g
o
p
o
r
h
t
n
a
 
e
h
t
 
h
t
i

w

 
t
n
e
t
s
i
s
n
o
c
 
e
r
a
 
s
d
n
e
r
t
 

d
e
v
r
e
s
b
o

 
e
h
t
 
t
a
h
t
 
e
t
a
c
i
d
n
i
 
)
c
(
 

n
a
h
t
 
)
d
(
 

n
i
 
s
a
e
r
a
 

y
e
r
g

 
r
e
g
r
a
l
 
e
h
T

 
.
)
0
0
0
2

,
.
l
a

 
t
e
 

 

n
o
s
t
u
n
K
m
o
r
f
(
 
l
e
d
o
m
0
3
R

 

.
s
n
o
i
t
a
l
u
m
i
s
 
l
o
r
t
n
o
c
 
e
h
t
 

n
a
h
t

720

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

use of both centred and uncentred statistics. Pattern correlation-
based  detection  studies  account  for  spatial  auto-correlation
implicitly  by  comparing  the  observed  pattern  correlation  with
values that are realised in long control simulations (see Wigley et
al., 2000). These studies do not consider the amplitude of anthro-
pogenic  signals, and  thus  centred  correlations  alone  are  not
sufficient for the attribution of climate change. 

Wigley et al. (1998b) studied the performance of correlation
statistics  in  an  idealised  study  in  which  known  spatial  signal
patterns were combined with realistic levels of internal variability.
The statistics were found to perform well even when the signal is
contaminated with noise. They found, in agreement with Johns et
al. (2001),
that  using  an  earlier  base  period  can  enhance
detectability, but  that  much  of  this  advantage  is  lost  when  the
reduced  data  coverage  of  earlier  base  periods  is  taken  into
account.  They  also  found  that  reasonable  combinations  of
greenhouse gas and aerosol patterns are more easily detected than
the greenhouse gas pattern on its own. This last result indicates the
importance of reducing the uncertainty in the estimate of aerosol
forcing, particularly the indirect effects. In summary, we have a
better understanding of the behaviour of pattern correlation statis-
tics and reasons for the discrepancies between different studies. 

12.4.2.2 Vertical patterns 
As  noted  in  Section  12.3.2,
increases  in  greenhouse  gases
produce a distinctive change in the vertical profile of temperature.
Santer  et  al. (1996c)  assessed  the  significance  of  the  observed
changes  in  recent  decades  using  equilibrium  GCM  simulations
with changes in greenhouse gases, sulphate aerosols and strato-
spheric  ozone. This  study  has  been  extended  to  include  results
from  the  transient  AOGCM  simulations, additional  sensitivity
studies and estimates of internal variability from three different
models (Santer et al., 1996a). Results from this study are consis-
tent with the earlier results  the 25-year trend from 1963 to 1988
in  the  centred  correlation  statistic  between  the  observed  and
simulated  patterns  for  the  full  atmosphere  was  significantly
different  from  the  population  of  25-year  trends  in  the  control
simulations. The results were robust even if the estimates of noise
levels  were  almost  doubled, or  the  aerosol  response  (assumed
linear and additive) was halved. The aerosol forcing leads to a
smaller  warming  in  the  Northern  Hemisphere  than  in  the
Southern Hemisphere. 

Tett et al. (1996) refined Santer et al.s (1996a) study by using
ensembles of transient simulations which included increases in
CO2, and  sulphate  aerosols, and  reductions  in  stratospheric
ozone, as well as using an extended record of observations (see
Figure  12.8).  They  found  that  the  best  and  most  significant
agreement  with  observations  was  found  when  all  three  factors
were  included1.  Allen  and  Tett  (1999)  find  that  the  effect  of
greenhouse gases can be detected with these signal patterns using
optimal detection (see Appendix 12.1).

Folland et al. (1998) and Sexton et al. (2001) take a comple-
mentary approach using an atmospheric model forced with sea

1 Correction of an error in a data mask (Allen and Tett, 1999) did not
affect these conclusions, though the additional improvement due to
adding sulphate and ozone forcing was no longer significant.

surface  temperatures  (SST)  and  ice  extents  prescribed  from
observations.  The  correlation  between  the  observed  and
simulated temperature changes in the vertical relative to the base
period from 1961 to 1975 was computed. The experiments with
anthropogenic forcing (including some with tropospheric ozone
changes), give significantly higher correlations than when only
SST changes are included. 

Interpretation of results
Weber  (1996)  and  Michaels  and  Knappenburger  (1996)  both
criticised  the  Santer  et  al. (1996a)  results, quoting  upper  air
measurements analysed by Angell (1994). Weber argued that the
increasing pattern similarity over the full atmosphere (850 to 50
hPa)  resulted  mainly  from  a  Southern  Hemisphere  cooling
associated  with  stratospheric  ozone  depletion.  Santer  et  al.
(1996b) pointed out that when known biases in the radiosonde
data  are  removed  (e.g., Parker  et  al., 1997), or  satellite  or
operationally  analysed  data  are  used, the  greater  stratospheric
cooling  in  the  Southern  Hemisphere  all  but  disappears.  Weber
(1996)  is  correct  that  stratospheric  cooling  due  to  ozone  will
contribute to the pattern similarity over the full atmosphere, but
decreases  in  stratospheric  ozone  alone  would  be  expected  to
produce a tropospheric cooling, not a warming as observed. This
point should be born in mind when considering a later criticism
of  the  pattern  correlation  approach.  Both  Weber  (1996)  and
Michaels  and  Knappenburger  (1996)  note  that  the  greater
warming  of  the  Southern  Hemisphere  relative  to  the  Northern
Hemisphere from 1963 to 1988 has since reversed. They attribute
the  Southern  Hemisphere  warming  from  1963  to  the  recovery
from the cooling following the eruption of Mount Agung. Santer
et  al. (1996b)  claim  that  this  change  in  asymmetry  is  to  be
expected, because  the  heating  due  to  increases  in  greenhouse
gases  over  the  most  recent  years  has  probably  been  growing
faster than the estimated cooling due to increases in aerosols (see
Section  12.2.3.3).  Calculations  of  the  difference  in  the  rate  of
warming between the Northern and Southern Hemispheres vary
between  different  climate  models  and  as  a  function  of  time,
depending on the relative forcing due to greenhouse gases and
sulphate  aerosols, and  on  the  simulated  rate  of  oceanic  heat
uptake in the Southern Hemisphere (Santer et al., 1996b; Karoly
and Braganza, 2001). 

Assessing statistical significance of changes in the vertical
patterns of temperature
There  are  some  difficulties  in  assessing  the  statistical  signifi-
cance  in  detection  studies  based  on  changes  in  the  vertical
temperature profile. First, the observational record is short, and
subject to error, particularly at upper levels (Chapter 2). Second,
the model estimates of variability may not be realistic (Section
12.2.2), particularly in the stratosphere. Third, because of data
and model limitations, the number of levels used to represent
the stratosphere in detection studies to date is small, and hence
may not be adequate to allow an accurate representation of the
stratospheric response. Fourth, all models produce a maximum
warming in the upper tropical troposphere that is not apparent
in  the  observations  and  whose  impact  on  detection  results  is
difficult to quantify. Nevertheless, all the studies indicate that

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

721

Box 12.1: Optimal detection

Optimal detection is a technique that may help to provide a clearer separation of a climate change fingerprint from natural internal
climate variations. The principle is sketched in Figure 12.B1, below (after Hasselmann, 1976).

;

ROTATED SIGNAL 

+

+

S I G N A L



*

*

:

Suppose for simplicity that most of the natural variability can be described in terms of two modes (well-defined spatial patterns) of
variability. In the absence of climate change, the amplitudes of these two modes, plotted on a 2D diagram along OX and OY will
vary with time, and for a given fraction of occasions (usually chosen as 95 %), the amplitude of each mode will lie within the shaded
ellipse. Suppose we are attempting to detect a fingerprint that can be made up of a linear combination of the two patterns such that
it lies along OB. The signal to noise ratio is given by OB/OBn. Because our signal lies close to the direction of the main component
of variability, the signal to noise ratio is small. On the other hand, we can choose a direction OC that overlaps less with the main
component of natural variability such that the signal to noise ratio OC/OCn for the component of the signal that lies in direction
OC is larger even though the projected signal OC is smaller then the full signal OB. Optimal detection techniques merely choose
the direction OC that maximises the signal to noise ratio. This is equivalent to general linear regression (see Appendix 12.1). A good
estimate of natural internal variability is required to optimise effectively.

anthropogenic  factors  account  for  a  significant  part  of  recent
observed  changes, whereas  internal  and  naturally  forced
variations alone, at least as simulated by current models, cannot
explain  the  observed  changes.  In  addition, there  are  physical
arguments for attributing the changes in the vertical profile of
temperature to anthropogenic influence (Section 12.3.2).

12.4.3.1 Single pattern studies
Since the SAR, optimal detection studies of surface temperature
have been extended (Hegerl et al., 1997, 2000; Barnett et al.,
1999) and new studies of data other than surface air temperature
have been conducted (Allen and Tett, 1999; Paeth and Hense,
2001; Tett et al., 2000).

12.4.3 Optimal Fingerprint Methods

The use of optimal techniques can increase the detectability
of  forced  climate  changes.  These  techniques  increase  the
signal-to-noise  ratio  by  looking  at  the  component  of  the
response away from the direction of highest internal variability
(see, e.g., Hasselmann, 1979, 1997, 1993;  North  et  al., 1995;
see  also  Box  12.1  on  optimal  detection  and Appendix  12.1).
Several  new  approaches  to  the  optimal  detection  of  anthro-
pogenic climate change have been undertaken since the SAR.
We focus on optimal detection studies that use a single pattern
of  climate  change  in  the  following  section.  Attribution  (see
Section  12.1.1), which  requires  us  to  consider  several  signals
simultaneously, will  be  considered  in  Sections  12.4.3.2  and
12.4.3.3. 

Surface temperature patterns
The Hegerl et al. (1996) optimal detection study was extended
to  include  more  recent  estimates  of  internal  variability  and
simulations with a representation of sulphate aerosols (Hegerl
et al., 1997). As in the previous study, different control simula-
tions  were  used  to  determine  the  optimal  fingerprint  and  the
significance  level  of  recent  temperature  change.  The  authors
find  significant  evidence  for  a  greenhouse  gas  plus  sulphate
aerosol (GS) fingerprint in the most recent observed 30-year
temperature trends regardless of whether internal variability is
estimated  from  models  or  observations.  The  30-year  trend
ending  in  the  1940s  was  found  to  be  significantly  larger  than
expected  from  internal  variability, but  less  so  than  the  more
recent  trends.  This  work  has  been  extended  to  include  other
models (Figure 12.10a; see also Barnett et al., 1999: Hegerl et

722

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

al., 2000), examining  whether  the  amplitude  of  the  50-year
summer  surface  temperature  trends  in  the  GS  simulations  is
consistent with that estimated in the observations. In eleven out
of fourteen cases (seven models each evaluated using the finger-
prints from the two original models), the model trends are consis-
tent with observations. The greenhouse gas only simulations are
generally  not  consistent  with  observations, as  their  warming
trends  are  too  large.  Berliner  et  al. (2000)  detect  a  combined
greenhouse gas and sulphate signal in a fixed pattern detection
study of temperature changes using Bayesian techniques.

Vertical patterns of temperature
Allen and Tett (1999) use optimal detection methods to study
the  change  in  the  vertical  profile  of  zonal  mean  temperature
between  1961  to  1980  and  1986  to  1995.  Estimated  signals
from ensemble AOGCM simulations with greenhouse gas alone
(G), greenhouse  gas  plus  direct  sulphate  (GS), and  also
including stratospheric ozone forcing (GSO; Tett et al., 1996)
are considered. The G and GSO signals are detected separately.
The amplitude of the GSO fingerprint estimated from observa-
tions is found to be consistent with that simulated by the model,
while the model-simulated response to greenhouse gases alone
was  found  to  be  unrealistically  strong.  The  variance  of  the
residuals that remain after the estimated signal is removed from
the observations is consistent with internal variability estimated
from a control run. 

Other climatic variables
Schnur (2001) applied the optimal detection technique to trends
in a variety of climate diagnostics. Changes in the annual mean
surface  temperature  were  found  to  be  highly  significant  (in
agreement with previous results from Hegerl et al., 1996, 1997).
The predicted change in the annual cycle of temperature as well
as  winter  means  of  diurnal  temperature  range  can  also  be
detected  in  most  recent  observations.  The  changes  are  most
consistent  with  those  expected  from  increasing  greenhouse
gases and aerosols. However, changes in the annual mean and
annual cycle of precipitation were small and not significant. 

Paeth  and  Hense  (2001)  applied  a  correlation  method
related to the optimal fingerprint method to 20-year trends of
lower tropospheric mean temperature (between 500 and 1,000
hPa)  in  the  summer  half  of  the  year  in  the  Northern
Hemisphere north of 55N. Greenhouse gas fingerprints from
two models were detected. The combined greenhouse gas plus
(direct) sulphate (GS) fingerprints from the two models were
not detected. 

Summary
All new single-pattern studies published since the SAR detect
anthropogenic fingerprints in the global temperature observa-
tions, both  at  the  surface  and  aloft.  The  signal  amplitudes
estimated  from  observations  and  modelled  amplitudes  are
consistent at the surface if greenhouse gas and sulphate aerosol
forcing  are  taken  into  account, and  in  the  free  atmosphere  if
ozone forcing is also included. Fingerprints based on smaller
areas  or  on  other  variables  yield  more  ambiguous  results  at
present.

12.4.3.2 Optimal detection studies that use multiple fixed signal 

patterns

Surface temperature patterns
Hegerl et al. (1997) applied a two-fingerprint approach, using a
greenhouse  gas  fingerprint  and  an  additional  sulphate  aerosol
fingerprint that is made spatially independent (orthogonalised) of
the  greenhouse  fingerprint.  They  analysed  50-year  trends  in
observed  northern  summer  temperatures.  The  influence  of
greenhouse gas and sulphate aerosol signals were both detected
simultaneously  in  the  observed  pattern  of  50-year  temperature
trends, and  the  amplitudes  of  both  signals  were  found  to  be
consistent between model and observations. Simulations forced
with greenhouse gases alone and solar irradiance changes alone
were not consistent with observations. 

Hegerl  et  al. (2000)  repeated  this  analysis  using  parallel
simulations from a different climate model. The combined effect
of greenhouse gases and aerosols was still detectable and consis-
tent  with  observations, but  the  separate  influence  of  sulphate
aerosol  forcing, as  simulated  by  this  second  model, was  not
detectable. This was because the sulphate response was weaker in
the second model, and closely resembled one of the main modes
of  natural  variability.  Hence, the  detection  of  the  net  anthro-
pogenic signal is robust, but the detection of the sulphate aerosol
component  is  very  sensitive  to  differences  in  model-simulated
responses. 

As in the single-pattern case, this study has been extended to
include  seven  model  GS  simulations  and  to  take  into  account
observational sampling error (Figure 12.10b,c, see also Barnett et
al., 1999;  Hegerl  et  al. 2001).  A  simple  linear  transformation
allows  results  to  be  displayed  in  terms  of  individual  greenhouse
and  sulphate  signal  amplitudes, which  assists  comparison  with
other  results  (see  Figure  12.10;  Hegerl  and  Allen, 2000).  The
amplitudes  of  the  greenhouse  gas  and  sulphate  components  are
simultaneously consistent with the observed amplitudes in 10 of
the fourteen GS cases (seven models for two sets of fingerprints)
displayed.  This  contrasts  with  eleven  out  of  fourteen  in  the
combined amplitude test described in Section 12.4.3.1. If the trends
to 1995 are used (Figure 12.10c), the results are similar, though in
this  case, the  ellipse  just  includes  the  origin  and  six  out  of  the
fourteen GS cases are consistent with observations. The inconsis-
tency  can  be  seen  to  be  mainly  due  to  large  variations  in  the
amplitudes of the model-simulated responses to sulphate aerosols
(indicated  by  the  vertical  spread  of  results).  Model-simulated
responses to greenhouse gases are generally more consistent both
with  each  other  and  with  observations.  Two  of  the  cases  of
disagreement  are  based  on  a  single  simulation  rather  than  an
ensemble mean and should therefore be viewed with caution (see
Barnett et al., 2000). Barnett et al. (1999) found that the degree of
agreement between the five models and observations they consid-
ered  was  similar, whether  or  not  the  global  mean  response  was
removed  from  the  patterns.  Signal  amplitudes  from  simulations
with greenhouse gas forcing only are generally inconsistent with
those estimated from observations (Figure 12.10b,c).

In most of the cases presented here, the response to natural
forcings  was  neglected.  In  a  similar  analysis  to  that  just
described, Hegerl et al. (2000); see also Barnett et al., 1999) also
assessed  simulations  of  the  response  to  volcanic  and  solar

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

723

forcing. They find, in agreement with Tett et al. (1999), that there
is better agreement between observations and simulations when
these natural forcings are included, particularly in the early 20th
century, but  that  natural  forcings  alone  cannot  account  for  the
late-century warming. 

In summary, the estimation of the contribution of individual
factors  to  recent  climate  change  is  highly  model  dependent,
primarily due to uncertainties in the forcing and response due to
sulphate  aerosols.  However, although  the  estimated  amplitude
varies  from  study  to  study, all  studies  indicate  a  substantial
contribution from anthropogenic greenhouse gases to the changes
observed over the latter half of the 20th century.

Vertical patterns of temperature
Allen and Tett (1999) also used spatial fingerprints in the vertical
derived from simulations with greenhouse gas forcing alone and
simulations  with  greenhouse  gas, sulphate  aerosol  and  strato-
spheric  ozone  forcing.  These  authors  show  that, even  if  both
greenhouse  and  other  anthropogenic  signals  are  estimated
simultaneously in the observed record, a significant response to
greenhouse gases remains detectable. Hill et al. (2001) extended
this analysis to include model-simulated responses to both solar
and  volcanic  forcing, and  again  found  that  the  response  to
greenhouse gases remains detectable. Results with non-optimised
fingerprints  are  consistent  with  the  optimised  case, but  the
uncertainty range is larger. 

In summary, the fixed pattern studies indicate that the recent
warming  is  unlikely  (bordering  on  very  unlikely)  to  be  due  to
internal  climate  variability.  A  substantial  response  to  anthro-
pogenic greenhouse gases appears to be necessary to account for
recent temperature trends but the majority of studies indicate that
greenhouse gases alone do not appear to be able to provide a full
explanation.  Inclusion  of  the  response  to  the  direct  effect  of
sulphate aerosols usually leads to a more satisfactory explanation
of the observed changes, although the amplitude of the sulphate
signal  depends  on  the  model  used.  These  studies  also  provide
some evidence that solar variations may have contributed to the
early century warming. 

12.4.3.3 Space-time studies
Here we consider studies that incorporate the time evolution of
forced  signals  into  the  optimal  detection  formalism.  These
studies use evolving patterns of historical climate change in the
20th century that are obtained from climate models forced with
historical anthropogenic and natural forcing. Explicit representa-
tion of the time dimension of the signals yields a more powerful
approach for both detecting and attributing climate change (see
Hasselmann, 1993;  North  et  al., 1995)  since  it  helps  to  distin-
guish between responses to external forcings with similar spatial
patterns  (e.g., solar  and  greenhouse  gas  forcing).  The  time
variations of the signals can be represented either directly in the
time domain or transformed to the frequency domain. 

Surface temperature
Tett et al. (1999) and Stott et al. (2001) describe a detection and
attribution study that uses the space-time approach (see Appendix
12.2).  They  estimate  the  magnitude  of  modelled  20th  century

greenhouse  gas, aerosol, solar  and  volcanic  signals  in  decadal
mean  data.  Signals  are  fitted  by  general  linear  regression  to
moving  fifty-year  intervals  beginning  with  1906  to  1956  and
ending  1946  to  1996.  The  signals  are  obtained  from  four
ensembles of transient change simulations, each using a different
historical forcing scenario. Greenhouse gas, greenhouse gas plus
direct sulphate aerosol, low frequency solar, and volcanic forcing
scenarios were used. Each ensemble contains four independent
simulations  with  the  same  transient  forcing.  Two  estimates  of
natural variability, one used for optimisation and the other for the
estimation  of  confidence  intervals, are  obtained  from  separate
segments of a long control simulation. 

Signal amplitudes estimated with multiple regression become
uncertain when the signals are strongly correlated (degenerate).
Despite  the  problem  of  degeneracy, positive  and  significant
greenhouse  gas  and  sulphate  aerosol  signals  are  consistently
detected  in  the  most  recent  fifty-year  period  (Figure  12.11)
regardless of which or how many other signals are included in the
analysis  (Allen  et  al., 2000a;  Stott  et  al., 2001).  The  residual
variation that remains after removal of the signals is consistent
with the models internal variability. In contrast, recent decadal
temperature changes are not consistent with the models internal
climate  variability  alone, nor  with  any  combination  of  internal
variability  and  naturally  forced  signals, even  allowing  for  the
possibility  of  unknown  processes  amplifying  the  response  to
natural forcing.

Tett et al. (2000) have completed a study using a model with
no  flux  adjustments, an  interactive  sulphur  cycle, an  explicit
representation  of  individual  greenhouse  gases  and  an  explicit
treatment  of  scattering  by  aerosols.  Two  ensembles  of  four
simulations for the instrumental period were run, one with natural
(solar  and  volcanic)  forcing  only  and  the  other  anthropogenic
(well-mixed  greenhouse  gases, ozone  and  direct  and  indirect
sulphate  aerosol)  forcing  only  (see  Figure  12.4).  They  find  a
substantial  response  to  anthropogenic  forcing  is  needed  to
explain  observed  changes  in  recent  decades, and  that  natural
forcing may have contributed significantly to early 20th century
climate change. The best agreement between model simulations
and observations over the last 140 years has been found when all
the above anthropogenic and natural forcing factors are included
(Stott  et  al., 2000b;  Figure  12.7c). These  results  show  that  the
forcings included are sufficient to explain the observed changes,
but  do  not  exclude  the  possibility  that  other  forcings  may  also
have contributed.

The detection of a response to solar forcing in the early part
of the century (1906 to 1956) is less robust and depends on the
details of the analysis. If seasonally stratified data are used (Stott
et  al., 2001), the  detection  of  a  significant  solar  influence  on
climate in the first half of the century becomes clearer with the
solar irradiance reconstruction of Hoyt and Schatten (1993), but
weaker with that from Lean et al. (1995). Volcanism appears to
show only a small signal in recent decadal temperature trends and
could only be detected using either annual mean data or specifi-
cally chosen decades (Stott et al., 2001). The residual variability
that remains after the naturally forced signals are removed from
the observations of the most recent five decades are not consis-
tent  with  model  internal  variability, suggesting  that  natural

724

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

(a)

)
s
r
a
e
y
 
0
5
C


/

(
 
e
s
a
e
r
c
n

i
 

t

e
r
u
a
r
e
p
m
e
T

Estimated GS contribution to JJA Trend 1949-1998

0.8

0.7

0.6

0.5

0.4

0.3

0.2

0.1

0

O bs 

E C H A M 3/LS G

E C H A M 4/G S
HadC M 2

G FDL-R30
E C H A M 4/G SI

C G C M 1

C G C M 2

(b)

(c)

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

)
s
r
y
0
5
/
C


(
 
g
n

i
l

o
o
c
 
l
u
S

0.2

0.4

GS2

Obs 1949-98

GS3
G1

GS5

GS6

GS1

GSI4

G4

GS4

G2

0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6

GHG warming (C/50yrs)

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

0

0.2

0.4

)
s
r
y
0
5
 
/
 

C


(
 
g
n

i
l

o
o
c
 
l
u
S

Obs 1949-98

GS2

G1

GS1 GS3

GSI4

GS5
GS6

G4
GS4

G2

0.2 0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 1.2 1.4 1.6

GHG warming (C/50yrs)

Figure 12.10: Comparison between the amplitude of anthropogenic signals from observed and modelled JJA trend patterns using fingerprints from
two different climate models (ECHAM3/LSG and HadCM2) and data from five climate models. (a) Comparison of the amplitude of a single
greenhouse gas + sulphate aerosol (GS) signal (expressed as change in global mean temperature [C] over 50 years). Results show that a significant
GS signal can be detected in observed trend patterns 1949 to 1998 at a 5% significance level (one-sided test), independent of which pair of finger-
prints was used. The observed signal amplitude is consistent with contemporaneous GS amplitudes for most models GS simulations. 90%
confidence intervals are shown by solid lines for estimates using ECHAM3/LSG fingerprints and by dashed lines for estimates based on HadCM2
fingerprints. Cases where a models and the observed amplitude disagree are marked by a cross on the axis. (b) and (c) show an estimate of the
observed amplitude of a greenhouse gas signal (horizontal axis) and a sulphate aerosol signal (vertical axis) estimated simultaneously. Both signal
amplitudes can be estimated as positive from observations based on ECHAM3/LSG fingerprints shown in (b) while only the greenhouse gas signal
is detected based on HadCM2 fingerprints shown in panel (c). The amplitudes of both signals from the observations are compared with those from
model simulations forced with various forcing histories and using different climate models (1: HadCM2; 2: ECHAM3/LSG; 3: GFDL; 4:
ECHAM4/OPYC; 5: CCCma1; 6: CCCma2). Simulations with symbols shown in black are consistent with observations relative to the uncertainty
in observations (grey ellipse) and that of the model simulations (not shown). Simulations which are inconsistent are shown in grey. Model simula-
tions where only a single ensemble member is available are illustrated by thin symbols, those based on ensembles of simulations by fat symbols.

Results from consistency tests indicate that most greenhouse gas only simulations (G, shown by ) are inconsistent with observations. Ten of
the GS simulations in both panels are in agreement with observed trend patterns, discrepancies arise mostly from the magnitude of a sulphate signal
(vertical axis). The failure to detect a sulphate signal as well as a greenhouse gas signal in panel (c) is due to the two signals being very highly
correlated if only spatial patterns are used- this makes separation of the signals difficult. These results show that estimates of a sulphate aerosol
signal from observations are model dependent and quite uncertain, while a single anthropogenic signal can be estimated with more confidence.

All units are in C/50 year, values in the upper right quadrant refer to a physically meaningful greenhouse warming and sulphate aerosol cooling
signal. The consistency test establishes whether the difference between a models and the observed amplitude estimate is significantly larger than the
combined uncertainty in the observations (internal variability + observational uncertainty) and the model simulation (internal variability). The figure
is derived by updating the data used by Barnett et al. (1999) (for details of the analysis see Hegerl et al., 2000) and then applying a simple linear
transformation of the multi-regression results (Hegerl and Allen, 2000).

Results for 1946 to 1995 period used by Barnett et al. (1999) are similar, except fewer of the models in b and c agree with observations and the

case of both signals being zero in c is not rejected. Simulations of natural forcing only ending before 1998 are also rejected in that case.

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

725

forcing alone cannot explain the observed 20th century tempera-
ture variations. Note that Delworth and Knutson (2000) find one
out of five of their simulations with only anthropogenic forcing
can reproduce the early century global mean warming, including
the  enhanced  warming  in  Northern  Hemisphere  high  latitudes.
Hence  a  substantial  response  to  anthropogenic  (specifically
greenhouse)  forcing  appears  necessary  to  account  for  the
warming over the past 50 years, but it remains unclear whether
natural external forcings are necessary to explain the early 20th
century warming.

Sensitivity of results
A variety of sensitivity tests confirm that the detection of anthro-
pogenic signals is insensitive to differences between solar forcing
reconstructions, the  inclusion  of  additional  forcing  through  the
specification of observed stratospheric ozone concentrations, and
to varying details of the analysis (including omitting the signal-
to-noise  optimisation).  Tett  et  al. (1999, 2000)  also  found  that
detection of an anthropogenic signal continues to hold even when
the standard deviation of the control simulation is inflated by a
factor  of  two.  Uncertainty  in  the  signals  is  unavoidable  when
ensembles are small, as is the case in Tett et al. (1999), and biases
the estimates of the signal amplitudes towards zero. Consistent
results are obtained when this source of uncertainty is taken into
account  (Allen  and  Stott, 2000;  Stott  et  al., 2000a).  However
amplitude  estimates  become  more  uncertain, particularly  if  the
underlying  signal  is  small  compared  with  internal  climate
variability.  Accounting  for  sampling  uncertainty  in  model-
simulated  signals  indicates  a  greater  degree  of  greenhouse
warming and compensating aerosol cooling in the latter part of
the century than shown by Tett et al. (1999). Gillett et al. (2000b)
find  that  discounting  the  temperature  changes  associated  with
changes in the Arctic Oscillation (Thompson and Wallace, 1998;
Thompson et al., 2000), which are not simulated by the model,
does not significantly alter the Tett et al. (1999) results.

Confidence intervals and scaling factors
Confidence intervals for the signal amplitudes that are obtained
from the regression of modelled signals onto observations can be
re-expressed as ranges of scaling factors that are required to make
modelled signal amplitudes consistent with those estimated from
observations (see, e.g., Allen and Tett, 1999). The results show
that  the  range  of  scaling  factors  includes  unity  (i.e., model  is
consistent with observations) for both the greenhouse gas and the
sulphate aerosol signal, and that the scaling factors vary only to a
reasonable (and consistent) extent between 50-year intervals. 

The scaling factors can also be used to estimate the contribu-
tion  from  anthropogenic  factors  other  than  well-mixed
greenhouse  gases.  Using  the  methodology  of  Allen  and  Stott
(2000) on the simulations described by Tett et al. (2000), the 5 to
95%  uncertainty  range  for  scaling  the  combined  response
changes  in  tropospheric  ozone  and  direct  and  indirect  sulphate
forcing  over  the  last  fifty  years  is  0.6  to  1.6.  The  simulated
indirect effect of aerosol forcing is by far the biggest contributor
to this signal. Ignoring the possible effects of neglected forcings
and assuming that the forcing can be scaled in the same way as
the  response, this  translates  to  a 0.5  to 1.5 Wm2 change  in

forcing due to the indirect effect since pre-industrial times. This
range  lies  well  within  that  given  in  Chapter  6  but  the  limits
obtained are sensitive to the model used. Note that large values of
the  indirect  response  are  consistently  associated  with  a  greater
sensitivity to greenhouse gases. This would increase this models
estimate of future warming: a large indirect effect coupled with
decreases  in  sulphate  emissions  would  further  enhance  future
warming (Allen et al., 2000b). 

Allen  et  al. (2000a)  have  determined  scaling  factors  from
other  model  simulations  (Figure  12.12)  and  found  that  the
modelled  response  to  the  combination  of  greenhouse  gas  and
sulphate  aerosol  forcing  is  consistent  with  that  observed.  The
scaling  factors  ranging  from  0.8  to  1.2  and  the  corresponding
95%  confidence  intervals  cover  the  range  0.5  to  1.6.  Scaling
factors  for  50-year  JJA  trends  are  also  easily  derived  from  the
results published in Hegerl et al. (2000). The resulting range of
factors is consistent with that of Allen et al. (2000a), but wider
because the diagnostic used in Allen et al. (2000b) enhances the
signal-to-noise  ratio.  If  it  is  assumed  that  the  combination  of
greenhouse  warming  and  sulphate  cooling  simulated  by  these
AOGCMs  is  the  only  significant  external  contributor  to  inter-
decadal near-surface temperature changes over the latter half of
the  20th  century, then  Allen  et  al. (2000a)  estimate  that  the
anthropogenic  warming  over  the  last  50  years  is  0.05  to
0.11C/decade.  Making  a  similar  assumption, Hegerl  et  al.
(2000) estimate 0.02 to 0.12C/decade with a best guess of 0.06
to  0.08C/decade  (model  dependent, Figure  12.10).  The
smallness of the range of uncertainty compared with the observed
change indicates that natural internal variability alone is unlikely
(bordering  on  very  unlikely)  to  account  for  the  observed
warming.

Given  the  uncertainties  in  sulphate  aerosol  and  natural
forcings and responses, these single-pattern confidence intervals
give an incomplete picture. We cannot assume that the response
to  sulphate  forcing  (relative  to  the  greenhouse  signal)  is  as
simulated in these greenhouse-plus-sulphate simulations; nor can
we assume the net response to natural forcing is negligible even
though observations of surface temperature changes over the past
30 to 50 years are generally consistent with both these assump-
tions. Hence we need also to consider uncertainty ranges based
on estimating several signals simultaneously (Figure 12.12, right
hand  panels).  These  are  generally  larger  than  the  single-signal
estimates because we are attempting to estimate more informa-
tion from the same amount of data (Tett et al., 1999; Allen and
Stott, 2000; Allen et al., 2000a). Nevertheless, the conclusion of
a  substantial  greenhouse  contribution  to  the  recent  observed
warming trend is unchanged. 

Estimation of uncertainty in predictions
The scaling factors derived from optimal detection can also be
used to constrain predictions of future climate change resulting
from  anthropogenic  emissions  (Allen  et  al., 2000b).  The  best
guess scaling and uncertainty limits for each component can be
applied to the model predictions, providing objective uncertainty
limits  that  are  based  on  observations.  These  estimates  are
independent of possible errors in the individual models climate
sensitivity and time-scale of oceanic adjustment, provided these

726

a)

y

l

a
m
o
n
a

 

e
r
u

t

a
r
e
p
m
e
T

b)

y

l

a
m
o
n
a

 

e
r
u

t

a
r
e
p
m
e
T

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

G&S

c)

1906 -- 1956

1946 -- 1996

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0
0.0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

y

l

a
m
o
n
a

 

e
r
u

t

a
r
e
p
m
e
T

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0
0.0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

06-16 16-26 26-36 36-46 46-56

Year

46-56 56-66 66-76 76-86 86-96

Year

Best fit (G S)

G

S

GS&Sol

d)

1906 -- 1956

1946 -- 1996

Figure 12.11: Best-estimate contributions to
global mean temperature change.
Reconstruction of temperature variations for
1906 to 1956 (a and b) and 1946 to 1995 (c
and d) for G and S (a and c) and GS and
SOL (b and d). (G denotes the estimated
greenhouse gas signal, S the estimated
sulphate aerosol signal, GS the greenhouse
gas / aerosol signal obtained from simulations
with combined forcing, SOL the solar
signal). Observed (thick black), best fit (dark
grey dashed), and the uncertainty range due
to internal variability (grey shading) are
shown in all plots. (a) and (c) show contribu-
tions from GS (orange) and SOL (blue). (b)
and (d) show contributions from G (red) and
S (green). All time-series were reconstructed
with data in which the 50-year mean had first
been removed. (Tett et al., 1999).

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0
0.0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

y

l

a
m
o
n
a

 

e
r
u

t

a
r
e
p
m
e
T

0.3

0.2

0.1

0.0
0.0

-0.1

-0.2

-0.3

06-16 16-26 26-36 36-46 46-56

Year
Best fit (GS Sol)

46-56 56-66 66-76 76-86 86-96

Year

GS

Sol

errors are persistent over time. An example based on the IS92a
(IPCC, 1992) GS scenario (whose exact forcing varies between
models, see Chapter 9, Table 9.1 for details) is shown in Figure
12.13 based on a limited number of model simulations. Note that
in each case, the original warming predicted by the model lies in
the range consistent with the observations. A rate of warming of
0.1 to 0.2C/decade is likely over the first few decades of the 21st
century under this scenario. Allen et al. (2000b) quote a 5 to 95%
(very likely) uncertainty range of 0.11 to 0.24C/decade for the
decades 1996 to 2046 under the IS92a scenario, but, given the
uncertainties  and  assumptions  behind  their  analysis, the  more
cautious  likely qualifier  is  used  here.  For  comparison, the
simple  model  tuned  to  the  results  of  seven AOGCMs  used  for
projections in Chapter 9 gives a range of 0.12 to 0.22C/decade
under  the  IS92a  scenario, although  it  should  be  noted  that  this
similarity  may  reflect  some  cancellation  of  errors  and  equally
good  agreement  between  the  two  approaches  should  not  be
expected for all scenarios, nor for time-scales longer than the few

decades  for  which  the  Allen  et  al.  (2000b)  approach  is  valid.
Figure  12.13  also  shows  that  a  similar  range  of  uncertainty  is
obtained  if  the  greenhouse  gas  and  sulphate  components  are
estimated  separately,
in  which  case  the  estimate  of  future
warming  for  this  particular  scenario  is  independent  of  possible
errors in the amplitude of the sulphate forcing and response. Most
of  the  recent  emission  scenarios  indicate  that  future  sulphate
emissions  will  decrease  rather  than  increase  in  the  near  future.
This would lead to a larger global warming since the greenhouse
gas component would no longer be reduced by sulphate forcing at
the same rate as in the past. The level of uncertainty also increases
(see Allen et al., 2000b). The final error bar in Figure 12.13 shows
that  including  the  model-simulated  response  to  natural  forcing
over  the  20th  century  into  the  analysis  has  little  impact  on  the
estimated anthropogenic warming in the 21st century.

It  must  be  stressed  that  the  approach  illustrated  in  Figure
12.13 only addresses the issue of uncertainty in the large-scale
climate response to a particular scenario of future greenhouse gas

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

727

(a)

2

1

0

1

Scaling required on model-simulated signals

GS GSIO GS

GS GSI

GS GS GS

G

SIO

G

N

G

S

So

G

S

V

So

(b)
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
0.5
1.0

HadC M 2

HadC M 2

G FDL-R30
E C H A M 4/O PY C
E C H A M 3/LS G
E C H A M 4/O PY C
HadC M 3

C G C M 1

C G C M 2

HadC M 3

E C H A M 3/LS G

HadC M 2

Estimated contributions to 20th century warming (C / century)

G

GS GSIO

GS GS GSI GS GS GS

G

G

So

S

G

N

SIO

So V

S

HadC M 2

HadC M 2

G FDL-R30
E C H A M 3/LS G
E C H A M 4/O PY C
E C H A M 4/O PY C
HadC M 3

C G C M 1

C G C M 2

HadC M 3

E C H A M 3/LS G

 

HadC M 2

Figure 12.12: (a) Estimates of the scaling factors by which we have to multiply the amplitude of several model-simulated signals to reproduce
the corresponding changes in the observed record. The vertical bars indicate the 5 to 95% uncertainty range due to internal variability. A range
encompassing unity implies that this combination of forcing amplitude and model-simulated response is consistent with the corresponding
observed change, while a range encompassing zero implies that this model-simulated signal is not detectable (Allen and Stott, 2000; Stott et al.,
2000a). Signals are defined as the ensemble mean response to external forcing expressed in large-scale (>5000 km) near-surface temperatures over
the 1946 to 1996 period relative to the 1896 to 1996 mean. The first entry (G) shows the scaling factor and 5 to 95% confidence interval obtained
if we assume the observations consist only of a response to greenhouse gases plus internal variability. The range is significantly less than one
(consistent with results from other models), meaning that models forced with greenhouse gases alone significantly overpredict the observed
warming signal. The next eight entries show scaling factors for model-simulated responses to greenhouse and sulphate forcing (GS), with two
cases including indirect sulphate and tropospheric ozone forcing, one of these also including stratospheric ozone depletion (GSI and GSIO respec-
tively). All but one (CGCM1) of these ranges is consistent with unity. Hence there is little evidence that models are systematically over- or under-
predicting the amplitude of the observed response under the assumption that model-simulated GS signals and internal variability are an adequate
representation (i.e. that natural forcing has had little net impact on this diagnostic). Observed residual variability is consistent with this assumption
in all but one case (ECHAM3, indicated by the asterisk). We are obliged to make this assumption to include models for which only a simulation
of the anthropogenic response is available, but uncertainty estimates in these single-signal cases are incomplete since they do not account for
uncertainty in the naturally forced response. These ranges indicate, however, the high level of confidence with which we can reject internal
variability as simulated by these various models as an explanation of recent near-surface temperature change. 

A more complete uncertainty analysis is provided by the next three entries, which show corresponding scaling factors on individual

greenhouse (G), sulphate (S), solar-plus-volcanic (N), solar-only (So) and volcanic-only (V) signals for those cases in which the relevant simula-
tions have been performed.  In these cases, we estimate multiple factors simultaneously to account for uncertainty in the amplitude of the naturally
forced response. The uncertainties increase but the greenhouse signal remains consistently detectable. In one case (ECHAM3) the model appears
to be overestimating the greenhouse response (scaling range in the G signal inconsistent with unity), but this result is sensitive to which
component of the control is used to define the detection space.  It is also not known how it would respond to the inclusion of a volcanic signal. In
cases where both solar and volcanic forcing is included (HadCM2 and HadCM3), G and S signals remain detectable and consistent with unity
independent of whether natural signals are estimated jointly or separately (allowing for different errors in S and V responses). (b) Estimated
contributions to global mean warming over the 20th century, based on the results shown in (a), with 5 to 95% confidence intervals. Although the
estimates vary depending on which models signal and what forcing is assumed, and are less certain if more than one signal is estimated, all show
a significant contribution from anthropogenic climate change to 20th century warming (from Allen et al., 2000a).

concentrations. This is only one of many interlinked uncertainties
in  the  climate  projection  problem, as  illustrated  in  Chapter  13,
Figure  13.2.  Research  efforts  to  attach  probabilities  to  climate
projections  and  scenarios  are  explored  in  Chapter  13, Section
13.5.2.3.

Forest  et  al. (2000)  used  simulations  with  an  intermediate
complexity  climate  model  in  a  related  approach.  They  used
optimal  detection  results  following  the  procedure  of Allen  and
Tett  (1999)  to  rule  out  combinations  of  model  parameters  that
yield simulations that are not consistent with observations. They
find that low values of the climate sensitivity (<1C) are consis-
tently ruled out, but the upper bound on climate sensitivity and
the rate of ocean heat uptake remain very uncertain. 

Other space-time approaches
North and Stevens (1998) use a space-frequency method that is
closely  related  to  the  space-time  approach  used  in  the  studies
discussed  above  (see  Appendix  12.2).  They  analyse  100-year

surface  temperature  time-series  of  grid  box  mean  surface
temperatures  in  a  global  network  of  thirty  six  large  (1010)
grid  boxes  for  greenhouse  gas, sulphate  aerosol, volcanic  and
solar cycle signals in the frequency band with periods between
about  8  and  17  years.  The  signal  patterns  were  derived  from
simulations  with  an  EBM  (see  Section  12.2.3).  The  authors
found highly significant responses to greenhouse gas, sulphate
aerosol, and  volcanic  forcing  in  the  observations.  Some
uncertainty  in  their  conclusions  arises  from  model  uncertainty
(see discussion in Section 12.2.3) and from the use of control
simulations  from  older  AOGCMs, which  had  relatively  low
variability, for the estimation of internal climate variability. 

A  number  of  papers  extend  and  analyse  the  North  and
Stevens  (1998)  approach.  Kim  and  Wu  (2000)  extend  the
methodology  to  data  with  higher  (monthly)  time  resolution
and  demonstrate  that  this  may  improve  the  detectability  of
climate  change  signals.  Leroy  (1998)  casts  the  results  from
North and Stevens (1998) in a Bayesian framework. North and

728

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

)

C


(
 
e
g
n
a
h
c
 
e
r
u
a
r
e
p
m
e

t

t
 

n
a
e
m

 
l

a
b
o
G

l

3.0

2.5

2.0

1.5

1.0

0.5

0.0

Anthropogenic warming relative to pre-industrial in 2036-46

Original model prediction under IS92a greenhouse+sulphate forcing

Best guess and 5-95% range based on observed 1946-96 signal

HadCM2

(GS)

ECHAM3
/LSG (GS)

ECHAM4

ECHAM4

GFDL-R30

HadCM2

/OPYC (GS)

/OPYC (GSI)

(GS)

(G)

HadCM2
(G&S)

HadCM2
(G&S&N)

Figure 12.13: Global mean temperature in the decade 2036 to 2046
(relative to pre-industrial, in response to greenhouse gas and sulphate
aerosol forcing following the IS92a (IPCC, 1992) scenario), based on
original model simulations (squares) and after scaling to fit the
observed signal as in Figure 12.12(a) (diamonds), with 5 to 95%
confidence intervals. While the original projections vary (depending,
for example, on each models climate sensitivity), the scale should be
independent of errors in both sensitivity and rate of oceanic heat
uptake, provided these errors are persistent over time. GS indicates
combined greenhouse and sulphate forcing. G shows the impact of
setting the sulphate forcing to zero but correcting the response to be
consistent with observed 20th century climate change. G&S indicates
greenhouse and sulphate responses estimated separately (in which
case the result is also approximately independent, under this forcing
scenario, to persistent errors in the sulphate forcing and response)
and G&S&N indicates greenhouse, sulphate and natural responses
estimated separately (showing the small impact of natural forcing on
the diagnostic used for this analysis). (From Allen et al., 2000b.)

Wu (2001) modified the method to perform space-time (rather
than space-frequency) detection in the 100-year record. Their
results are broadly similar to those of Tett et al., (1999), Stott
et  al. (2001)  and  North  and  Stevens  (1998).  However, their
best guess includes a small sulphate aerosol signal countered
by  a  relatively  small, but  highly  significant, greenhouse  gas
signal.

All  of  the  space-time  and  space-frequency  optimal
detection  studies  to  date  indicate  a  discernible  human
influence  on  global  climate  and  yield  better-constrained
estimates  of  the  magnitude  of  anthropogenic  signals  than
approaches using spatial information alone. In particular, the
inclusion of temporal information can reduce the degeneracy
that may occur when more than one climate signal is included.
Thus, results  from  time-space  methods  generally  detect
anthropogenic  signals  even  if  natural  forcings  are  estimated
simultaneously  and  show  that  the  combination  of  natural
signals  and  internal  variability  is  inconsistent  with  the
observed surface temperature record.

estimate  of  the  magnitude  of  this  influence.  The  use  of  a
number of forced climate signals, and the extensive treatment
of  various  (but  not  all)  sources  of  uncertainty  increases  our
confidence that a considerable part of the recent warming can
be  attributed  to  anthropogenic  influences.  The  estimated
signals and scaling factors remain subject to the considerable
uncertainty in our knowledge of historic climate forcing from
sources  other  than  greenhouse  gases. While  estimates  of  the
amplitude of a single anthropogenic signal are quite consistent
between  different  model  signals  (see  Figures  12.10, 12.12)
and different approaches, joint estimates of the amplitude of
several  signals  vary  between  models  and  approaches.  Thus
quantitative separation of the observed warming into anthro-
pogenic  and  naturally  forced  components  requires  consider-
able  caution.  Nonetheless, all  recent  studies  reject  natural
forcing and internal variability alone as a possible explanation
of recent climate change. Analyses based on a single anthro-
pogenic  signal  focusing  on  continental  and  global  scales
indicate that:

 Changes over the past 30 to 50 years are very unlikely to be

due to internal variability as simulated by current models.

 The combined response to greenhouse and sulphate forcing
is  more  consistent  with  the  observed  record  than  the
response to greenhouse gases alone.

 Inclusion  of  the  simulated  response  to  stratospheric  ozone
depletion improves the simulation of the vertical structure of
the response.

Analyses based on multiple anthropogenic and natural signals
indicate that:

 The  combination  of  natural  external  forcing  (solar  and
volcanic) and internal variability is unlikely to account for
the spatio-temporal pattern of change over the past 30 to 50
years, even  allowing  for  possible  amplification  of  the
amplitude  of  natural  responses  by  unknown  feedback
processes.

 Anthropogenic greenhouse gases are likely to have made a
significant  and  substantial  contribution  to  the  warming
observed over the second half of the 20th century, possibly
larger than the total observed warming.

 The  contribution  from  anthropogenic  sulphate  aerosols  is
less  clear, but  appears  to  lie  in  a  range  broadly  consistent
with  the  spread  of  current  model  simulations.  A  high
sulphate  aerosol  forcing  is  consistently  associated  with  a
stronger response to greenhouse forcing.

12.4.3.4 Summary of optimal fingerprinting studies
Results  from  optimal  fingerprint  methods  indicate  a
discernible  human  influence  on  climate  in  temperature
observations  at  the  surface  and  aloft  and  over  a  range  of
applications.  These  methods  can  also  provide  a  quantitative

 Natural  external  forcing  may  have  contributed  to  the

warming that occurred in the early 20th century. 

Results based on variables other than continental and global
scale temperature are more ambiguous.

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

729

12.5 Remaining Uncertainties

The SAR identified a number of factors that limited the degree to
which  any  human  influence  on  climate  could  be  quantified.  It
was noted that detection and attribution of anthropogenic climate
change  signals  would  be  accomplished  through  a  gradual
accumulation  of  evidence, and  that  there  were  appreciable
uncertainties in the magnitude and patterns of natural variability,
and in the radiative forcing and climate response resulting from
human activity.

The SAR predicted an increase in the anthropogenic contri-
bution to global mean temperature of slightly over 0.1C in the
five  years  following  the  SAR, which  is  consistent  with  the
observed  change  since  the  SAR  (Chapter  2).  The  predicted
increase in the anthropogenic signal (and the observed change)
are small compared to natural variability, so it is not possible to
distinguish  an  anthropogenic  signal  from  natural  variability  on
five year time-scales.

Differences in surface and free atmosphere temperature trends
There  are  unresolved  differences  between  the  observed  and
modelled  temperature  variations  in  the  free  atmosphere.  These
include apparent changes in the temperature difference between
the  surface  and  the  lower  atmosphere, and  differences  in  the
tropical  upper  troposphere.  While  model  simulations  of  large-
scale changes in free atmospheric and surface temperatures are
generally  consistent  with  the  observed  changes, simulated  and
observed trends in troposphere minus surface temperature differ-
ences  are  not  consistent.  It  is  not  clear  whether  this  is  due  to
model or observational error, or neglected forcings in the models.

Internal climate variability
The  precise  magnitude  of  natural  internal  climate  variability
remains  uncertain.  The  amplitude  of  internal  variability  in  the
models  most  often  used  in  detection  studies  differs  by  up  to  a
factor  of  two  from  that  seen  in  the  instrumental  temperature
record  on  annual  to  decadal  time-scales, with  some  models
showing similar or larger variability than observed (Section 12.2;
Chapter 8). However, the instrumental record is only marginally
useful for validating model estimates of variability on the multi-
decadal time-scales that are relevant for detection. Some palaeo-
climatic  reconstructions  of  temperature  suggest  that  multi-
decadal variability in the pre-industrial era was higher than that
generated  internally  by  models  (Section  12.2;  Chapter  8).
However, apart  from  the  difficulties  inherent  in  reconstructing
temperature  accurately  from  proxy  data,
the  palaeoclimatic
record  also  includes  the  climatic  response  to  natural  forcings
arising, for example, from variations in solar output and volcanic
activity.  Including  the  estimated  forcing  due  to  natural  factors
increases the longer-term variability simulated by models, while
eliminating  the  response  to  external  forcing  from  the  palaeo-
record brings palaeo-variability estimates closer to model-based
estimates (Crowley, 2000). 

Natural forcing
Estimates of natural forcing have now been included in simula-
tions  over  the  period  of  the  instrumental  temperature  record.

Natural climate variability (forced and/or internally generated) on
its own is generally insufficient to explain the observed changes
in temperature over the last few decades. However, for all but the
most recent two decades, the accuracy of the estimates of forcing
may  be  limited, being  based  entirely  on  proxy  data  for  solar
irradiance and on limited surface data for volcanoes. There are
some indications that solar irradiance fluctuations have indirect
effects in addition to direct radiative heating, for example due to
the substantially stronger variation in the UV band and its effect
on ozone, or hypothesised changes in cloud cover (see Chapter
6).  These  mechanisms  remain  particularly  uncertain  and
currently  are  not  incorporated  in  most  efforts  to  simulate  the
climate  effect  of  solar  irradiance  variations, as  no  quantitative
estimates of their magnitude are currently available.

Anthropogenic forcing
The representation of greenhouse gases and the effect of sulphate
aerosols  has  been  improved  in  models.  However, some  of  the
smaller  forcings, including  those  due  to  biomass  burning  and
changes in land use, have not been taken into account in formal
detection studies. The major uncertainty in anthropogenic forcing
arises  from  the  indirect  effects  of  aerosols.  The  global  mean
forcing is highly uncertain (Chapter 6, Figure 6.8). The estimated
forcing patterns vary from a predominantly Northern Hemisphere
forcing  similar  to  that  due  to  direct  aerosol  effects  (Tett  et  al.,
2000)  to  a  more  globally  uniform  distribution, similar  but
opposite  in  sign  to  that  associated  with  changes  in  greenhouse
gases (Roeckner et al., 1999). If the response to indirect forcing
has a component which can be represented as a linear combina-
tion of the response to greenhouse gases and to the direct forcing
by aerosols, it will influence amplitudes of the responses to these
two factors estimated through optimal detection. 

Estimates of response patterns
Finally, there remains considerable uncertainty in the amplitude
and pattern of the climate response to changes in radiative forcing.
The  large  uncertainty  in  climate  sensitivity, 1.5  to  4.5C  for  a
doubling  of  atmospheric  carbon  dioxide, has  not  been  reduced
since the SAR, nor is it likely to be reduced in the near future by
the evidence provided by the surface temperature signal alone. In
contrast,
the  emerging  signal  provides  a  relatively  strong
constraint  on  forecast  transient  climate  change  under  some
emission scenarios. Some techniques can allow for errors in the
magnitude  of  the  simulated  global  mean  response  in  attribution
studies. As noted in Section 12.2, there is greater pattern similarity
between  simulations  of  greenhouse  gases  alone, and  of
greenhouse  gases  and  aerosols  using  the  same  model,
than
between  simulations  of  the  response  to  the  same  change  in
greenhouse  gases  using  different  models.  This  leads  to  some
inconsistency in the estimation of the separate greenhouse gas and
aerosol components using different models (see Section 12.4.3).
In  summary, some  progress  has  been  made  in  reducing
uncertainty, particularly  with  respect  to  distinguishing  the
responses  to  different  external  influences  using  multi-pattern
techniques and in quantifying the magnitude of the modelled and
observed  responses.  Nevertheless, many  of  the  sources  of
uncertainty identified in the SAR still remain. 

730

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

12.6 Concluding Remarks

In the previous sections, we have evaluated the different lines of
evidence  on  the  causes  of  recent  climate  change.  Here, we
summarise  briefly  the  arguments  that  lead  to  our  final  assess-
ment. The reader is referred to the earlier sections for more detail.

20th century climate was unusual.
Palaeoclimatic  reconstructions  for  the  last  1,000  years  (e.g.,
Chapter 2, Figure 2.21) indicate that the 20th century warming is
highly unusual, even taking into account the large uncertainties in
these reconstructions. 

The  observed  warming  is  inconsistent  with  model  estimates  of
natural internal climate variability. 
While these estimates vary substantially, on the annual to decadal
time-scale  they  are  similar, and  in  some  cases  larger,
than
obtained from observations. Estimates from models and observa-
tions are uncertain on the multi-decadal and longer time-scales
required for detection. Nonetheless, conclusions on the detection
of an anthropogenic signal are insensitive to the model used to
estimate internal variability. Recent observed changes cannot be
accounted for as pure internal variability even if the amplitude of
simulated  internal  variations  is  increased  by  a  factor  of  two  or
more.  It  is  therefore  unlikely  (bordering  on  very  unlikely)  that
natural  internal  variability  alone  can  explain  the  changes  in
global climate over the 20th century (e.g., Figure 12.1).

The  observed  warming  in  the  latter  half  of  the  20th  century
appears  to  be  inconsistent  with  natural  external  (solar  and
volcanic) forcing of the climate system.
Although there are measurements of these forcings over the last
two decades, estimates prior to that are uncertain, as the volcanic
forcing is based on limited measurements, and the solar forcing
is  based  entirely  on  proxy  data.  However, the  overall  trend  in
natural forcing over the last two, and perhaps four, decades of the
20th  century  is  likely  to  have  been  small  or  negative  (Chapter
6,Table 6.13) and so is unlikely to explain the increased rate of
global warming since the middle of the 20th century.

The observed change in patterns of atmospheric temperature in
the vertical is inconsistent with natural forcing.
The  increase  in  volcanic  activity  during  the  past  two  to  four
decades  would, if  anything, produce  tropospheric  cooling  and
stratospheric warming, the reverse to what has occurred over this
period  (e.g., Figure  12.8).  Increases  in  solar  irradiance  could
account  for  some  of  the  observed  tropospheric  warming, but
mechanisms  by  which  this  could  cool  the  stratosphere  (e.g.,
through  changes  in  stratospheric  ozone)  remain  speculative.
Observed  increases  in  stratospheric  water  vapour  might  also
account  for  some  of  the  observed  stratospheric  cooling.
Estimated changes in solar radiative forcing over the 20th century
are  substantially  smaller  than  those  due  to  greenhouse  gas
forcing, unless  mechanisms  exist  which  enhance  the  effects  of
solar  radiation  changes  at  the  ground.  Palaeo-data  show  little
evidence  of  such  an  enhancement  at  the  surface  in  the  past.
Simulations based solely on the response to natural forcing (e.g.,

Figure 12.7a) are inconsistent with the observed climate record
even if the model-simulated response is allowed to scale up or
down  to  match  the  observations.  It  is  therefore  unlikely  that
natural forcing and internal variability together can explain the
instrumental temperature record.

Anthropogenic factors do provide an explanation of 20th century
temperature change.
All models produce a response pattern to combined greenhouse
gas  and  sulphate  aerosol  forcing  that  is  detectable  in  the  20th
century  surface  temperature  record  (e.g., Figures  12.10, 12.12
(one model produces an estimate of internal variability which is
not consistent with that observed)). Given that sulphate aerosol
forcing  is  negative, and  hence  tends  to  reduce  the  response,
detection of the response to the combined forcing indicates the
presence of a greenhouse gas signal that is at least as large as the
combined signal.

The effect of anthropogenic greenhouse gases is detected, despite
uncertainties in sulphate aerosol forcing and response.
The analysis used to derive Figures 12.10a  and 12.12, left box,
assumes that the ratio of the greenhouse gas and sulphate aerosol
responses  in  each  model  is  correct.  Given  the  uncertainty  in
sulphate aerosol forcing, this may not be the case. Hence one must
also  consider  the  separate  responses  to  greenhouse  gases  and
aerosols  simultaneously. A  greenhouse  gas  signal  is  consistently
detected  in  the  observations  (e.g., Figure  12.10b,c, Figure  12.12
right  hand  boxes;  North  and  Wu, 2001;  Tett  et  al. 2000).  The
greenhouse gas responses are consistent with the observations in all
but one case. The two component studies all indicate a substantial
detectable greenhouse gas signal, despite uncertainties in aerosol
forcing. The spread of estimates of the sulphate signal emphasises
the uncertainty in sulphate aerosol forcing and response.

It is unlikely that detection studies have mistaken a natural signal
for an anthropogenic signal.
In order to demonstrate an anthropogenic contribution to climate,
it  is  necessary  to  rule  out  the  possibility  that  the  detection
procedure  has  mistaken  part  or  all  of  a  natural  signal  for  an
anthropogenic  change.  On  physical  grounds, natural  forcing  is
unlikely  to  account  completely  for  the  observed  warming  over
the last three to five decades, given that it is likely that the overall
trend in natural forcing over most of the 20th century is small or
negative.  Several  studies  have  involved  three  or  more
components   the  responses  to  greenhouse  gases, sulphate
aerosols  and  natural  (solar, volcanic  or  volcanic  and  solar)
forcing.  These  studies  all  detect  a  substantial  greenhouse  gas
contribution  over  the  last  fifty  years, though  in  one  case  the
estimated greenhouse gas amplitude is inconsistent with observa-
tions.  Thus  it  is  unlikely  that  we  have  misidentified  the  solar
signal completely as a greenhouse gas response, but uncertainty
in the amplitude of the response to natural forcing continues to
contribute to uncertainty in the size of the anthropogenic signal.

The detection methods used should not be sensitive to errors in the
amplitude of the global mean forcing or response.
Signal estimation methods (e.g., Figures 12.10, 12.11 and 12.12)

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

731

allow for errors in the amplitude of the response, so the results
should not be sensitive to errors in the magnitude of the forcing or
the  magnitude  of  the  simulated  model  response.  This  would
reduce the impact of uncertainty in indirect sulphate forcing on the
estimated greenhouse and net sulphate signal amplitudes, to the
extent  that  the  pattern  of  response  to  indirect  sulphate  forcing
resembles the pattern of response to direct sulphate forcing. Some
models  indicate  this  is  may  be  the  case, others  do  not, so  this
remains an important source of uncertainty. Note that if the spatio-
temporal pattern of response to indirect sulphate forcing were to
resemble the greenhouse response, it would lead to the amplitude
of the greenhouse response being underestimated in cases where
indirect  sulphate  forcing  has  not  been  included  in  the  model.
Detection and attribution results are also expected to be insensitive
to  all  but  the  largest  scale  details  of  radiative  forcing  patterns.
Detection is only possible at the largest spatial scales (e.g., Stott
and Tett, 1998). In addition, atmospheric motions and large-scale
feedbacks smooth out the response. All these arguments tend to
reduce the impact of the large uncertainty in the magnitude of the
forcing due to indirect sulphate aerosols. The inclusion of forcing
from additional aerosols (see Chapter 6) is unlikely to alter our
conclusion concerning the detection of a substantial greenhouse
gas signal, though it is likely to affect estimates of the sulphate
aerosol response. This is because part of the response to sulphate
aerosols can be considered as surrogate for other aerosols, even
though the patterns of forcing and response may differ on smaller
scales. In general, the estimates of global mean forcing for other
neglected factors are small (see Chapter 6, Figure 6.6). 

Studies of the changes in the vertical patterns of temperature also
indicate  that  there  has  been  an  anthropogenic  influence  on
climate over the last 35 years. 
One study finds that even when changes in stratospheric ozone
and solar irradiance are taken into account, there is a detectable
greenhouse gas signal in the vertical temperature record. 

Observed and simulated vertical lapse rate changes are inconsis-
tent  over  the  last  two  decades, but  there  is  an  anthropogenic
influence on tropospheric temperatures over a longer period.
Over  the  last  twenty  years, the  observed  warming  trend  in  the
lower  troposphere  has  been  smaller  than  at  the  surface.  This
contrasts  with  model  simulations  of  the  response  to  anthro-
pogenic greenhouse gases and sulphate aerosols. Natural climate
variability and the influence of natural external forcing, such as
volcanism, can  explain  part  of  this  difference.  However, a
discrepancy  remains  that  cannot  be  accounted  for  with  current
climate models. The reduced warming in the lower troposphere
does  not, however, call  into  question  the  fact  that  the  surface
temperature  has  been  warming  over  the  satellite  period  (e.g.,
National Academy of Sciences, 2000). Over the longer period for
which radiosonde data are available, an anthropogenic influence
due to increasing greenhouse gases and decreasing stratospheric
ozone is detected in all studies.

Natural  factors  may  have  contributed  to  the  early  century
warming.
Most of the discussion in this section has been concerned with
evidence relating to a human effect on late 20th century climate.
The observed global mean surface temperature record shows two
main periods of warming. Some studies detect a solar influence
on surface temperature over the first five decades of the century,
with  perhaps  a  small  additional  warming  due  to  increases  in
greenhouse  gases.  One  study  suggests  that  the  early  warming
could  be  due  to  a  combination  of  anthropogenic  effects  and  a
highly unusual internal variation. Thus the early century warming
could be due to some combination of natural internal variability,
changes  in  solar  irradiance  and  some  anthropogenic  influence.
The additional warming in the second half-century is most likely
to be due to a substantial warming due to increases in greenhouse
gases, partially offset by cooling due to aerosols, and perhaps by
cooling due to natural factors towards the end of the period.

732

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

Appendix 12.1: Optimal Detection is Regression

The  detection  technique  that  has  been  used  in  most  optimal
detection studies  performed  to  date  has  several  equivalent
representations  (Hegerl  and  North, 1997;  Zwiers, 1999).  It  has
recently been recognised that it can be cast as a multiple regres-
sion problem with respect to generalised least squares (Allen and
Tett, 1999; see also Hasselmann, 1993, 1997) in which a field of
n observations y  is  represented  as  a  linear  combination  of
signal patterns g1,...,gm plus noise u

where  Cuu is  the  nn covariance  matrix  of  the  noise
(Hasselmann, 1997, 1998; Allen  and  Tett, 1999;  Levine  and
Berliner, 1999). Generalisations allow for the incorporation of
signal uncertainties (see, for example, Allen et al., 2000b). A
schematic  two-dimensional  example  is  given  in  Box  12.1.  In
essence, the  amplitudes  are  estimated  by  giving  somewhat
greater weight to information in the low variance parts of the
field  of  observations.  The  uncertainty  of  this  estimate,
expressed as the mm covariance matrix of Caa of a, is given
by

=

y

m

= ai

1

i

+ =

u Ga u

+

g

i

(A12.1.1)

C

a a

=

(

T

GCG


1
uu


1

)

(A12.1.3)

where G=(g1...gm) is the matrix composed of the signal patterns
and  a=(a1,...,am)T is  the  vector  composed  of  the  unknown
amplitudes. The field usually contains temperature observations,
arrayed  in  space, either  at  the  surface  as  grid  box  averages  of
surface temperature observations (typically 55 degrees; Santer
et  al., 1995;  Hegerl  et  al., 1997;  Tett  et  al., 1999), or  in  the
vertical as zonal averages of radiosonde observations (Karoly et
al., 1994; Santer et al., 1996a; Allen and Tett, 1999). The fields
are  masked  so  that  they  represent  only  those  regions  with
adequate data. The fields may also have a time dimension (Allen
and  Tett, 1999;  North  and  Stevens;  1998;  Stevens  and  North,
1996). Regardless of how the field is defined, its dimension n (the
total  number  of  observed  values  contained  in  any  one  single
realisation  of  the  field)  is  large. The  signal  patterns, which  are
obtained from climate models, and the residual noise field, have
the  same  dimension.  The  procedure  consists  of  efficiently
estimating  the  unknown  amplitudes  a from  observations  and
testing  the  null  hypotheses  that  they  are  zero.  In  the  event  of
rejection, testing the hypothesis that the amplitudes are unity for
some combination of signals performs the attribution consistency
test.  This  assumes, of  course, that  the  climate  model  signal
patterns  have  been  normalised.  When  the  signal  is  noise-free,
estimates of the amplitudes are given by 

(~
=
yCGGCGa


1

)

T

T


1
uu


1
uu

(A12.1.2)

This leads to a (1)100% confidence ellipsoid for the unknown
amplitudes when u is the multivariate Gaussian that is given by

~(
aaGCGaa

~(





)

T

T


1
uu



)

 

2
1

(A12.1.4)

where 2
1 is the (1) critical value of the chi-squared distribu-
tion with m degrees of freedom. Marginal confidence ellipsoids
can be constructed for subsets of signals simply by removing the
appropriate  rows  and  columns  from GTC1
uuG and  reducing  the
number  of  degrees  of  freedom.  The  marginal  (1)100%
confidence  interval  for  the  amplitude  of  signal  i (i.e.,
the
confidence  interval  that  would  be  obtained  in  the  absence  of
information about the other signals) is given by



a
i

z

1


/

2

(

T

G C G


1
uu



a
i

 +

a
i

)

ii

z

1


/

2

(

T

G C G


1
uu

)

ii

(A12.1.5)

where Z1/2 is the (1/2) critical value for the standard normal
distribution. Signal i is said to be detected at the /2100% signif-
icance  level  if  the  lower  limit  confidence  interval  (A12.1.5)  is
greater  than  zero.  However, multiplicity is  a  concern  when
making inferences in this way. For example, two signals that are
detected  at  the  /2100%  significance  level  may  not  be  jointly
detectable at this level. The attribution consistency test is passed
when the confidence ellipsoid contains the vector of units (1,...,1)T. 

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

733

Appendix 12.2: Three Approaches to Optimal Detection

Optimal  detection  studies  come  in  several  variants  depending
upon how the time evolution of signal amplitude and structure is
treated. 

Fixed pattern studies (Hegerl et al., 1996, 1997, 2000a; Berliner
et al., 2000; Schnur, 2001) assume that the spatial structure of
the  signals  does  not  change  during  the  epoch  covered  by  the
instrumental  record.  This  type  of  study  searches  for  evidence
that the amplitudes of fixed anthropogenic signals are increasing
with time. The observed field y=y(t) that appears on the left hand
side of equation (A12.1.1) is typically a field of 30 to 50-year
moving  window  trends  computed  from  annual  mean  observa-
tions.  The  regression  equation  (A12.1.1)  is  solved  repeatedly
with  a  fixed  signal  matrix  G as  the  moving  30  to  50-year
window is stepped through the available record. 

Studies  with time-varying  patterns  allow  the  shape  of  the
signals, as well as their amplitudes, to evolve with time. Such
studies come in two flavours. 

The  space-time  approach  uses  enlarged  signal  vectors  that
consist  of  a  sequence  of  spatial  patterns  representing  the
evolution of the signal through a short epoch. For example, Tett
et al. (1999) use signal vectors composed of five spatial patterns
representing a sequence of decadal means. The enlarged signal
matrix  G=G(t)  evolves  with  time  as  the  5-decade  window  is
moved  one  decade  at  a  time.  The  observations  are  defined

similarly as extended vectors containing a sequence of observed
decadal  mean  temperature  patterns.  As  with  the  fixed  pattern
approach, a separate model is fitted for each 5-decade window
so that the evolution of the signal amplitudes can be studied.

The space-frequency approach (North et al., 1995) uses annual
mean signal patterns that evolve throughout the analysis period.
A  Fourier  transform  is  used  to  map  the  temporal  variation  of
each signal into the frequency domain. Only the low-frequency
Fourier  coefficients  representing  decadal-scale  variability  are
retained and gathered into a signal vector. The observations are
similarly  transformed.  The  selection  of  time-scales  that  is
effected by retaining only certain Fourier coefficients is a form
of  dimension  reduction  (see  Dimension  Reduction, Appendix
12.4) in the time domain. This is coupled with spatial dimension
reduction that must also be performed. The result approximates
the dimension reduction that is obtained by projecting observa-
tions in space and time on low order space-time EOFs (North et
al., 1995).  A  further  variation  on  this  theme  is  obtained  by
increasing  the  time  resolution  of  the  signals  and  the  data  by
using  monthly  rather  than  annual  means.  Climate  statistics,
including means, variances and covariances, have annual cycles
at  this  time  resolution, and  thus  dimension  reduction  must  be
performed with cyclo-stationary space-time EOFs (Kim and Wu,
2000).

Given the same amount of data to estimate covariance matrices,
the  space-time  and  space-frequency  approaches  will  sacrifice
spatial resolution for temporal resolution.

Appendix 12.3: Pattern Correlation Methods

The  pattern  correlation  methods  discussed  in  this  section  are
closely  related  to  optimal  detection  with  one  signal  pattern.
Pattern correlation studies use either a centred statistic, R, which
correlates observed and signal anomalies in space relative to their
respective spatial means, or an uncentred statistic, C (Barnett and
Schlesinger, 1987), that correlates these fields without removing
the spatial means. It has been argued that the latter is better suited
for detection, because it includes the response in the global mean,
while  the  former  is  more  appropriate  for  attribution  because  it
better  measures  the  similarity  between  spatial  patterns.  The
similarity  between  the  statistics  is  emphasised  by  the  fact  that
they  can  be  given  similar  matrix-vector  representations.  In  the
one  pattern  case, the  optimal  (regression)  estimate  of  signal
amplitude is given by

=

a


1
T
gCgyCg
uu
1


1
uu

T
1

/

1

(A12.3.1)

The uncentred statistics may be written similarly as

=

C

T
ggyg
1

T
1

/

=

1

T
Iyg
1

/

T
Igg
1

1

 

(A12.3.2)

where I is the nn identity matrix. Similarly, the centred statistic
can be written (albeit with an extra term in the denominator) as

=

R



T
yUIg
)
1

(

/[(



T
gUIg
)
1

(

)

1

2/1

(

T



yUIy
))

(

2/1

]

(A12.3.3)

where U is the nn matrix with elements ui,j=1/n. The matrix U
removes  the  spatial  means.  Note  that  area, mass  or  volume
weighting, as  appropriate, is  easily  incorporated  into  these
expressions. The main point is that each statistic is proportional
to the inner product with respect to a matrix kernel between
the signal pattern and the observations (Stephenson, 1997). In
contrast with the pattern correlation statistics, the optimal signal
amplitude  estimate, which  is  proportional  to  a  correlation
coefficient  using 
so-called  Mahalonobis  kernel
(Stephenson, 1997), maximises the signal-to-noise ratio.

the 

734

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

Appendix 12.4: Dimension Reduction

Estimation of the signal amplitudes, as well as the detection and
attribution  consistency  tests  on  the  amplitudes, requires  an
estimate of the covariance matrix Cuu of the residual noise field.
However, as  y typically  represents  climate  variation  on  time-
scales similar to the length of the observed instrumental record, it
is  difficult  to  estimate  the  covariance  matrix  reliably.  Thus  the
covariance matrix is often estimated from a long control simula-
tion. Even so, the number of independent realisations of u that are
available from a typical 1,000 to 2,000-year control simulation is
substantially smaller than the dimension of the field, and thus it is
not possible to estimate the full covariance matrix. The solution is
to  replace  the  full  fields  y, g1,...,gm and  u with  vectors  of
dimension k, where m<k<<n, containing indices of their projec-
tions onto the dominant patterns of variability f1,...,fk of u. These
patterns are usually taken to be the k highest variance EOFs of a
control run (North and Stevens, 1998; Allen and Tett, 1999; Tett et
al., 1999)  or  a  forced  simulation  (Hegerl  et  al., 1996, 1997;
Schnur, 2001).  Stott  and  Tett  (1998)  showed  with  a  perfect
model study that climate change in surface air temperature can
only be detected at very large spatial scales. Thus Tett et al. (1999)
reduce the spatial resolution to a few spherical harmonics prior to
EOF truncation. Kim et al. (1996) and Zwiers and Shen (1997)
examine  the  sampling  properties  of  spherical  harmonic  coeffi-
cients when they are estimated from sparse observing networks.

An important decision, therefore, is the choice of k. A key consid-
eration in the choice is that the variability of the residuals should
be consistent with the variability of the control simulation in the
dimensions  that  are  retained. Allen  and  Tett  (1999)  describe  a
simple  test  on  the  residuals  that  makes  this  consistency  check.
Rejection implies that the model-simulated variability is signifi-
cantly different from that of the residuals. This may happen when
the number of retained dimensions, k, is too large because higher
order  EOFs  may  contain  unrealistically  low  variance  due  to
sampling deficiencies or scales that are not well represented. In
this  situation, the  use  of  a  smaller  value  of  k  can  still  provide
consistent results: there is no need to require that model-simulated
variability  is  perfect  on  all  spatio-temporal  scales  for  it  to  be
adequate on the very large scales used for detection and attribu-
tion studies. However, failing the residual check of Allen and Tett
(1999)  could  also  indicate  that  the  model  does  not  have  the
correct timing or pattern of response (in which case the residuals
will  contain  forced  variability  that  is  not  present  in  the  control
regardless of the choice of k) or that the model does not simulate
the correct amount of internal variability, even at the largest scales
represented  by  the  low  order  EOFs.  In  this  case, there  is  no
satisfactory  choice  of  k.  Previous  authors  (e.g., Hegerl  et  al.,
1996, 1997; Stevens and North, 1996; North and Stevens, 1998)
have  made  this  choice  subjectively.  Nonetheless, experience  in
recent studies (Tett et al. 1999; Hegerl et al. 2000, 2001; Stott et
al., 2001) indicates that their choices were appropriate.

Appendix 12.5: Determining the Likelihood of Outcomes (p-
values)

Traditional  statistical  hypothesis  tests  are  performed  by
comparing the value of a detection statistic with an estimate of
its natural internal variability in the unperturbed climate. This
estimate  must  be  obtained  from  control  climate  simulations
because detection statistics typically measure change on time-
scales  that  are  a  substantial  fraction  of  the  length  of  the
available  instrumental  record  (see  Appendix  12.4).  Most
optimal detection  studies  use  two  data  sets  from  control
climate  simulations, one  that  is  used  to  develop  the  optimal
detection  statistic  and  the  other  to  independently  estimate  its
natural variability. This is necessary to avoid underestimating
natural  variability.  The  p-value  that  is  used  in  testing  the  no
signal null hypothesis is often computed by assuming that both
the observed and simulated projections on signal patterns are

normally distributed. This is convenient, and is thought to be a
reasonable  assumption  given  the  variables  and  the  time  and
space  scales  used  for  detection  and  attribution.  However, it
leads  to  concern  that  very  small  p-values  may  be  unreliable,
because they correspond to events that have not been explored
by  the  model  in  the  available  control  integrations  (Allen  and
Tett, 1999).  They  therefore  recommend  that  p-values  be
limited to values that are consistent with the range visited in
the available control integrations. A non-parametric approach
is  to  estimate  the  p-value  by  comparing  the  value  of  the
detection statistic with an empirical estimate of its distribution
obtained  from  the  second  control  simulation  data  set.  If
parametric methods are used to estimate the p-value, then very
small values should be reported as being less than 1/np where
np represents  the  equivalent  number  of  independent  real-
isations  of  the  detection  statistic  that  are  contained  in  the
second control integration. 

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

735

References
Adcock,R.J., 1878: The Analyst (Des Moines, Iowa), 5, 53.
Allen, M.R.  and  S.F.B.Tett, 1999: Checking  for  model  consistency  in

optimal fingerprinting. Clim. Dyn., 15, 419-434.

Allen, M.R. and P.A. Stott, 2000: Interpreting the signal of anthropogenic
climate  change  I: estimation  theory.  Tech.  Report  RAL-TR-2000-
045, Rutherford Appleton Lab., Chilton, X11 0QX, UK. 

Allen, M.R., N.P. Gillett, J.A. Kettleborough, R. Schnur, G.S. Jones, T.
Delworth, F.  Zwiers, G.  Hegerl, T.P.  Barnett, 2000a: Quantifying
anthropogenic influence on recent near-surface temperature change,
Tech.  Report  RAL-TR-2000-046, Rutherford  Appleton  Lab.,
Chilton, X11 0QX, UK. 

Allen, M.R., P.A.  Stott, R.  Schnur, T.  Delworth  and  J.F.B.  Mitchell,
2000b: Uncertainty  in  forecasts  of  anthropogenic  climate  change.
Nature, 407, 617-620.

Angell, J.K.,1994: Global, hemispheric and zonal temperature anomalies
derived  from  radiosonde  records.  pp.  636-672.  In  Trends  93: A
compendium  of  data  on  global  change (Eds. T. A.  Boden  et  al.),
ORNL/CDIAC-65, Oak Ridge, TN.

Bankes, H.T., R.A. Wood, J.M. Gregory, T.C. Johns and G.S Jones, 2000:
Are  observed  changes  in  intermediate  water  masses  a  signature  of
anthropogenic climate change? Geophys. Res. Lett. , 27, 2961-2964.
Barnett, T.P. and M.E. Schlesinger, 1987: Detecting changes in global
climate induced by greenhouse gases. J. Geophys. Res., 92, 14772-
14780.

Barnett, T.P., B.D.  Santer, P.D.  Jones, R.S.  Bradley  and  K.R.  Briffa,
1996: Estimates  of  low  Frequency  Natural  Variability  in  Near-
Surface Air Temperature. The Holocene, 6, 255-263.

Barnett, T.P., K. Hasselmann, M. Chelliah, T. Delworth, G. Hegerl, P.
Jones, E. Rasmussen, E. Roeckner, C. Ropelewski, B. Santer and S.
Tett, 1999: Detection  and  attribution  of  climate  change: A  Status
report. Bull. Am. Met. Soc., 12, 2631-2659.

Barnett, T. P., G.C. Hegerl, T. Knutson and S.F.B. Tett, 2000: Uncertainty
levels  in  predicted  patterns  of  anthropogenic  climate  change.  J.
Geophys.Res., 105, 15525-15542.

Bengtsson, L., E.Roeckner, M.Stendel, 1999: Why is the global warming
proceeding much slower than expected. J. Geophys. Res., 104, 3865-
3876.

Berliner, L.M., R.A.  Levine  and  D.J.  Shea, 2000: Bayesian  climate

change assessment. J.Climate, 13, 3805-3820.

Bertrand, C., J.-P.  van Ypersele, A.  Berger, 1999: Volcanic  and  solar

impacts on climate since 1700. Clim. Dyn., 15, 355-367

Boer, G. J., G. Flato, M.C. Reader and D. Ramsden, 2000a: A transient
climate change simulation with greenhouse gas and aerosol forcing:
experimental design and comparison with the instrumental record for
the 20th century. Clim. Dyn., 16, 405-426. 

Boer, G.J., G. Flato, M.C. Reader and D. Ramsden, 2000b: A transient
climate change simulation with greenhouse gas and aerosol forcing:
projected for the 21st century. Clim. Dyn., 16, 427-450.

Briffa, K.R., P.D.  Jones, F.H.  Schweingruber  and  T.J.  Osborn, 1998:
Influence  of  volcanic  eruptions  on  Northern  Hemisphere  summer
temperature over the past 600 years. Nature, 393, 450-454.

Briffa, K.R., T.J. Osborn, F.H. Schweingruber, I.C. Harris, P.D. Jones,
S.G. Shiyatov and E.A. Vaganov, 2000: Low-frequency temperature
variations from a northern tree-ring density network. J.Geophys.Res.
106, 2929-2942.

Brown, L., G. Casella and T.G. Hwang, 1995: Optimal confidence sets,
bioequivalence and the limacon of Pascal. J. Amer. Statist. Soc., 90,
880-889.

Brown, S.J., D.E. Parker, C.K. Folland and I. Macadam, 2000a: Decadal
variability in the lower-tropospheric lapse rate. Geophys. Res. Lett.,
27, 997-1000.

Brown, S.J., D.E.  Parker  and  D.M.H.  Sexton, 2000b: Differential
changes  in  observed  surface  and  atmospheric  temperature  since

1979.  Hadley  Centre  Technical  Note  No.  12, The  Met.  Office
Bracknell, UK, pp41.

Chanin, M.-L.  and  V.  Ramaswamy, 1999: Trends  in  Stratospheric
Temperatures in  WMO  (World  Meteorological  Organization),
Scientific  Assessment  of  Ozone  Depletion: 1998, Global  Ozone
Research and Monitoring Project - Report No. 44, Geneva. 5.1-5.59
Collins, M., T.J. Osborn, S.F.B. Tett, K.R. Briffa and F.H. Schwingruber,
2000: A  comparison  of  the  variability  of  a  climate  model  with  a
network of tree-ring densities. Hadley Centre Technical Note 16.

Crowley, T.J., 2000: Causes of climate change over the last 1000 years,

Science, 289, 270-277.

Crowley, T.J.  and  K.-Y.  Kim, 1996: Comparison  of  proxy  records  of

climate change and solar forcing. Geophys. Res. Lett. 23: 359-362.

Crowley, T.J. and Kim K.-Y., 1999: Modelling the temperature response
to forced climate change over the last six centuries. Geophys. Res.
Lett., 26, 1901-1904.

Crowley, T.J. and T. Lowery, 2000: How warm was the Medieval warm

period? Ambio, 29, 51-54.

Cubasch, U., G.C. Hegerl and J. Waszkewitz,1996: Prediction, detection
and  regional  assessment  of  anthropogenic  climate  change.
Geophysica, 32, 77-96.

Cubasch, U., G.C.  Hegerl, R.  Voss, J.  Waszkewitz  and  T.J.  Crowley,
1997: Simulation of the influence of solar radiation variations on the
global climate with an ocean-atmosphere general circulation model.
Clim. Dyn., 13, 757-767.

Delworth, T.L. and T.R. Knutson, 2000. Simulation of early 20th century

global warming. Science, 287, 2246-2250.

Dempster, A.P., 1998: Logicist  statistics  I.  Models  and  modeling.

Statistical Science, 13, 248-276. 

Drijfhout, S.S., R.J. Haarsma, J.D.Opsteegh, F.M. Selten, 1999: Solar-
induced  versus  internal  variability  in  a  coupled  climate  model.
Geophys. Res. Lett., 26, 205-208.

Folland, C.K., D.M.H.  Sexton, D.J.K.  Karoly, C.E.  Johnston, D.P.
Rowell  and  D.E.  Parker, 1998: Influences  of  anthropogenic  and
oceanic forcing on recent climate change.  Geophys.  Res.  Lett., 25,
353-356.

Forest, C.E., M.R. Allen, P.H. Stone, A.P. Sokolov, 2000: Constraining
uncertainties  in  climate  models  using  climate  change  detection
techniques. Geophys. Res. Lett., 27, 569-572.

Forster, P.M. and K.P. Shine, 1999: Stratospheric water vapour changes
as a possible contributor to observed stratospheric cooling. Geophys.
Res. Lett., 26,3309-3312.

Free, M. and A. Robock, 1999: Global Warming in the Context of the

little Ice Age. J.Geophys Res, 104, 19057-19070.

Froehlich, K.  and  J.  Lean, 1998: The  Suns  Total  Irradiance: Cycles,
Trends  and  Related  Climate  Change  Uncertainties  since  1976.
Geophys. Res. Lett., 25, 4377-4380.

Fyfe, J.C., G.J.  Boer  and  G.M.  Flato  1999: The Arctic  and Antarctic
Oscillations  and  their  projected  changes  under  global  warming.
Geophys. Res. Lett., 26, 1601-1604.

Gaffen, D.J., B.D.  Santer, J.S.  Boyle, J.R.  Christy, N.E.  Graham  and
R.J.Ross, 2000.  Multi-decadal  changes  in  vertical  temperature
structure of the tropical troposphere. Science, 287, 1242-1245.

Gillett, N., M.R. Allen and S.F.B. Tett, 2000a: Modelled and observed
variability in atmospheric vertical temperature structure. Clim Dyn,
16, 49-61.

Gillett, N, G.C. Hegerl, M.R. Allen, P.A. Stott, 2000b: Implications of
observed changes in the Northern Hemispheric winter circulation for
the  detection  of  anthropogenic  climate  change.  Geophys.Res.Lett.,
27, 993-996..

Graf, H.-F., I. Kirchner, I. Schult 1996: Modelling Mt. Pinatubo Climate
Effects. NATO-ASI Series, Vol 142, The Mount Pinatubo Eruption,
Fiocco G and Dua D. eds., Springer, 1996: 219-231.

Graf, H-F., I.  Kirchner  and  J.  Perlwitz,1998: Changing  lower  stratos-
pheric  circulation: The  role  of  ozone  and  greenhouse  gases.  J.

736

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

Geophys. Res., 103, 11251-11261.

Grieser, J.and  C.-D.  Schoenwiese, 1999: Parameterization  of  spatio-
temporal  patterns  of  volcanic  aerosol  induced  stratospheric  optical
depth and its climate radiative forcing. Atmosfera, 12, 111-133

Grieser, J.  and  C.-D.  Schoenwiese, 2001: Process, forcing  and  signal
analysis of global mean temperature variations by means of a three
box energy balance model. Clim. Change, in press. 

Haigh, J.D., 1999: A GCM study of climate change in response to the 11-

year solar cycle. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc., 125, 871-892.

Hansen J., Mki.Sato, R. Ruedy, A. Lacis, K. Asamoah, S. Borenstein, E.
Brown, B. Cairns, G. Caliri, M. Campbell, B. Curran, S. deCastro, L.
Druyan , M. Fox, C. Johnson, J. Lerner, M.P. McCormick, R. Miller,
P. Minnis, A. Morrison, L. Pandolfo, I. Ramberran, F. Zaucker, M.
Robinson, P. Russell, K. Shah, P. Stone, I. Tegen, L. Thomason, J.
Wilder and H. Wilson 1996: A Pinatubo climate modeling investga-
tion. In The Mount Pinatubo Eruption: Effects on the Atmosphere
and Climate, Fiocco G and Fua Visconti G, Springer Verlag, Berlin,
pp 233-272.

Hansen, J., M. Sato and R. Reudy, 1997a: Radiative forcing and climate

response. J. Geophys. Res., 102, 6831-6864.

Hansen, J.E., M.  Sato, A.  Lacis  and  R.  Reudy, 1997b: The  missing

climate forcing. Roy. Soc. Phil. Trans. B, 352, 231-240.

Hansen, J.E., M.Sato, A.  Lacis, R.Reudy, I  .Tegen  and  E.  Matthews,
1998.  Climate  forcings  in  the  industrial  era.  Proc.  Nat.  Acad.  Sci.
U.S.A., 95, 12753-12758.

Harrison, R.G. and K.P. Shine, 1999: A review of recent studies of the
influence  of  solar  changes  on  the  Earths  climate.  Hadley  Centre
Tech. Note 6. Hadley Centre for Climate Prediction and Research,
Meteorological Office, Bracknell RG12 2SY UK pp 65 

Hasselmann, K., 1976: Stochastic climate models. Part 1. Theory. Tellus,

28, 473-485.

Hasselmann, K., 1979. On the signal-to-noise problem in atmsopheric
response studies. Meteorology over the tropical oceans, D.B. Shaw
ed., Roy Meteorol. Soc., 251-259

Hasselmann, K., 1993: Optimal fingerprints for the Detection of Time

dependent Climate Change. J. Climate, 6: 1957-1971.

Hasselmann, K.  ,1997: Multi-pattern  fingerprint  method  for  detection

and attribution of climate change. Clim. Dyn., 13: 601-612.

Hasselmann, K., 1998: Conventional and Bayesian approach to climate-
change detection and attribution. Quart. J. R. Met. Soc., 124, 2541-
2565.

Hasselmann, K., L. Bengtsson , U. Cubasch, G.C. Hegerl, H. Rodhe, E.
Roeckner, H. von Storch, R.Voss and J. Waskewitz,1995: Detection
of  an  anthropogenic  fingerprint.  In:Proceedings  of  Modern
Meteorology Symposium in honour of Aksle Wiin-Nielsen, 1995. P.
Ditvelson (ed) ECMWF.

Haywood, J.M., R.  Stouffer, R.  Wetherald, S.  Manabe  and  V.
Ramaswamy, 1997: Transient  response  of  a  coupled  model  to
estimated  changes  in  grenhouse  gas  and  sulphate  concentrations.
Geophys. Res. Lett. , 24, 1335- 1338.

Hegerl, G.C.  and  G.R.  North  1997: Statistically  optimal  methods  for
detecting anthropogenic climate change. J. Climate, 10: 1125-1133.
Hegerl, G.C. and M.R. Allen, 2000: Physical interpretation of optimal
detection.  Tech  Report  RAL-TR-2001-010, Rutherford  Appleton
Lab., Chilton, X11 0QX, U.K.

Hegerl, G.C., von Storch, K. Hasselmann, B.D. Santer, U. Cubasch and
P.D. Jones 1996: Detecting Greenhouse Gas induced Climate Change
with an Optimal Fingerprint Method. J. Climate, 9, 2281-2306.

Hegerl, G.C., K Hasselmann, U. Cubasch, J.F.B. Mitchell, E. Roeckner,
R.  Voss  and  J.  Waszkewitz  1997: Multi-fingerprint  detection  and
attribution  of  greenhouse  gas-  and  aerosol  forced  climate  change.
Clim. Dyn. 13, 613-634

Hegerl, G.C., P.  Stott, M.  Allen, J.F.B.Mitchell, S.F.B.Tett  and
U.Cubasch, 2000: Detection  and  attribution  of  climate  change:
Sensitivity of results to climate model differences.  Clim.  Dyn., 16,

737-754

Hegerl, G.C., P.D. Jones and T.P. Barnett. 2001: Effect of observational
sampling error on the detection of anthropogenic climate change. J.
Climate, 14, 198-207.

Hill, D.C., M.R. Allen, P.A. Stott, 2001: Allowing for solar forcing in the
detection  of  human  influence  on  atmospheric  vertical  temperature
structures. Geophys. Res. Lett., 28, 1555-1558.

Hoyt, D.V.  and  K.H.  Schatten,1993: A  discussion  of  plausible  solar
irradiance variations, 1700-1992. J. Geophys. Res., 98, 18895-18906.
IPCC, 1990: Climate change: the IPCC scientific assessment [Houghton,
J.T., G.J.  Jenkins  and  J.J.  Ephraums  (eds.)]  Cambridge  University
Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom, 365pp.

IPCC, 1992: Climate Change 1992: The Supplementary Report to the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change Scientific Assessment
[Houghton, J.T., B.A. Callander and S.K. Varney (eds.)]. Cambridge
University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
USA, 100 pp.

IPCC,1996: Climate Change 1995. The IPCC second scientific assess-
ment. Houghton JT, L.G. Meira Filho, B.A. Callander, N. Harris, A.
Kattenberg  , K.  Maskell  (eds.).  Cambridge  University  Press,
Cambridge, 572 pp.

Johns, T.C., J.M. Gregory, P. Stott and J.F.B. Mitchell, 2001: Assessment
of the similarity between modelled and observed near surface temper-
ature changes using ensembles. Geophys. Res. Lett. 28, 1007-1010. 
Jones, A., D.L. Roberts and M.J. Woodage, 1999: The indirect effects of
anthropogenic  aerosl  simulated  using  a  climate  model  with  an
interactive  sulphur  cycle  .  Hadley  Centre  Tech.  Note  14.  Hadley
Centre for Climate Prediction and Research, Meteorological Office,
Bracknell RG12 2SY UK, pp39.

Jones, P.D.  and  G.C.  Hegerl, 1998: Comparisons  of  two  methods  of
removing  anthropogenically  related  variability  from  the  near
surface  observational  temperature  field.  J.Geophys.Res., 103, D12:
1377-13786

Jones, P.D., K.R. Briffa, T.P. Barnett and S.F.B. Tett, 1998: High-resolu-
tion  paleoclimatic  records  for  the  last  millenium.  The  Holocene 8:
467-483.

Jones, P.D., T.J.  Osborn, K.R.  Briffa, C.K.  Folland, B.  Horton, L.V.
Alexander, D.E.  Parker  and  N.A.  Raynor, 2001:Adjusting  for
sampling  density  in  grid-box  land  and  ocean  surface  temperature
time series, J. Geophys. Res., 106, 3371-3380

Karoly, D. J. and K. Braganza, 2001: Identifying global climate change

using simple indices. Geophys. Res. Lett., in press.

Karoly, D.J., J.A. Cohen, G.A. Meehl, J.F.B. Mitchell, A.H. Oort, R.J.
Stouffer, R.T.  Weatherald, 1994: An  example      of  fingerprint
detection of greenhouse climate change. Clim. Dyn, 10, 97-105.

Kattenberg, A., F.  Giorgi, H.  Grassl, G.A.  Meehl, J.F.B.  Mitchell, R.
Stouffer, T. Tokioka, A.J. Weaver and T.M.L. Wigley, 1996: Climate
Models - Projections of Future Climate. Houghton et al. (eds.), The
IPCC  Second  Scientific  Assessment.  Cambridge  University  Press,
Cambridge, 285-357.

Kaufmann, R.K. and D.I. Stern, 1997: Evidence for human influence on
climate from hemispheric temperature relations. Nature, 388, 39-44.
Kelly, P.M., P.D. Jones, J. Pengqun, 1996: The spatial response of the
climate system to explosive volcanic eruptions. Int. J. Climatol. 16,
537-550.

Kim, K.-Y. and Q. Wu, 2000: Optimal detection using cyclostationary

EOFs. J. Climate, 13, 938-950.

Kim, K.-Y., G.R. North, S.S. Shen, 1996: Optimal estimation of spherical
harmonic components from a sample of spatially nonuniform covari-
ance statistics. J. Climate, 9, 635-645.

Kirchner, I., G.L.  Stenchikov, H.-F.Graf, A.Robock  and  J.C.Antuna,
1999: Climate  model  simulation  of  winter  warming  and  summer
cooling  following  the  1991  Mount  Pinatubo  volcanic  eruption.  J.
Geophys. Res., 104, 19,039-19,055.

Knutson, T.R., T.L. Delworth, K. Dixon and R.J. Stouffer, 2000: Model

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

737

assessment  of  regional  surface  temperature  trends  (1949-97), J.
Geophys. Res., 104, 30981-30996.

Labitzke, K. and H.van Loon, 1997: The signal of the 11-year sunspot
cycle in the upper troposphere-lower stratosphere. Space Sci. Rev.,
80, 393-410.

Lamb, H. H., 1970: Volcanic dust in the atmosphere; with a chronology
and  assessment  of  its  meteorological  significance, Philosophical
transactions of the Royal Society of Londen, A 266, 425-533

Laut, P. and J. Gunderman, 1998: Does the correlation between the solar
cycle and hemispheric land temperature rule out any significant global
warming from greenhouse gases? J. Atmos. Terrest. Phys., 60, 1-3.

Lean, J., 1997: The Suns Variable Raditation and its relevance for earth.

Annu. Rev. Astrophys. 35, 33-67

Lean, J., J.Beer and R.Bradley, 1995: Reconstruction of solar irradiance
since 1600: Implications For climate change. Geophys. Res. Lett., 22,
3195-3198.

Lean, J., D. Rind, 1998: Climate Forcing by Changing Solar Radiation.

J. Climate, 11, 3069-3094.

Legates, D.  R.  and  R.  E.  Davis, 1997  The  continuing  search  for  an
anthropogenic climate change signal: limitations of correlation based
approaches. Geophys. Res. Lett., 24, 2319-2322

Leroy, S., 1998: Detecting Climate Signals: Some Bayesian Aspects. J.

Climate 11, 640-651.

Levine, R.A. and L.M. Berliner, 1999: Statistical principles for climate

change studies. J. Climate, 12, 564-574.

Lockwood, M.  and  R.  Stamper  1999: Long-term  drift  of  the  coronal
source  magnetic  flux  and  the  total  solar  irradiance, Geophys.  Res.
Lett., 26, 2461-2464

Mann, M.E., R.S. Bradley, M.K. Hughes, 1998: Global scale tmperature
patterns and climate forcing over the past six centuries. Nature, 392,
779-787.

Mann, M.E., E. Gille, R.S. Bradley, M.K. Hughes, J.T. Overpeck, F.T.
Keimig  and W.  Gross, 2000b: Global  temperature  patterns  in  past
centuries: An interactive presentation. Earth Interactions, 4/4, 1-29.
Mao, J.  and A.  Robock, 1998: Surface  air  temperature  simulations  by
AMIP general circulation models: Volcanic and ENSO signals and
systematic errors. J. Climate, 11, 1538-1552.

Michaels, P.J. and P.C. Knappenburger, 1996: Human effect on global

climate? Nature, 384, 523-524.

Mitchell, J.F.B. and T.C. Johns, 1997: On the modification of greenhouse

warming by sulphate aerosols. J. Climate, 10, 245-267

Mitchell, J.F.B., R.A. Davis, W.J. Ingram and C.A. Senior, 1995a: On
surface  temperature, greenhouse  Gases  and  aerosols, models  and
observations. J. Climate, 10, 2364-3286.

Mitchell, J.F.B., T.J.  Johns, J.M.  Gregory  and  S.F.B.  Tett, 1995b:
Transient  climate  response  to  Increasing  sulphate  aerosols  and
greenhouse gases. Nature, 376, 501-504.

National  Academy  of  Sciences, 2000; Reconciling  observations  of
global temperature change. 85pp. Nat. Acad. Press, Washington, DC.
North, G.R.  and  M.  Stevens,1998: Detecting  Climate  Signals  in  the

Surface Temperature Record. J. Climate, 11,: 563-577.

North, G.R. and Q. Wu, 2001: Detecting Climate Signals Using Space

Time EOFs. J. Climate, 14, 1839-1863.

North, G.R., K-Y  Kim, S.  Shen  and  J.W.  Hardin  1995: Detection  of
Forced Climate Signals, Part I: Filter Theory. J. Climate, 8, 401-408.
Osborn, T.J., K.R. Briffa, S.F.B. Tett, P.D. Jones and R.M. Trigo, 1999:
Evaluation  of  the  North  Atlantic  Oscillation  as  simulated  by  a
coupled climate model. Clim. Dyn. 15, 685-702.

Overpeck, J., K. Hughen, D. Hardy, R. Bradley, R. Case, M. Douglas, B.
Finney, K.  Gajewski, G.  Jacoby, A.  Jennings, S.  Lamoureux, A.
Lasca, G. MacDonald, J. Moore, M. Retelle, S. Smith, A. Wolfe, G.
Zielinksi,1997: Arctic  Environmental  Change  of  the  Last  Four
Centuries. Science, 278, 1251-1256.

Paeth, H.  and  H.  Hense, 2001: Signal  Analysis  of  the  northern
hemisphere  atmospheric  mean  temperature  500/1000  hPa  north  of

55N between 1949 and 1994. Clim. Dyn., in press. 

Paeth, H., A. Hense, R. Glowenka-Hense, R.Voss and U.Cubasch, 1999:
The  North Atlantic  Oscillation  as  an  indicator  for  greenhouse  gas
induced climate change. Clim. Dyn., 15, 953-960.

Parker, D.E., M.Gordon, D.P.M.Cullum, D.M.H.Sexton, C.K.Folland
and N.Rayner 1997: A new global gridded radiosonse temperature
data  base  and  recent  temperature  trends.  Geophys.  Res.  Lett., 24,
1499-1502.

Parkinson, C.  L., D.  J.  Cavalieri, P.  Gloersen, H.  J.  Zwally  and  J.
C.Comiso, 1999: Arctic sea ice extents, areas and trends, 1978-1996,
J. Geophys. Res., 104, 20,837-20,856.  

Priestley, M.  B., Spectral  Analysis  and  Time-series, Volume  1,

Academic Press, 1981.

Reader, M.C. and G.J. Boer, 1998: The modification of greenhouse gas
warming  by  the  direct  effect  of  sulphate  aerosols.  Clim.  Dyn., 14,
593-607.

Rind, D., J. Lean and R. Healy, 1999: Simulated time-depended climate
response to solar radiative forcing since 1600. J. Geophys. Res. 104:
1973-1990.

Ripley, B.D.  and  M.  Thompson, 1987: Regression  techniques  for  the

detection of analytical bias. Analyst, 112, 377-383.

Risbey, J., M. Kandlikar and D. Karoly, 2000: A framework to articulate
and quantify uncertainty in climate change detection and attribution.
Clim. Res., 16, 61-78.

Robock, A.  and  J.  Mao  1992: Winter  warming  from  large  volcanic

eruptions. Geophys. Res. Lett. 19, 2405-2408.

Robock, A. and M. Free,1995: Ice cores as an index of global volcanism

from 1850 to the present, J. Geophys. Res., 100, 11567-11576.

Robock, A.  and  M.  Jianping, 1995: The  volcanic  signal  in  surface

temperature observations. J. Climate, 8, 1086-1103.

Roeckner, E., L. Bengtsson, J. Feichter, J. Lelieveld and H. Rodhe, 1999:
Transient  climate  change  simulations  with  a  coupled  atmosphere-
ocean GCM including the tropospheric sulfur cycle. J. Climate, 12,
3004-3032.

Santer, B.D., T.M.L. Wigley and P.D. Jones, 1993:Correlation methods

in fingerprint detection studies. Clim Dyn., 8, 265-276.

Santer, B.D., K.E. Taylor, J.E. Penner, T.M.L. Wigley, U. Cubasch and
P.D. Jones, 1995: Towards the detection and attribution of an anthro-
pogenic effect on climate. Clim. Dyn., 12, 77-100.

Santer, B.D., K.E. Taylor, T.M.L. Wigley, P.D. Jones, D.J. Karoly, J.F.B.
Mitchell, A.H. Oort, J.E.Penner, V. Ramaswamy, M.D. Schwarzkopf,
R.S. Stouffer and S.F.B. Tett, 1996a: A search for human influences
on the thermal structure in the atmosphere. Nature, 382, 39-46.

Santer, B.D., K.E. Taylor, T.M.L. Wigley, T.C. Johns, P.D. Jones, D.J.
Karoly, J.F.B.  Mitchell, A.H.  Oort, J.E.  Penner, V.  Ramaswamy,
M.D.  Schwartzkopf, R.J.  Stouffer and  S.F.B.  Tett, 1996b: Human
effect on global climate? Nature, 384, 522-524.

Santer, B.D., T.M.L. Wigley, T.P. Barnett, E. Anyamba, 1996c: Detection
of climate change and attribution of causes. in: J. T. Houghton et al.
(eds.)  Climate  change  1995.  The  IPCC  Second  Scientific
Assessment, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, pp. 407-444.
Santer, B.D., T.M.L. Wigley, D.J. Gaffen, C. Doutriaux, J.S. Boyle, M.
Esch, J.J. Hnilo, P.D. Jones, G.A. Meehl, E. Roeckner, K.E. Taylor
and M.F. Wehner 2000: Interpreting Differential Temperature Trends
at  the  Surface  and  in  the  lower  Troposphere, Science, 287, 1227-
1231.

Sato, M., J.E.  Hansen, M.P.  McCormick  and  J.  Pollack, 1993:
Statospheric aerosol optical depths (1850-1990). J. Geophys. Res. 98,
22987-22994

Schonwiese, C.-D., M.  Denhard, J.  Grieser  and  A.  Walter, 1997:
Assessments  of  the  global  anthropogenic  greenhouse  and  sulphate
signal using different types of simplified climate models. Theor. Appl.
Climatol., 57, 119-124.

Schneider T  and  I.  Held, 2001: Discriminants  of  twentieth-century

changes in Earth surface temperatures. J. Climate, 14, 249-254.

738

Detection of Climate Change and Attribution of Causes

Schnur, R., 2001: Detection of climate change using advanced climate
diagnostics: seasonal  and  diurnal  cycle.  Max-Planck-Institut  fuer
Meteorologie, Report  No.  312, Bundesstr.  55, 20146  Hamburg,
Germany. 

Sexton, D.M.H., D.P.  Rowell, C.K.  Folland  and  D.J.  Karoly, 2001:
Detection  of  anthropogenic  climate  change  using  an  atmospheric
GCM. Clim. Dyn., in press.

Shindell, D.  T., R.L.  Miller, G.  Schmidt  and  L.  Pandolfo, 1999:
Simulation of recent northern winter climate trends by greenhouse-
gas forcing. Nature, 399, 452-455.

Shindell, D.  T., G.Schmidt, R.L.  Miller  and  D.  Rind, 2001: Northern
Hemispheric  climate  response  to  greenhouse  gas, ozone, solar  and
volcanic forcing. J. Geophys. Res. (Atmospheres), in press.

Simkin, T., L.Siebert, L.McClelland, D.Bridge, C.G.Newhall  and  J.H.
Latter, 1981: Volcanoes  of  the  World, 232  pp.  Van  Nostrand
Reinhold, New York, 1981

Smith, R.L., T.M.L.  Wigley  and  B.D.  Santer, 2001: A  bivariate  time-
series  approach  to  anthropogenic  trend  detection  in  hemospheric
mean temperatures. J. Climate, in press.

Stephenson, D.B., 1997: Correlation of spatial climate/weather maps and
the advantages of using the Mahalonbis metric in predictions. Tellus,
49A, 513-527.

Stevens, M.J. and G.R. North, 1996: Detection of the climate response to

the solar cycle. J. Atmos. Sci., 53, 2594-2608.

Stothers, R.B., 1996.  Major  optical  depth  perturbations  to  the  strato-
sphere  from  volcanic  eruptions: Pyrheliometric  period  1881-1960.
J.Geophys. Res., 101, 3901-3920.

Stott, P. A. and S.F.B. Tett,1998: Scale-dependent detection of climate

change. J. Climate, 11: 3282-3294.

Stott, P.A., M.R.  Allen  and  G.S.  Jones, 2000a: Estimating  signal
amplitudes in optimal fingerprinting II: Application to general circula-
tion models. Hadley Centre Tech Note 20, Hadley Centre for Climate
Prediction and Response, Meteorological Office, RG12 2SY UK.

Stott, P.A., S.F.B. Tett, G.S. Jones, M.R. Allen, J.F.B.Mitchell and G.J.
Jenkins, 2000b: External  control  of  twentieth  century  temperature
variations by natural and anthropogenic forcings. Science, 15, 2133-
2137.

Stott, P.A., S.F.B. Tett, G.S. Jones, M.R. Allen, W.J. Ingram and J.F.B.
Mitchell, 2001: Attribution  of  Twentieth  Century  Temperature
Change to Natural and Anthropogenic Causes. Clim. Dyn. 17,1-22.
Stouffer, R.J., G.C.  Hegerl  and  S.F.B.  Tett, 1999: A  comparison  of
Surface  Air  Temperature  Variability  in  Three  1000-Year  Coupled
Ocean-Atmosphere Model Integrations. J. Climate, 13, 513-537.

Svensmark, H. and E. Friis-Christensen, 1997: Variations of cosmic ray
flux  and  global  cloud  coverage    a  missing  link  in  solar-climate
relationships. J. Atmos. Solar-Terrestrial Phys., 59, 1226-1232.

Svensmark, H., 1998: Influence  of  cosmic  rays  on  Earths  climate.

Phys. Rev. Lett., 81, 5027-5030.

Tett, S.F.B., J.F.B. Mitchell, D.E. Parker and M.R. Allen, 1996: Human
Influence  on  the  Atmospheric  Vertical  Temperature  Structure:
Detection and Observations. Science, 274, 1170-1173.

Tett, S.F.B., P.A.  Stott, M.A. Allen, W.J.  Ingram  and  J.F.B.  Mitchell,
1999: Causes of twentieth century temperature change. Nature, 399,
569-572.

Tett, S.F.B., G.S.  Jones, P.A.  Stott, D.C.  Hill, J.F.B.  Mitchell, M.R.
Allen, W.J.  Ingram, T.C.  Johns, C.E.  Johnson, A.  Jones, D.L.
Roberts, D.M.H.  Sexton  and  M.J.  Woodage, 2000: Estimation  of
natural  and  anthropogenic  contributions  to  20th  century.  Hadley
Centre  Tech  Note  19, Hadley  Centre  for  Climate  Prediction  and
Response, Meteorological Office, RG12 2SY, UK pp52. 

Thejll, P.  and  K.  Lassen, 2000: Solar  forcing  of  the  Northern
Hemisphere  land  air  temperature: New  data.  J.  Atmos.  Solar-
Terrestrial Phys, 62,1207-1213.

Thompson, D.W.J.  and  J.M.  Wallace, 1998: The  Arctic  oscillation
signature  in  the  wintertime  geopotential  height  and  temperature
fields. Geophys. Res. Lett., 25, 1297-1300.

Thompson, D.W.J., J.M.  Wallace  and  G.C.  Hegerl  2000: Annular
Modes in the Extratropical Circulation. Part II Trends. J. Climate,
13, 1018-1036 .

Tol, R.S.J.  and  P.  Vellinga, 1998: Climate  Change, the  Enhanced
Greenhouse  Effect  and  the  Influence  of  the  Sun: A  Statistical
Analysis, Theoretical and Applied Climatology, 61, 1-7.

Tol, R.S.J. and A.F. de Vos, 1998: A Bayesian statistical analysis of the

enhanced greenhouse effect. Clim. Change, 38, 87-112.

van Loon, H. and D. J. Shea, 1999: A probable signal of the 11-year
solar cycle in the troposphere of the Northern Hemisphere, Geophys.
Res. Lett., 26, 2893-2896.

van Loon, H. and D. J. Shea, 2000: The global 11-year solar signal in

July-August. J. Geophys. Res., 27, 2965-2968.

Vinnikov, K. Y., A.Robock, R. J.Stouffer, J.E.Walsh, C. L. Parkinson,
D.J.Cavalieri, J.F.B  Mitchell, D.Garrett  and  V.F.  Zakharov, 1999:
Global warming and Northern Hemisphere sea ice extent. Science,
286, 1934-1937.

Volodin, E.M. and V.Y.  Galin, 1999: Interpretation of winter warming
on Northern Hemisphere continents 1977-94. J. Climate, 12, 2947-
2955.

Walter, A., M. Denhard, C.-D. Schoenwiese, 1998: Simulation of global
and hemispheric temperature variation and signal detection studies
using neural networks. Meteor. Zeitschrift, N.F. 7, 171-180.

Weber, G.R., 1996: Human effect on global climate? Nature, 384, 524-

525.

White, W.B., J. Lean, D.R. Cayan and M.D. Dettinger, 1997: A response
of global upper ocean temperature to changing solar irradiance. J.
Geophys. Res., 102, 3255-3266.

Wigley, T.M.L., P.D. Jones and S.C.B. Raper, 1997: The observed global
warming record: What does it tell us? Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA,
94, 8314-8320.

Wigley, T.M.L., R.L.  Smith  and  B.D.  Santer, 1998a: Anthropogenic
influence  on  the  autocorrelation  structure  of  hemispheric-mean
temperatures. Science, 282, 1676-1679.

Wigley, T.M.L., P.J.  Jaumann, B.D.  Santer  and  K.E  Taylor, 1998b:
Relative detectablility of greenhouse gas and aerosol climate change
signals Clim Dyn, 14, 781-790.

Wigley, T.M.L., B.D.Santer  and  K.E.Taylor, 2000: Correlation

approaches to detection. Geophys. Res. Lett. 27, 2973-2976. 

WMO, 1999: Scientific assessment of ozone depletion : 1998, Global
Ozone  Research  and  Monitoring  Project, World  Meteorological
Organisation, Report No. 44, Geneva.

Wong, A.P.S., N.L.  Bindoff  and  J.A.  Church, 1999: Large-scale
freshening  of  intermediate  water  masses  in  the  Pacific  and  Indian
Oceans. Nature, 400, 440-443.

Zheng, X.  and  R.E.  Basher, 1999: Structural  time-series  models  and
trend detection in global and regional temperature series. J. Climate,
12, 2347-2358.

Zwiers, F.W., 1999: The detection of climate change. In Anthropogenic
Climate  Change, H.  von  Storch  and  G.  Floeser, eds., Springer-
Verlag, 161-206.

Zwiers, F.W.  and  S.S.  Shen, 1997: Errors  in  estimating  spherical
harmonic  coefficients  from  partially  sampled  GCM  output.  Clim.
Dyn., 13, 703-716.

