The Emergence of 
Cybersecurity Law

Prepared for the Indiana University Maurer School of Law
by Hanover Research | February 2015

INDIANA UNIVERSITY BLOOMINGTON
MAURER SCHOOL OF LAW

 
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
Executive Summary and Key Findings ............................................................................... 2 
INTRODUCTION ........................................................................................................................... 2 
KEY FINDINGS ............................................................................................................................. 2 
Cybersecurity and the Law ............................................................................................... 4 
THE CHALLENGE OF CYBERSECURITY ................................................................................................ 4 
CORPORATE CYBERSECURITY PREPAREDNESS ..................................................................................... 6 
THE FUTURE OF CYBERLAW ........................................................................................................... 8 
Legal Developments in Cyberlaw .................................................................................... 11 
CYBERLAW LEGISLATION AND GUIDANCE ............................................................................................ 11 
Lack of Federal Legislation ............................................................................................... 12 
Federal Trade Commission Act, Section 5 ....................................................................... 13 
SEC Disclosure Guidance .................................................................................................. 15 
NIST Framework............................................................................................................... 16 
 How Lawyers Help Meet Cyberthreats ........................................................................... 18 
THE ROLE OF LAWYERS IN CYBERSECURITY ...................................................................................... 18 
Why Should Lawyers be Involved? .................................................................................. 18 
What Are Lawyers Doing? ............................................................................................... 19 
What Should Lawyers Be Doing? ..................................................................................... 22 
KNOWLEDGE AND SKILLSETS FOR CYBERLAWYERS ............................................................................. 24 
What Lawyers Need to Know .......................................................................................... 24 
How Lawyers Learn About Cybersecurity ........................................................................ 26 
 Methodology ................................................................................................................ 29 
 
 

 

 

                                                                                               

Hanover Research | February 2015 

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY AND KEY FINDINGS 

INTRODUCTION 
This paper examines cyberlaw as a growing field of legal practice and the roles that lawyers 
play  in  helping  companies  respond  to  cybersecurity  threats.  Drawing  on  interviews  with 
lawyers,  consultants,  and  academics  knowledgeable  in  the  intersection  of  law  and 
cybersecurity, as well as a survey of lawyers working in general counsels offices, this study 
examines  the  broader  context  of  cybersecurity,  the  current  legal  framework  for  data 
security  and  related  issues,  and  the  ways  in  which  lawyers  learn  about  and  involve 
themselves in cybersecurity issues. These discussions are presented across the papers three 
sections: 

  Cybersecurity  and  the  Law  explores  the  context  in  which  cyberlaw  is  developing, 
examining the importance of cybersecurity to companies and corporations and how 
inside and outside counsel are responding.    

  Legal Developments in Cyberlaw provides an overview of the current state of the 
influencing 

legislation,  regulations,  and  other  sources  of 
cybersecurity.  

law  and  policy 

  How  Lawyers  Help  Meet  Cyberthreats  examines  lawyers  roles  cybersecurity  in 
more  detail,  including  both  the  tasks  they  should  perform  and  the  tasks  they  do 
perform. This section also examines how lawyers are improving their knowledge of 
cybersecurity.  

 
KEY FINDINGS 

  Cybersecurity  is  a  growing  priority  for  legal  practitioners.  Of  the  corporate  law 
departments  surveyed  for  this  study,  over  half  rate  cybersecurity  as  a  high 
concern. To meet the growing demand for counsel on these issues, multiple large 
law  firms  have  formed  cybersecurity  practice  groups;  some  areas  may  even  be 
experiencing a shortage of qualified practitioners. Although the market for cyberlaw 
services remains in a nascent stage, experts expect that in the long term, the field 
will continue to grow.  

  Corporations,  including  their  legal  counsel,  can  improve  their  preparedness  for 
cyberthreats.  Multiple  studies  have  found  that  substantial  numbers  of  corporate 
leaders  lack  full  confidence  in  their  organizations  preparedness.  Similarly,  among 
the corporate law departments surveyed for this study, the average self-rating falls 
well  short  of  full  preparedness.  To  address  these  threats,  law  departments  need 
more  resources,  as  well  as  better  information  about  the  issues  surrounding 
cybersecurity and the law.    

  Cybersecurity  has  become  as  much  a  legal  issue  as  a  technical  one.  Given  the 
fragmented legal framework for data security and privacy issues, organizations must 
be aware of a quilt of laws and regulations they may be subject to; this is largely 
the  purview  of  legal  counsel.  Working  in  coordination  with  IT  professionals, 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

2 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

managers, and other parts of the corporation, lawyers must play a role in designing 
the  procedures,  training,  and  risk  assessments  required  to  implement  managerial, 
operational, and technical controls needed to protect data.  

  Lawyers are becoming more proactive in addressing cybersecurity concerns. Until 
very recently, companies primarily involved lawyers in the response to cybersecurity 
incidents, rather than in the planning against such crises. However, driven in part by 
pressure  from  agencies  such  as  the  Securities  and  Exchange  Commission,  legal 
counsel  is  becoming  more  proactive;  among  the  corporate  law  departments 
surveyed  for  this  study,  nearly  70  percent  report  proactive  involvement  in 
cybersecurity. 

  Lawyers  need  more  education  in  both  the  legal  and  technical  aspects  of 
cybersecurity. Over two-thirds of the corporate law departments surveyed for this 
study  rated  improved  cybersecurity  training  as  very  or  extremely  important. 
Experts  suggest  that  such  training  should  encompass  both  the  legal  and  technical 
aspects  of  cybersecurity;  when  asked  what  areas  of  training  would  be  most 
beneficial to them, corporate counsel largely agreed. However, experts also caution 
that  lawyers  cannot  be  expected  to  maintain  detailed  knowledge  of  associated 
technology.  Instead,  technical  training  should  enable  lawyers  to  ask  the  right 
questions of IT professionals and technical experts.       

 
 
 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

3 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

CYBERSECURITY AND THE LAW 

THE CHALLENGE OF CYBERSECURITY 
Over the past year, a number of high profile data security breaches at large retailers,1 and 
broad-reaching security threats like the Heartbleed Bug,2 have heightened public awareness 
about  the  threat  of  cyberattacks  to  personal  information.  Moreover,  according  to  a  2013 
study on the cost of cybercrime by the Ponemon Institute, the United States led nine other 
nations  in  highest  average  organizational  cost-per-breach  and  largest  average  number  of 
breached  records.3 According  to  the  same  survey,  the  annualized  cost  of  cybercrime 
increased by 30 percent from 2012 to 2013, now estimated at $11.6 million per year per 
company studied.4  
 
As a result, cybersecurity has emerged as a primary concern for many corporate leaders. A 
2014 survey of nearly 500 company directors and general counsel found that data security 
was the number one issue for directors that keeps them up at night, and the second most 
important  issue  for  general  counsel,  after  regulatory  compliance.5 Similarly,  among  the 
corporate law departments surveyed for this study, a majority rated cybersecurity as a high 
concern, both company-wide and within the law department.   
 

Figure 1.1: Level of Concern about Cybersecurity Among Corporate Counsel 

How much of a concern is cybersecurity within your . . .

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

Entire Company
Law Department

Not a
concern

Low concern Moderate
concern

High

concern

Don't

know/no
opinion

 

 

  Source: Survey of corporate law departments. See methodology section for further details. 

 

                                                        
1 Grande, A. Data Breaches Put Retail GCs in the Firing Line. Law360, May, 21, 2014. 

http://www.law360.com/articles/537810/data-breaches-put-retail-gcs-in-the-firing-line 

2 Heartbleed. CNET. http://www.cnet.com/tags/heartbleed/  
3 Crowe, K. Law in the Boardroom in 2014. FTI Consulting. p. 22. 

http://www.fticonsulting.com/global2/media/collateral/united-states/law-in-the-boardroom-in-2014.pdf 

4 Ibid., p. 24. 
5 Ibid., p. 22. 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

4 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

The broad range of negative impacts that a successful cyberthreat poses to companies drive 
such concerns financial loss is just one of the problems that can result from a breach. In 
2012,  for  instance,  PricewaterhouseCoopers  found  that  about  38  percent  of  businesses 
experience financial losses as a result of cybersecurity incidents, but that similar numbers 
also suffer intellectual property theft and brand or reputation damage.6 
 
Indeed,  given  the  often  highly  publicized  nature  of  cybersecurity  breaches,  reputation 
damage  may  be  one  of  the  greatest  threats  this  risk  poses.  Among  the  corporate  law 
departments surveyed for this study, the cybersecurity consequence respondents ranked  as 
their  top  concern  is  Potential  for  damage  to  reputation  with  customers;  purely  legal 
consequences,  such  as  regulatory  action  or  lawsuits,  were  ranked  lower,  with  loss  of 
shareholder confidence ranking lowest. Almost half of respondents gave a rank of 1 or 2 to 
Potential  for  damage  to  reputation  with  customers  or  Loss  of  companys  intellectual 
property, while only about a quarter gave such ratings to Potential for loss of confidence 
among shareholders/investors. 
 

Figure 1.2: Corporate Counsels Top Concerns for Cybersecurity 

Please rank these potential consequences from a data breach or other 

cyber threat in order of concern for your law department, with 1 

representing the greatest concern and 5 representing the least concern. 

Potential for damage to reputation with

customers

Loss of company's intellectual property

Potential for regulatory action against

company

Potential for customer lawsuits

2.69

2.87

2.98

3.00

Potential for loss of confidence among

shareholders/investors

3.46

0.00

1.00

2.00

3.00

4.00

    Source: Survey of corporate law departments.  
                                                        
6 Loveland, G. and M. Lobel. Cybersecurity: The New Business Priority. http://www.pwc.com/us/en/view/issue-

15/cybersecurity-business-priority.jhtml 

 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

5 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

CORPORATE CYBERSECURITY PREPAREDNESS 
Cybersecurity clearly has the attention of corporate leaders, including the law department. 
However,  indications  suggest  that  these  leaders  are  not  as  prepared  as  they  could  be  to 
meet  these  threats.  PricewaterhouseCoopers  found  that  fewer  than  half  of  the  chief 
information  officers  and  chief  security  officers  it  surveyed  have  an  effective  information 
security strategy in place and are proactive in executing the plan. The remainder either lack 
a strategy, fail to execute it adequately, or are essentially reactive in meeting cyberthreats.7  
 
General  counsel  similarly  have  room  for  improvement.  In  a  2014  survey  of  corporate 
directors and general counsel, majorities of each group reported not having confidence in 
their  companys  cybersecurity  breach  response  plan,  and  nearly  a  third  of  each  group 
indicated that they are not convinced their company is secure and impervious to hackers.8 
Similarly, when asked to rate their preparedness to meet cyberthreats, the law departments 
surveyed for this study gave an average rating of 6.57 on a 10-point scale. Approximately 40 
percent  of  respondents  gave  a  rating  of  8  or  above,  a  proportion  that  increases  to  70 
percent  for  a  grade  of  6  or  higher.  Although  this  indicates  moderate  confidence  in  the 
general counsels preparedness, it also shows that law departments could be doing more to 
reach full preparedness for preventing and containing cybersecurity breaches.    
 

Figure 1.3: Corporate Counsel Preparedness to Meet Cyberthreats 

On a scale of 0 to 10, how prepared do you think the law department/ 

general counsel is to meet the cyber threats facing your company?

Not At All 
Prepared

Average
Response

Extremely 
Prepared

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

 

  Source: Survey of corporate law departments. 

 
 
In  this  task,  corporate  law  departments  have  at  least  two  needs:  better  information  and 
more  resources.  The  latter  problem  emerged  in  a  number  of  comments  made  by 
respondents  to  the  survey  conducted  for  this  study.  As  one  attorney  put  it,  although 
cybersecurity is a very important matter for us, the law department lacks the finances or 
manpower  to  dedicate  to  this  issue.  Another  respondent  noted  that  boards  and  senior 
management  tend  to  view  cybersecurity  as  a  cost  center;  with  a  focus  on  financial 
performance,  they  prefer  to  devote  resources  to  sales,  marketing,  and  [other]  activities 
that grow revenue. It comes as little surprise, then, that the majority of law departments 
surveyed  have  no  staff  dedicated  to  cybersecurity  at  any  capacity;  only  23.5  percent 
reported employing staff full-time on the issue.  
                                                        
7 Ibid. 
8 Crowe, K. Law in the Boardroom in 2014. Op. cit., p. 24. 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

6 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

 

Figure 1.4: Cybersecurity Staffing Among Corporate Counsel 

Does your law department/general counsel's office have staff dedicated to 

cybersecurity matters?

23.5%

23.5%

53.0%

Full-Time

Part-Time

Neither

 

    Source: Survey of corporate law departments. 
 
Beyond more resources, however, corporate leaders, including the law department, need to 
learn  more  about  cybersecurity.  In  a  2014  survey,  IT  strategy  and  risk  was  ranked  by  52 
percent  of  corporate  directors  and  44  percent  of  general  counsel  as  the  issue  for  which 
they  need  better  information  and  processes  to  be  as effective  in  their  jobs  as  possible.9 
Indeed, when law departments were surveyed for this study, only one-third of respondents 
reported  being  very  familiar  with  the  topic  of  cybersecurity.  Most  are,  at  best, 
moderately  or  even  only  slightly  familiar  with  the  issue.  As  one  respondent  put  it, 
cybersecurity may be less of a concern for some law departments probably because we do 
not know enough about it.  
 

                                                        
9 Ibid., pp. 23-24. 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

7 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

Figure 1.5: Corporate Counsel Familiarity with Cybersecurity 

How familiar is your company's law department/general counsel's office 

with the topic of cybersecurity?

30%

34%

26%

4%

7%

Not at all familiar Slightly familiar Moderately

familiar

Very familiar

Don't know/no

opinion

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

 

slowly.  Although 

  Source: Survey of corporate law departments. 

 
 
THE FUTURE OF CYBERLAW 
Looking ahead, the challenge of cybersecurity will remain a prominent issue for corporate 
leaders. However, the role of lawyers and law departments in addressing this challenge may 
develop  more 
experts 
interviewed  for  this  study  cite  a  growing  need 
they  also  highlight 
for  cyberlaw  services, 
difficulties  translating  that  need 
into  actual 
demand  for  legal  services.  On  the  other  hand, 
indicators  suggest  that  a  shortage  of  qualified 
lawyers  in  the  field may also  be  hampering  the 
development of cyberlaw.    
 
On the one hand, cyberlaw practice seems to be 
growing with every passing year. Some large law 
firms are already forming cybersecurity practice groups,10 which experts point to as a sign of 
strong  demand  for  this  expertise.11 Leading  firms  such  as  Hogan  Lovells,  Hunton  & 
Williams,  Sidley  Austin,  and  K&L  Gates  already  maintain  cybersecurity-related  practice 
groups,12 and even mid-sized firms are now venturing into the field.13 In California, law firms 
                                                        
10 Lyons, K. Law Firms Adding Cybersecurity Fields. Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, November 3, 2013. http://www.post-
gazette.com/business/legal/2013/11/04/VENTURING-INTO-THE-DATA-BREACH-Law-firms-adding-cybersecurity-
fields/stories/201311040006 

 Demand for cyberlaw services is 
growing, but many lawyers may 
struggle to sustain a practice on 

cybersecurity alone.   

11 DeMarco, J. Partner, DeVore and DeMarco. Phone Interview, July 18, 2014. 
12 [1] Privacy and Information Management. Hogan Lovells. http://www.hoganlovells.com/privacy-information-

management/ 

    [2] Global Privacy and Cybersecurity. Hunton & Williams. 

http://www.hunton.com/global_privacy_and_cybersecurity/ 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

8 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

face a shortage of practitioners qualified in cybersecurity, as they compete with the Silicon 
Valley  companies  who  often  hire  these  lawyers  as  inside  counsel.14 Multiple  experts 
interviewed for this study agreed that the supply of lawyers knowledgeable in these areas is 
inadequate to meet current needs.15 
 
At the same time, cyberlaw practice may not have expanded as rapidly as some might have 
expected. David Bodenheimer, a partner at Crowell & Mooring, chairman of the ABA Public 
Contract  Law  Sections  Cybersecurity  Committee,  and  author  of  an  early  paper  on 
cybersecurity and its legal ramifications,16 notes that the field of cyberlaw has grown more 
slowly  than  he  initially  predicted.  Although  firms  are  establishing  practice  groups  in  the 
field,  many  lawyers  may  still  find  it  difficult  to  sustain  a  practice  based  on  cybersecurity 
alone. Bodenheimer points to a kind of paradox: there are insufficient lawyers to perform 
the work companies should be doing in this area, but until companies fully realize the risks 
and  regulatory  requirements  they  face,  there  may  be  an  inconsistent  flow  of  work  for 
lawyers who are active in the area.17  
 
Bodenheimer  remains  optimistic  for  the  growth  of  cyberlaw.18 In  the  long  term,  he  calls 
cyberlaw a [bet] on the future, as these issues are sure to become only more important.19 
Other experts interviewed for this study agreed. Harriet Pearson, a partner at Hogan Lovells 
in  Washington,  D.C.  and  known  to  some  as  the  First  Lady  of  Privacy,20 noted  that  the 
pervasiveness of cybersecurity issues suggests a huge growth potential for the field. The 
mounting concern over cybersecurity issues triggers many legal considerations for managing 
risk, as well as proactive legal counselling opportunities. Pearson compares the trajectory of 
cyberlaw with that of other legal niches such as asbestos and toxic tort sites, in that once a 
major incident occurs, it will sustain the cyberlaw industry for a long time.21 
 
Clearly,  the  continuing  evolution  of  the  legal  framework  for  cybersecurity  should  only 
increase  the  role  of  lawyers  in  addressing  these  concerns.  In  the  following  sections,  this 
                                                                                                                                                                     
    [3] Privacy, Data Security and Information Law. Sidley Austin. http://www.sidley.com/en/services/infolaw 
    [4] Cyber Law and Cybersecurity. K&L Gates. http://www.klgates.com/cybersecurity-and-cyberlaw-practices/ 
13 See, e.g., Ruskin Moscou Faltischek P.C. Forms Cybersecurity and Data Privacy Practice Group and Taps John J. 

Cooney, Esq. as Chair. Ruskin Moscou Faltischek P.C. January 12, 2015. http://rmfpc.com/ruskin-moscou-
faltischek-p-c-forms-cybersecurity-and-data-privacy-practice-group-and-taps-john-j-cooney-esq-as-chair/ 

14 Sebold, J. Cybersecurity Specialists in Short Supply. Los Angeles Daily Journal, August 19, 2013. 

http://www.gtlaw.com/portalresource/lookup/wosid/contentpilot-core-1602-
17302/pdfCopy.name=/GT%20LAW%20(DJ.8.18.13).pdf?view=attachment 

15 [1] Bodenheimer, D. Partner, Crowell & Mooring. Phone interview. July 29, 2014. 
    [2] DeMarco, Phone Interview, Op. cit.  
    [3] Opsitnick, Timothy. Founder and General Counsel at JurInnov. Phone Interview. July 30, 2014  
    [4] Pearson, Harriet. Partner, Hogan Lovells. Phone interview. July 28, 2014.  
16 Bodenheimer, D. The Cyber Forecast  Hotter than Global Warming. Crowell and Moring, DC Cyber Security 

Breakfast Series, January 24, 2008. http://www.crowell.com/documents/The-Cyber-Forecast_Reviewing-2007-
and-Previewing-2008.pdf 

17 Bodenheimer, Phone interview, Op. cit. 
18 Ibid. 
19 Lyons, K. Law Firms Adding Cybersecurity Fields. Op. cit. 
20 Harriet Pearson. Hogan Lovells. http://www.hoganlovells.com/harriet-pearson/ 
21 Pearson, Phone interview, Op. cit. 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

9 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

white paper first explores the current legal developments in the field, followed by a more 
detailed discussion of how lawyers can help organizations to meet cyberthreats.   
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

10 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

LEGAL DEVELOPMENTS IN CYBERLAW 

CYBERLAW LEGISLATION AND GUIDANCE 
A  basic  definition  of  cybersecurity  is  whether  and  how  electronic  data  and  systems  are 
protected from attack, loss, or other compromise.22 It falls largely on general counsel and 
other  senior  lawyers  to  advise  on  a  large  scope  of  cybersecurity  legal  issues,  including 
privacy  concerns,  data  breaches,  information sharing,  and  developing  a  plan  of action  for 
potential cybersecurity crisis situations. Currently, data protection and privacy are governed 
by a patchwork of state and federal regulations, as well as industry-specific legislation and 
guidelines that can leave both large and small companies wondering where to begin.23 More 
than 50 federal statutes address aspects of cybersecurity in some capacity, whether directly 
or indirectly, with no overarching piece of legislation in place.24  
 
In  this  environment,  corporate  law  departments  naturally  pay  the  most  attention  to 
regulations  and  private  lawsuits,  rather  than  federal  or  state  legislation.  Among  those 
surveyed  for  this study,  a  majority  cite  regulations  or  lawsuits  as  the  greatest  motive  for 
taking action, with almost equal numbers driven by internal concerns (e.g., shareholders). 
Substantially fewer are concerned about legislation or binding judicial precedent. 
 

Figure 2.1: Types of Cybersecurity Law on Corporate Counsels Radar  

What types of cyber threats motivate your law department/general counsel's 

office to take action? (Please select all that apply)

Regulation
Lawsuit
Shareholder or board concern
Judicial decision
Threat of legislation
FTC consent decree
Other
None of the above

29%

26%

15%

5%

9%

59%

56%

47%

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

 Source: Survey of corporate law departments. 
 
Although it is beyond the scope of this white paper to provide an exhaustive account of all 
sources  of  current  cybersecurity  law,  the  ensuing  discussion  outlines  the  major  current 
                                                        
22 Pearson, H. Cybersecurity: The Corporate Counsels Agenda. Bloomberg BNA: Privacy and Security Law Report, 

2012. p. 1. http://www.hldataprotection.com/files/2012/12/BloombergBNA-Cybersecurity-Pearson2.pdf 

23 Lyons, K. Law Firms Adding Cybersecurity Fields. Op. cit. 
24 Fischer, E. Federal Laws Relating to Cybersecurity: Overview and Discussion of Proposed Revisions. Congressional 

Research Service, June 20, 2013. pp. 1-2. http://fas.org/sgp/crs/natsec/R42114.pdf 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

11 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

influences in the field. These include congressional actions, Section 5 of the Federal Trade 
Commission (FTC) Act, the SECs disclosure guidance, and the National Institute of Standards 
and Technology (NIST) Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity.  
 
LACK OF FEDERAL LEGISLATION 
Congress  has  not  passed  major  cybersecurity  legislation  since  2002.25 While  many  states 
have established their own laws to address cybersecurity, there is still no unifying federal 
legislation  that  addresses  these  issues.26 Broadly  speaking,  recent  legislative  proposals 
relating to cybersecurity in Congress concentrate on 10 main issues:27 

  National strategy and the role of government;  
  Reform of the Federal Information Security Management Act of 2002 (FISMA); 
  Protection of critical infrastructure (especially the electricity grid and the chemical industry); 
  Information sharing and cross-sector coordination;  
  Breaches resulting in theft or exposure of personal data such as financial information;  
  Cybercrime offenses and penalties;  
  Privacy in the context of electronic commerce;  
  International efforts;  
  Research and development (R&D); and, 
  The cybersecurity workforce.  

 

The  privacy  and  information  security  practice  group  at  law  firm  King  &  Spalding  outlines 
several pieces of legislation that have been introduced to Congress recently that touch on 
cybersecurity issues. In addition to several narrower bills on cybersecurity introduced in 
the House of Representatives, the major recent attempts at federal cybersecurity legislation 
include:28 

  Personal  Data  Privacy  and  Security  Act  of  2014.  Introduced  by  Senate  Judiciary 
Chairman  Patrick  Leahy  (D-VT)  and  four  other  Senate  Democrats,  this  bill  would 
create  a  national  standard  for  data  breach  notification  and  require  businesses  to 
keep  consumer  information  safe  from  hackers.  Furthermore,  it  would  toughen 
criminal penalties for those who conceal a damaging breach, require companies that 
keep data to establish safety policies, and update computer hacking penalties. 

  Data  Security  Act  of  2014.  Introduced  by  Senate  Homeland  Security  and 
Government Affairs  Committee  Chairman  Senator  Tom  Carper  (D-DE)  and Senator 

                                                        
25 Ibid., pp. 2-3.  
26 Client Alert: Five Things Every In-House Counsel Should Understand About the NIST Cybersecurity Framework. 

King & Spalding Privacy & Information Security Practice Group, February 25, 2014. p. 3. 
http://www.kslaw.com/imageserver/KSPublic/library/publication/ca022514.pdf  

27 Bulleted points quoted from: Fischer, Op. cit., pp. 4-5. 
28 Bulleted points adapted from: Client Alert: Five Things Every In-House Counsel Should Understand About the NIST 

Cybersecurity Framework. Op. cit., pp. 3-4. 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

12 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

Roy  Blunt  (R-MO),  this  bill  would  require  entities  including  financial  institutions, 
retailers, and federal agencies to better safeguard sensitive information, investigate 
security breaches, and notify consumers when there is a substantial risk of identity 
theft or account fraud. 

  The National Cybersecurity and Critical Infrastructure Protection Act of 2013. This 
act addresses liability protections for private agencies that voluntarily cooperate on 
cybersecurity  measures;  cross-industry  information  sharing  on  cyber  threats;  and 
cyber-incident response teams to support critical infrastructure owners. 

 
In a recent statement at the American Bar Association (ABA) Section of International Law 
2014 Spring Meeting in New York, former Senator Evan Bayh suggested that it will probably 
take a cyberattack succeeding in some way that significantly harms the country before we'll 
be  able  to  reconcile  the  debate  in  Washington  about  legislation.  Bayh  urged  bipartisan 
support  to  pass  cybersecurity  legislation  before  a  serious  cyberthreat  prompts  action.29 
Without  an  overarching  federal  legislative  framework  in  place,  it  remains  very  easy  [for 
companies]  to  make  mistakes 
in  cybersecurity  management,  given  the  complex 
patchwork of state, federal, and international laws.30  
 
Experts  interviewed  for  this  study  tended  to  echo  these  concerns.  Joseph  DeMarco,  a 
partner at the boutique privacy and information security law firm DeVore and DeMarco in 
New York, observes that the law is lagging behind developments in cybersecurity, and that 
the  lag  is  growing  over  time  rather  than  shrinking.31 Harriet  Pearson,  of  Hogan  Lovells 
believes that the law in its current state is not appropriate to address the consequences of 
data breaches and other cyberthreats. Pearson asserts that the law needs to evolve, with 
immunities  or  limitations  of  liability  for  companies  dealing  with  the  most  catastrophic 
incidents. This requires the creation of a paradigm for cybersecurity that has not yet been 
established by legislation.32 
 
In  the  absence  of  federal  legislation,  experts  have  identified  a  number  of  regulatory  or 
executive  influences  on  cybersecurity  law,  including  the  FTC,  the  SEC,  and  the  NIST 
Framework. The remainder of this section considers these influences in turn.   
 
 
FEDERAL TRADE COMMISSION ACT, SECTION 5  
The United States does not currently have a comprehensive law dealing with data security 
similar  to  the  Data  Protection  Directive  used  by  the  European  Union.  Instead,  the  FTC 
supplements  industry-specific  legislation  with  its  broad  authority  under  Section  5  of  the 
                                                        
29 Joyce, S. Congress Won't Approve Cybersecurity Law Until Attack Compels It to Act, Bayh Says. Bloomberg BNA, 

April 7, 2014. http://www.bna.com/congress-wont-approve-n17179889411/ 

30 Hirsch, R. What Every General Counsel Should Know About Privacy and Security: 10 Trends for 2014. Morgan 

Lewis Webinar, March 18, 2014. p. 3. http://www.morganlewis.com/pubs/WhatEveryGCShould-
Know10Trendsfor2014_18march14.pdf  

31 DeMarco, Phone interview, Op. cit.  
32 Pearson, Phone interview, Op. cit. 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

13 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

Federal Trade Commission Act (15 U.S. Code  45).33 Section 5 states that the FTC has the 
authority to investigate unfair or deceptive acts or practices in or affecting commerce.34 
The FTC has used Section 5 to pursue investigations of unfair or deceptive data security 
and  privacy  practices,  usually  relying  on  the  deception  aspect  more  so  than  claims  of 
unfairness.35  
 
In order to avoid a Section 5 violation, the FTC suggests that companies adopt a privacy by 
design  strategy,  offer  simplified  choices  for  businesses  and  consumers  about  their  data, 
and  allow  greater  transparency  of  practices.36 The  privacy  by  design  principle  encourages 
companies to consider potential privacy and data security issues at every stage of company, 
product, or service development. Furthermore, two applied principles support the baseline 
privacy by design guidance:37 

  Companies should incorporate substantive privacy protections into their practices, such as 
data security, reasonable collection limits, sound retention and disposal practices, and data 
accuracy.  

  Companies should maintain comprehensive data management procedures throughout the 

life cycle of their products and services. 

 
Privacy  by  design  is  a  key  principle  for  general  counsel  to  understand  in  order  to  advise 
companies  on  ensuring  their  practices  and  products  or  services  are  consistent  with  legal 
requirements,  posted  privacy  policies,  product  descriptions,  and  user  expectations.38 The 
principle  is  proactive  for  protecting  private  information,  rather  than  traditional  reactive 
frameworks, with the understanding that it is harder to correct architectural deficiencies 
after  rollout. 39 The  FTC  also  recommends  that  businesses  and  policymakers  adopt 
simplified  choice  mechanisms  that  give  consumers  more  meaningful  control  over  their 
privacy and make their data practices more transparent.40 
Jennifer Woods, an attorney with the intellectual property group at Clark Hill PLC, explains 
that many data security and privacy cases are not solely based on a Section 5 violation, but 
could be related to other statutes under FTC authority such as the Fair Credit Reporting Act 

                                                        
33 Woods, J. Federal Trade Commissions Privacy and Data Security Enforcement Under Section 5. American Bar 

Association Young Lawyers Division. 
http://www.americanbar.org/groups/young_lawyers/publications/the_101_201_practice_series/federal_trade_c
ommissions_privacy.html 

34 15 U.S. Code  45 - Unfair methods of competition unlawful; prevention by Commission. Cornell University Law 

School Legal information Institute. http://www.law.cornell.edu/uscode/text/15/45 

35 Woods, Op. cit. 
36 Ibid. 
37 Bulleted points quoted from: Protecting Consumer Privacy in an Era of Rapid Change: Recommendation for 

Businesses and Policy Makers. Federal Trade Commission, March 2012. p. vii. 
http://www.ftc.gov/sites/default/files/documents/reports/federal-trade-commission-report-protecting-
consumer-privacy-era-rapid-change-recommendations/120326privacyreport.pdf 

38 Hirsch, Op. cit., p. 29.  
39 Ibid., p. 26. 
40 Protecting Consumer Privacy in an Era of Rapid Change: Recommendation for Businesses and Policy Makers. Op. 

cit., p. 1. 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

14 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

and  the  Childrens  Online  Privacy  Protection  Act.41 The  FTC  has  60  different  sets  of  laws, 
rules, and guides that give it authority to pursue privacy and data security violations.42  Laws 
are published in the United States Code, while most rules are published in Title 16 of the 
Code of Federal Regulations. 
 
SEC DISCLOSURE GUIDANCE 
In October 2011, the SECs Division of Corporation Finance released disclosure guidance for 
situations  related  to  cybersecurity  risks  and  incidents  in  response  to  more  frequent  and 
severe  cyber 
incidents.  No  existing  disclosure  requirement  specifically  refers  to 
cybersecurity, but other requirements may indirectly compel registrants to disclose the risks 
and incidents related to cybersecurity. For example, SEC registrants should disclose the risk 
of  cyberthreats  if  these  factors  make  investment  in  the  company  speculative  or  risky.43 
The  guidance  document  states  that,  depending  on  the  circumstances  of  a  particular 
registrant, the following risk disclosures may be appropriate:44 
 

  Discussion  of  aspects  of  the  registrants  business  or  operations  that  give  rise  to  material 

cybersecurity risks and the potential costs and consequences; 

  To  the  extent  the  registrant  outsources  functions  that  have  material  cybersecurity  risks, 

description of those functions and how the registrant addresses those risks; 

  Description of cyber incidents experienced by the registrant that are individually, or in the 

aggregate, material, including a description of the costs and other consequences; 

  Risks related to cyber incidents that may remain undetected for an extended period; and, 
  Description of relevant insurance coverage. 

 
The Division of Corporation Finance provides further guidance on managements discussion 
and analysis of financial condition and results of operations, description of business, legal 
proceedings,  financial  statement  disclosures,  and  disclosure  controls  and  procedures. 
However, the SEC points out that this guidance is not a rule, regulation, or statement of the 
Securities Exchange Commission and represents the views of the Division of Corporation 
Finance.45  
 
Although there have been calls for additional cybersecurity disclosure regulations from the 
Commission,  experts  worry  about  whether  the  SEC  is  the  right  agency  to  address 
cybersecurity  issues  and  about  how  to  strike  the  right  balance  between  protecting 

                                                        
41 Woods, Op. cit. 
42 Legal Resources. Bureau of Consumer Protection Business Center. http://www.business.ftc.gov/legal-

resources/8/33 

43 CF Disclosure Guidance, Topic No. 2: Cybersecurity. Division of Corporation Finance, Securities and Exchange 

Commission, October, 2011.  http://www.sec.gov/divisions/corpfin/guidance/cfguidance-topic2.htm 

44 Bulleted points quoted from: Ibid. 
45 Ibid. 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

15 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

investors  and  protecting  companies  from  the  adverse  consequences  of  disclosure.  At 
present, SEC commissioners do not appear to be planning additional regulations.46 
 
NIST FRAMEWORK 
In  February  2014,  NIST  released  the  Framework  for  Improving  Critical  Infrastructure 
Cybersecurity (NIST Framework), a response to the Executive Order from President Barack 
Obama  that  tasked  it  with  addressing  how  to  protect  critical  infrastructure  sectors  the 
previous  February.47 While  the  NIST  Framework  is  not  a  regulation  or  official  standard  of 
care,  Ron  Plesco,  principal  at  KPMG  and  a  board  member  of  the  National  Cyber  Forensic 
Training Alliance,48 suggests that it will likely become a de facto standard of care through 
case law and public opinion.49 The potential importance of the Framework, however, may 
not be fully appreciated by practicing lawyers, including inside counsel. A May 2014 survey 
by Todays General Counsel revealed that about one-third of respondents had not heard of 
the NIST Framework, and that another one-third had heard of it but had not reviewed it.50 
Only around one-third of respondents had read and planned to use the Framework.51 
 
Critical infrastructure, the core of the NIST Frameworks focus, is defined as systems and 
assets,  whether  physical  or  virtual,  so  vital  to  the  United  States  that  the  incapacity  or 
destruction  of  such  systems  and  assets  would  have  a  debilitating  impact  on  security, 
national  economic  security,  national  public  health  or  safety,  or  any  combination  of  those 
matters.52 To  protect  critical  infrastructure  from  cyberthreats,  the  NIST  Framework  is 
recommended  for  organizations  of  all  sizes,  regardless  of  threat  exposure  or  the 
sophistication of cybersecurity systems, in recognizing, assessing, and managing risk.53 The 
NIST Framework provides a common roadmap for organizations to:54 

  Describe their current cybersecurity posture;  
  Describe their target state for cybersecurity;  
  Identify and prioritize opportunities for improvement within the context of a continuous and 

repeatable process;  

  Assess progress toward the target state; and, 

                                                        
46 Lynch, S. Experts Urge U.S. Caution on Additional Cyber Threat Disclosures. Chicago Tribune, March 26, 2014. 
http://articles.chicagotribune.com/2014-03-26/business/sns-rt-us-sec-cybercrime-20140326_1_cyber-security-
cyber-threat-breaches 

47 Client Alert: Five Things Every In-House Counsel Should Understand About the NIST Cybersecurity Framework. 

Op. cit. 

48 Ron Plesco. Association of Certified Fraud Examiners. 

http://www.acfe.com/uploadedFiles/ACFE_Website/Content/images/eblasts/webinar/ron-plesco-bio.pdf 

49 Survey Shows Awareness of Standards Lagging. Todays General Counsel, June/July 2014. p. 45. 

http://digital.todaysgeneralcounsel.com/Vizion5/viewer.aspx?issueID=25&pageID=47 

50 Ibid. 
51 Ibid., p. 47. 
52 Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity. National Institute of Standards and Technology, 

February 12, 2014. p. 3. http://www.nist.gov/cyberframework/upload/cybersecurity-framework-021214.pdf 

53 Ibid. 
54 Bulleted points quoted from: Ibid., p. 4. 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

16 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

  Communicate among internal and external stakeholders about cybersecurity risk.  

 

The Framework is intended to be flexible and adaptive to serve an array of risk management 
processes for cybersecurity, including compatibility with other guidance documents like the 
International  Organization  for  Standardization  (ISO)  31000:2009  and  ISO/IEC  27005:2011, 
the  NIST  Special  Publication  800-39,  and  the  Electricity  Subsector  Cybersecurity  Risk 
Management Process (RMP) guideline.55 The NIST Framework is also applicable to a broad 
range of sectors  including transportation, financial services, energy and utilities, and the 
government  although its usage in other industries, like health care, is still uncertain.56 The 
Privacy & Information Security practice group at King & Spalding LLP predicts that NIST will 
continue to work alongside sector-specific agencies and associations to further develop the 
Framework for implementation in various industries.57 
 
Experts  interviewed  for  this  study  generally  do  not  believe  that  the  NIST  Framework  will 
become a dispositive standard of care for corporations.58 In part, this is because the NIST 
is  currently  a  voluntary  measure  for  companies. 59  However,  the  NIST 
Framework 
Framework  is  an  important  methodological  roadmap  for  planning  and  implementing  a 
companys  compliance  plan.60 The  NIST  Framework  is  one  place  where  a  court  may  look 
when  considering  whether  a  company  exercised  a  standard  of  care,61 and  though  the 
Framework  may  not  be  dispositive,  it  will  likely be  influential  in  such  decisions.62 In a 
sense, the Framework may serve as a gap-filler for the piecemeal collection of laws that 
currently relate to cybersecurity concerns.63 
 
 
 
 
 
 

                                                        
55 Ibid., pp. 5-6. 
56 Hirsch, Op. cit., p. 31. 
57 Client Alert: Five Things Every In-House Counsel Should Understand About the NIST Cybersecurity Framework. 

Op. cit., p. 3. 

58 [1] Pearson, Phone interview, Op. cit. 
    [2] Bodenheimer, Phone interview, Op. cit.  
59 Framework for Improving Critical Infrastructure Cybersecurity. Op. cit., p. 2. 
60 DeMarco, Phone Interview, Op. cit. 
61 Bodenheimer, Phone interview, Op. cit. 
62 Pearson, Phone interview, Op. cit. 
63 Bodenheimer, Phone interview, Op. cit. 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

17 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

HOW LAWYERS HELP MEET CYBERTHREATS 

THE ROLE OF LAWYERS IN CYBERSECURITY 
WHY SHOULD LAWYERS BE INVOLVED? 
As the welter of laws, regulations, and policies touching on cybersecurity suggest, the issue 
has  become  as  much  a  legal  problem  as  a  technical  one.  In  the  past,  many  companies 
believed  that  cybersecurity  could  be  managed  primarily  by  IT staff  and  risk management. 
While some may still hold that belief, the question has largely shifted from whether lawyers 
should  be  involved  in  a  companys  cybersecurity  efforts  to  when  lawyers  should  become 
involved.64 Lawyers are best suited to apply relevant laws to the facts and circumstances of 
the company, assess compliance, and inform decision-making for companies cybersecurity 
efforts as they relate to the law.65 Indeed, most of the corporate counsel surveyed for this 
study are involved to some extent in their companys cybersecurity efforts, with a majority 
reporting that they are at least moderately involved. 
 

Figure 3.1: Level of Involvement in Cybersecurity by Corporate Counsel 

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

What level of involvement do lawyers play in your company's cybersecurity 

efforts?
48%

26%

9%

13%

5%

Not at all involved Slightly involved

Moderately

involved

Extremely involved Don't know/no

opinion

Source: Survey of corporate law departments. 
 
However,  it  seems  likely  that  lawyers  should  be  even  more  involved  in  companies 
cybersecurity efforts. Companies may limit their involvement in part due to confusion over 
roles.  Timothy  Opsitnick,  founder  and  general  counsel  for  JurInnov,  a  cybersecurity 
consulting  firm  that  works  with  companies  and  law  firms  on  IT,  compliance,  and  legal 
issues,66 points out that company IT and risk management staff often lack hard stops for 

 

                                                        
64 Bodenheimer, Phone interview, Op. cit. 
65 [1] Opsitnick, Phone interview, Op. cit.  
    [2] DeMarco, Phone Interview, Op. cit. 
66 Timothy M. Opsitnick, Esq. JurInnov. http://www.jurinnov.com/leadership/timothy-opsitnick/ 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

18 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

knowing when a cybersecurity matter should be elevated to legal counsel. He explains that 
often  IT  and  risk  management  staff  believe  that  they  can  handle  the  legal  aspects  of 
cybersecurity, but the better question is: should they be handling it?67 
 
The  NIST  Handbook  addresses  this  issue  by  breaking  down  computer-based  security 
controls  into  three  functions:  technical  controls,  management  controls,  and  operational 
controls.68 While  an  IT  unit  could  manage  the  technical  subset,  other  controls  require 
procedures,  training,  and  risk  assessments  for  an  organization  based  on  the  types  of 
information and risks involved.69 Many aspects of cybersecurity are backed up by statutory 
or regulatory regimes. While IT can safeguard data within a company, IT staff may not be 
aware of the regulatory requirements associated with data. For these reasons, lawyers have 
become an integral part of cybersecurity planning, assessment, and management.  
 
However,  experts  interviewed  for  this study also stress  that  legal  counsel forms only  one 
part  of  the  broader  cybersecurity  team, which should  include  legal,  IT,  management,  and 
financial  experts.70 The  challenge  of  managing  cybersecurity  within  a  company  is  so  large 
and  complex  that  it  should  not  be  managed  by  just  one  unit. 71 Rather,  the  best 
cybersecurity management team should be a collaborative partnership between several 
supporting units.72 
 
WHAT ARE LAWYERS DOING? 
There  are  currently  many  different  levels  of  involvement  for  lawyers  in  companies 
cybersecurity  efforts,  depending  in  part  on  the  size  of  the  company  and  its  particular 
circumstances.  Generally,  experts  observe  that  larger  companies  are  more  likely  to  have 
lawyers  involved,  either  because  they  have  their  own  in-house  counsel  or  because  they 
have  access  to  external  advisors  that  smaller  companies  lack.73 Some  companies  involve 
lawyers on a nominal basis to answer a few questions, while others have their own lawyers 
leading  internal  cybersecurity  efforts,  and  some companies  bring  outside  legal  counsel  to 
perform cyber-compliance reviews on policy and procedure within the company.74 
 
Overall,  it  is  becoming  increasingly  common  for  companies  to  involve  legal  counsel  in 
cybersecurity matters. This trend is attributable, in part, to increased regulatory pressure on 
companies to prepare for cyber incidents and to disclose cyber risks and data breaches to 
consumers.  Harriet  Pearson  commented  that 
in  corporate 

involvement 

lawyers 

                                                        
67 Opsitnick, Phone interview, Op. cit. 
68 Special Publication 800-12: An Introduction to Computer Security: The NIST Handbook. National Institute of 

Standards and Technology. http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-12/800-12-html/chapter1.html 

69 Bodenheimer, Phone interview, Op. cit. 
70 Ibid. 
71 Pearson, Phone interview, Op. cit.  
72 DeMarco, Phone interview, Op. cit. 
73 [1] Opsitnick, Phone interview, Op. cit.  
    [2] DeMarco, Phone interview, Op. cit. 
74 Bodenheimer, Phone interview, Op. cit. 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

19 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

cybersecurity has especially increased with regard to data breaches and privacy concerns.75 
Timothy Opsitnick points out that in cases of theft, such as identity theft, or where there is a 
clear violation of a regulation, lawyers are not only common, but essential.76 
 
Among  the  corporate  law  departments  surveyed  for  this  study,  over  80  percent  have 
participated  in  at  least  one  type  of  cybersecurity-related  action  or  precaution.  The  most 
common  step  taken  by  the  companies  surveyed  is  also  the  one  that  the  most  law 
departments  have  performed:  preparing  an  information  or  data  security  policy.  Notable 
amounts of respondents have also participated in employee training or cybersecurity audits. 
Also notable, however, is that most companies that have experienced a data breach involve 
their  general  counsel  in  the  response;  although  a  minority  of  companies  surveyed  have 
experienced such a breach, a majority of these (76 percent) involved the law department in 
the response.   
 

Figure 3.2: Cybersecurity Steps Involving Corporate Counsel 

Which of the following actions/precautions has been taken by your . . . 

(Please select all that apply)

80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

Prepared an

information/data
security policy

Trained

employees in
data security

practices

Conducted an

audit/assessment
of cyber threat
preparedness

Prepared a data
breach incident
response plan

Company

Law Department

Responded to a

data breach

incident

None of the

above

Source: Survey of corporate law departments. 
 
This points to an important conclusion that emerged in the interviews conducted for this 
study: companies are more likely to involve lawyers as a reactive measure, after an incident 
has occurred, rather than as a proactive measure.77 SEC Commissioner Luis Aguilar made a 
similar point in a June 2014 speech at the Cyber Risks and the Boardroom Conference in 
New York:78  

 

                                                        
75 Pearson, Phone interview, Op. cit. 
76 Opsitnick, Phone interview, Op. cit. 
77 Budish, Ryan. Fellow, Berkman Center for Internet and Society, Harvard University. Phone interview. July 18, 2014. 
78 Aguilar, L. Boards of Directors, Corporate Governance and Cyber-Risks: Sharpening the Focus. Cyber Risks and 

the Boardroom Conference, New York Stock Exchange, New York. June 10, 2014. p. 3. 
http://business.cch.com/srd/Aguilar-CorporateGovernanceandCyber-Risks.pdf 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

20 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

Given  the  known  risks  posed  by  cyber-attacks,  one  would  expect  that  corporate 
boards  and  senior  management  universally  would  be  proactively  taking  steps  to 
confront  these  cyber-risks.  Yet,  evidence  suggests  that  there  may  be  a  gap  that 
exists  between  the  magnitude  of  the  exposure  presented  by  cyber-risks  and  the 
steps,  or  lack  thereof,  that  many  corporate  boards  have  taken  to  address  these 
risks.  Some  have  noted  that  boards  are  not  spending  enough  time  or  devoting 
sufficient corporate resources to addressing cybersecurity issues . . . In light of these 
observations, directors should be asking themselves what they can, and should, be 
doing to effectively oversee cyber-risk management. 
 

Timothy Opsitnick explains this in part by noting that compliance and IT units are more likely 
to drive the proactive measures, while lawyers drive the reactive responses to an incident.79 
Most  companies  bring  in  legal  counsel  after  experiencing  either  a  major  or  minor  crisis 
situation. An example of a minor crisis would be a company receiving a grievance from a 
business  partner  about  meeting  particular  cybersecurity  requirements;  lawyers  might  be 
brought  on  board  to  bring  the  companys  procedures  up  to  standard  with  the  partners 
requested requirements. A major crisis would be a large-scale data security breach.80 
 
Despite  these  practices,  however,  at  least  one  expert  interviewed  for  this  study  has 
observed  a  trend  toward  increasingly  proactive  involvement  for  legal  counsel,  partly  as  a 
result of the increased attention to cybersecurity by regulatory bodies like the SEC.81 This 
trend may be reflected in the responses of corporate law departments when asked whether 
their cybersecurity involvement tends to be proactive or reactive. For most, it is both, with a 
relatively small proportion (22 percent) reporting only a reactive involvement. 
 

                                                        
79 Opsitnick, Phone interview, Op. cit. 
80 Bodenheimer, Phone interview, Op. cit. 
81 DeMarco, Phone interview, Op. cit. 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

21 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

Figure 3.3: How Companies Involve Lawyers in Cybersecurity 

Does your company tend to involve lawyers as proactive or reactive 

measures to cybersecurity?

53%

22%

16%

Proactive

Reactive

Both

9%

Don't know/not

applicable

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

 

    Source: Survey of corporate law departments. 
 
WHAT SHOULD LAWYERS BE DOING?  
Legal  counsel  may  take  on  many  roles  in  advising  companies  on  cybersecurity  matters. 
Primarily, legal counsel must understand the patchwork of laws that govern cybersecurity 
matters at the state and federal levels, including sector-specific legislation, and be able to 
communicate  this  information  with  stakeholders. 82 More  specifically,  Harriet  Pearson 
suggests a 10-point cybersecurity agenda for corporate counsel (Figure 3.4).  
 
 

 

                                                        
82 Ibid. 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

22 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

Figure 3.4: Pearsons 10-Point Agenda for Corporate Counsel 

1. Fulfill Fiduciary Duty of Board and Management. If a 
cybersecurity incident occurs, a company will need to be 
able to prove they have met their duty for safeguarding 
company stock price and assets. A protocol to fulfill this 
duty should be a part of an effective cybersecurity plan. 

6. Prepare to Handle Incidents and Crisis. Counsel can 

help prevent escalation of an incident to a crisis by 

helping guide sessions to prepare the company with a 

plan of action for incident response. Identify key 

internal and external resources for managing incident 
response, consider involving senior management in a 
tabletop exercise, and consider in advance what legal 

issues are implicated during an incident. 

2. Address Disclosure Obligations and Appropriate 
Communications. Training employees on effective 

internal and external communication during a 

cybersecurity incident can prevent escalating the issue 
further. Early attention and training on communicating 

factually without speculation and establishing channels for 

seeking assistance can serve a company well. 

3. Guide Participation in Public-Private Partnerships and 
Law Enforcement Interactions. Industry and government 

forums for sharing threat information, response 

strategies, and cybersecurity best practices can be a useful 

part of a companys cybersecurity program. However, 

there should be a strategy for company participation and 
training for individuals involved to reduce risk and avoid 

conflicts with clients or government authorities. 

4. Achieve Regulatory Compliance. Companies should 
assess the regulations relevant to its circumstances, 

including federal and state-level data security and breach 
notification laws. However, avoid overinvesting in check-

the-box compliance efforts that may hinder more 

effective cybersecurity measures. 

5. Provide Counsel to Cybersecurity Program. Companies 

7. Manage Cybersecurity-Related Transactional Risk. 
Mergers and acquisitions, vendor/supplier contracts, 

and consumer/client contracts can all implicate 
cybersecurity-related risk. Create a due diligence 

checklist and approach to cybersecurity issues, review 

contractual provisions, and review the vendor 
oversight program to integrate cybersecurity risk 

considerations into approach. 

8. Effectively Use Insurance. Insurance can be a 

valuable way to protect a company, but the exclusions 
and conditions of the insurance should be examined 

carefully. Cybersecurity insurance products have 

improved since their first introduction to the market 

aver a decade ago. 

9. Monitor and Strategically Engage in Public Policy. 
Stay informed of developing policy standards, engage 
in advocacy via industry associations, and engage in 
conversations on key issues so that policymakers and 
industry leaders are aware of company positions and 

concerns. 

10. Discharge Professional Duty of Care. Corporate 

and outside counsel should take precautions to protect 
client and related information, particularly when using 
or relying upon e-mail, social media, cloud, and other 

digital capabilities. 

should appoint or identify legal counsel to become 
familiar with the security program and legal issues 

potentially raised by its implementation.These individuals 
should be prepared to bring any policy issues or potential 

legal risks to senior management or the board.  
Source: Cybersecurity: The Corporate Counsels Agenda.83 

 
To gauge the extent to which corporate counsel have taken on this agenda, Hanover asked 
law departments whether they have performed any of these tasks. Again, results suggest 
that  general  counsel  have  significant  room  for  improvement  in  addressing  cybersecurity. 
The highest rate of implementation for any agenda item is only 53 percent, and nearly one-
fifth of respondents have not taken on any of these tasks. Expectedly, crisis preparedness 
and regulatory compliance rank highly, while less immediate tasks  such as using insurance 
or engaging in public policy  are less commonly addressed. 
 
                                                        
83 Taken nearly verbatim from: Pearson, Cybersecurity: The Corporate Counsels Agenda, Op. cit., pp. 4-6. 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

23 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

Figure 3.5: Engagement with Pearsons Ten-Point Agenda 

Has your law department/general counsel's office taken on any of these 

agendas? (Please select all that apply)

Prepare to handle incidents and crises

Address disclosure obligations and appropriate

communications

Achieve regulatory compliance

Manage cybersecurity-related transactional risk

Discharge professional duty of care

Fulfill fiduciary duty of board and management

Effectively use insurance

Monitor and strategically engage in public policy

53%

48%

46%

43%

37%

32%

28%

22%

Provide counsel to cybersecurity program

Guide participation in public-private partnerships and

law enforcement interactions

13%

10%

None of the above

17%

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

 

Source: Survey of corporate law departments. 
 
 
KNOWLEDGE AND SKILLSETS FOR CYBERLAWYERS 
WHAT LAWYERS NEED TO KNOW 
Experts  interviewed  for  this  study  identified  three  main  areas  of  knowledge  that  lawyers 
working  in  cybersecurity  could  improve  on:  legal  knowledge,  technical  knowledge,  and 
communication  skills.  Surveyed  corporate  counsel  largely  agree.  Corporate  counsel  most 
commonly  select  legal  knowledge  and  technical  knowledge  as  the  two  areas  in  which  it 
would be "most beneficial" for lawyers to receive cybersecurity training.  
 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

24 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

Figure 3.6: Lawyers Cybersecurity Training and Education Needs  

If lawyers in your office were to receive additional training in 

cybersecurity, which of the following areas would be the most beneficial?

34%

32%

28%

Risk assessment

Technical knowledge/training

Legal knowledge

Forensic analysis

Communication skills

3%

3%

Other

1%

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

 

    Source: Survey of corporate law departments. 
 
Regulatory knowledge is central to lawyers involved in a companys cybersecurity efforts. 
Foundational  regulations  are  driving  most  companies efforts, so an  understanding  of  the 
quilt of regulations and standards that apply to a company is a major component of legal 
counsels  responsibility. 84  Harriet  Pearson  suggests  that  legal  issues  associated  with 
information  sharing  and  incident  response;  privilege  assertion;  legal  issues  with  law 
enforcement 
interaction;  active  defense  measures;  and  public  disclosure  about 
cybersecurity events and risks are just a few areas in which knowledge and awareness could 
be improved.85 
 
However,  cybersecurity  goes  beyond  regulatory  law,  encompassing  private  contracts  as 
well. Harriet Pearson notes, for instance, that the trend toward companies contracting out 
business processes to different organizations sets up the potential for a broad base for legal 
activity regarding cybersecurity incidents. The cyberlaw industry will be faced with sorting 
out the responsible parties when data breaches or other cyberthreats occur in companies 
outsourcing business processes to other organizations.86  
 
For  similar  reasons,  David  Bodenheimer  recommends  that  legal  education  integrate 
information security into the curriculum for contract law. Many cybersecurity issues result 
from business-to-business contracts rather than statutes or regulations, and lawyers need 
to  be  aware  of  basic  information  security  concerns  when  working  with  contractual 
                                                        
84 Opsitnick, Phone interview, Op. cit. 
85 Pearson, Phone interview, Op. cit. 
86 Ibid. 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

25 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

agreements between clients.87 Bodenheimer also suggests that facets of cybersecurity law 
could  be  integrated  elsewhere  in  the  law  school curriculum,  such  as  in  ethics  courses,  as 
mishandling  information  security  can  put  a  lawyer  at  risk  of  malpractice  or  may  damage 
client relations.88 
 
Basic  technical  training  in  cybersecurity  is  also  an  important  area  for  lawyers  to  build 
knowledge,  although  many  experts  stress  that  detailed  technology  expertise  is  not 
necessary. A recent ABA Commission on Ethics also noted that lawyers have a responsibility 
to stay informed of technology developments and risks.89 Along those lines, Harriet Pearson 
notes that lawyers should be able to sort the wheat from the chaff in terms of the types of 
cybersecurity threats that a company may face.90  
 
Ryan Budish, a fellow at the Berkman Center for Internet and Society at Harvard University, 
adds that lawyers need a certain degree of technical knowledge to understand if they are 
actually  meeting  the  legal  standards  set  out.  Basic  knowledge  of  cybersecurity  can  help 
lawyers  to  communicate  with  IT  staff  and  ask  the  right  questions  about  potential 
concerns.91 However, Timothy Opsitnick cautions that technology is evolving so quickly that 
it  would  be  unfeasible  for  lawyers  to  stay  informed  on  the  technical  details  of  the 
cybersecurity field; although he believes that the demand justifies building an educational 
practice around a cyberlaw specialty, he suggests that such a program should not focus too 
much on the technical side of cybersecurity.92  
 
Finally,  several  experts  emphasize  the  value  of  communication  skills  for  explaining 
cybersecurity  issues  to  non-experts.  Lawyers  are  responsible  for  translating  cybersecurity 
laws  and  policies  for  their  clients,  helping  them  understand  how  the  laws  relate  to  their 
particular circumstances, and explaining the trade-offs of various approaches.93 
 
HOW LAWYERS LEARN ABOUT CYBERSECURITY 
Experts  note  that  there  is  an  immense  amount  of  information  on  cybersecurity  and  legal 
practice  available  to  lawyers  through  the ABA,  government  websites,  private  newsletters, 
and many conferences.94 The Congressional Cybersecurity Caucus provides weekly updates 
of developments in the public sector,95 and the Georgetown Cybersecurity Law Institute is 

                                                        
87 Bodenheimer, Phone interview, Op. cit. 
88 Bodenheimer, Phone interview, Op. cit. 
89 Law Firms Not Immune to Cybersecurity Risks. Your ABA, October 2013. 

http://www.americanbar.org/newsletter/publications/youraba/201310article01.html 

90 Pearson, Phone interview, Op. cit. 
91 Budish, Phone interview, Op. cit. 
92 Opsitnick, Phone interview, Op. cit. 
93 DeMarco, Phone interview, Op. cit.  
94 [1] Bodenheimer, Phone interview, Op. cit.  
    [2] Opsitnick, Phone interview, Op. cit.  
    [3] Pearson, Phone interview, Op. cit. 
95 Langevin, J. and M. McCaul. Weekly News Round-up. Congressional Cybersecurity Caucus. 

http://cybercaucus.langevin.house.gov/ 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

26 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

an  important  resource  for  keeping  up  with  developments  in cybersecurity  law.96 The ABA 
publications  and  the  annual  Georgetown  Cybersecurity  Law  Institute  may  be  the  best 
sources  for  holistic  coverage  of  cybersecurity  developments,  while  conferences  and 
specialist publications provide information on particular issues like privacy issues or cyber-
insurance.97  
 
In  practice,  no  one  source  of  information  on  cybersecurity predominates  among  lawyers. 
When asked which source they use, corporate counsel responding to the survey conducted 
for  this  study  were  almost  equally  likely  to  select  various  options,  including  newsletters, 
conferences,  and  government  websites.  Encouragingly,  roughly  two-thirds  of  respondents 
consult at least one of these sources to learn about cybersecurity. 
  

Figure 3.7: How Lawyers Learn About Cybersecurity 

Have you used any of the following sources of information to learn about 

cybersecurity and legal practice? (Please select all that apply)

Private newsletters

Specialized conferences

Government websites

Class related to cybersecurity

American Bar Association

None of the above

32%

30%

29%

28%

26%

34%

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

        Source: Survey of corporate law departments. 
 
However,  despite  the  abundance  of  information,  some  of  the  experts  consulted  for  this 
study feel that lawyers are still not sufficiently informed about cybersecurity issues.98 Ryan 
Budish points out that while there are some well-trained experts, most lawyers probably do 
not have the adequate knowledge to address issues in cyberlaw.99 Practicing lawyers seem 
to agree; when asked about the importance of improving formal education and training in 

 

                                                        
96 Cybersecurity Law Institute. Georgetown Law Continuing Legal Education. 

http://www.law.georgetown.edu/continuing-legal-education/programs/cle/cybersecurity/ 

97 Pearson, Phone interview, Op cit. 
98 [1] DeMarco, Phone interview, Op. cit.  
      [2] Pearson, Phone interview, Op. cit. 
99 Budish, Phone interview, Op. cit. 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

27 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

the  field,  corporate  counsel  responded  affirmatively,  with  over  two-thirds  rating  such 
improvement very or extremely important. 
 

Figure 3.8: Importance of Formal Education and Training in Cybersecurity 

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

How important is it to improve formal education and training on legal 

aspects of cybersecurity?

46%

25%

23%

2%

5%

Not at all
important

Slightly
important

Very important

Extremely
important

Don't know/no

opinion

 

    Source: Survey of corporate law departments. 
 
In-house legal counsel may be better informed on cybersecurity issues within a company.100 
In-house counsel are more in tune with the cybersecurity issues companies are facing and 
have 
inside  knowledge  of  their  companys  particular  cybersecurity  challenges  and 
vulnerabilities. Outside counsel can be divorced from the reality of whats going on with 
corporate  cybersecurity,  unless  they  are  one  of  the  few  lawyers  who  have  frequent 
involvement with the same companies.101 Still, in-house corporate counsel will often bring 
in outside counsel to augment their skills and knowledge on the most difficult issues.102 
 
 

                                                        
100 [1] Bodenheimer, Phone interview, Op. cit.  
      [2] Opsitnick, Phone interview, Op. cit.  
      [3] Pearson, Phone interview, Op. cit. 
101 Pearson, Phone interview, Op. cit. 
102 Cyber Security Incident Response: Are We as Prepared as We Think? Ponemon Institute, LLC, January 2014. p. 

13. http://www.lancope.com/files/documents/Industry-Reports/Lancope-Ponemon-Report-Cyber-Security-
Incident-Response.pdf/ 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

28 

Hanover Research | February 2015 

METHODOLOGY 

To develop the findings of this paper, interviews were conducted during the second half of 
2014 with lawyers, consultants, and academics knowledgeable in the intersection of law and 
cybersecurity. These interviewees are cited directly throughout this paper.  
 
In addition to these in-depth interviews, an online survey of corporate law departments was 
administered  in  November  2014.  Of  the  149  individuals  who  took  the  survey,  most 
respondents (89 percent) work as attorneys in their employers law department or general 
counsels office, with the remainder working as paralegals or in other positions. As shown 
below, around half of respondents work in companies with more than 700 employees, with 
the rest distributed more or less evenly across a range of sizes.      
 

Size of Companies Surveyed 

Approximately how many employees does your company/corporation 

employ?

60%

50%

40%

30%

20%

10%

0%

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

17%

7%

7%

11%

5%

50 or less

51-100

101-250

251-500

501-700

52%

More than

700

 

 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

29 

 

PROJECT EVALUATION FORM 
 
Hanover Research is committed to providing a work product that meets or exceeds partner 
expectations. In keeping with that goal, we would like to hear your opinions regarding our 
reports. Feedback is critically important and serves as the strongest mechanism by which we 
tailor  our  research  to  your  organization.  When  you  have  had  a  chance  to  evaluate  this 
report, please take a moment to fill out the following questionnaire. 
 
http://www.hanoverresearch.com/evaluation/index.php 
 
 
CAVEAT 
 
The publisher and authors have used their best efforts in preparing this brief. The publisher 
and  authors  make  no  representations  or  warranties  with  respect  to  the  accuracy  or 
completeness of the contents of this brief and specifically disclaim any implied warranties of 
fitness  for  a  particular  purpose.  There  are  no  warranties  that  extend  beyond  the 
descriptions  contained  in  this  paragraph.  No  warranty  may  be  created  or  extended  by 
representatives  of  Hanover  Research  or  its  marketing  materials.  The  accuracy  and 
completeness  of  the  information  provided  herein  and  the  opinions  stated  herein  are  not 
guaranteed  or  warranted  to  produce  any  particular  results,  and  the  advice and  strategies 
contained  herein  may  not  be  suitable  for  every  partner.  Neither  the  publisher  nor  the 
authors shall be liable for any loss of profit or any other commercial damages, including but 
not  limited  to  special,  incidental,  consequential,  or  other  damages.  Moreover,  Hanover 
Research  is  not  engaged  in  rendering  legal,  accounting,  or  other  professional  services. 
Partners requiring such services are advised to consult an appropriate professional. 
 
 
 
 

 

4401 Wilson Boulevard, Suite 400 
Arlington, VA 22203 
P 202.559.0500 F 866.808.6585 
www.hanoverresearch.com 

 

 

 
 

 2015 Hanover Research  

 

30 

