The Best Way to Control Mosquitoes
Integrated Mosquito Management explained

The perfect control for mosquitoes would protect us immediately from bites and mosquito-borne diseases, and it
would be simple, inexpensive and safe for the environment. Initially, when modern pesticides were fi rst 
introduced for control of public health pests in the middle of the 20th century, some thought the perfect control 
had been discovered. Unfortunately, despite some early successes, pesticides ultimately proved to be the less-
than-perfect solution for long-term mosquito control.

Experience has shown that pesticides alone rarely produce complete or lasting 
control of pests, whether battling cockroaches in kitchens, or mosquitoes in 
marshes. This observation is the basis of a control strategy called
integrated mosquito management (IMM).

Mosquitoes are controlled most effi ciently with an approach that blends the 
use of both chemical and non-chemical control measures. This is the essence 
of IMM, the preferred approach for governmental mosquito control programs. 
Integrated mosquito management works best when done over a large area, like a 
neighborhood, community or county.

COMMUNITY MOSQUITO MANAGEMENT

Most community mosquito control programs are coordinated by city or county health departments. Because of
the high profi le of most mosquito spraying operations, with their truck-mounted fogging machines and highly
publicized treatment schedules, many people assume that mosquito control is essentially spraying. But spraying
is only a small part of an IMM program. Chances are that your area health departments are actively involved
in all aspects of IMM. The acronym SSLAP is sometimes used to describe the essential parts of an integrated
mosquito management program. SSLAP is Surveillance, Source Reduction, Larval Mosquito Control, Adult
Control, and Public Education.

Surveillance. Without a well-designed sampling and surveillance program, it is diffi cult to know what is really 
going on with mosquitoes in your community. Knowing what species of mosquitoes are active provides clues 
as to where breeding is occurring and whether public health is threatened. In addition to monitoring mosquito 
population changes, surveillance programs may monitor the presence of health-threatening viruses in wild 
animal and bird populations.  This information is useful in determining whether and when spraying is needed, 
and allows health departments to issue health alerts and target awareness programs to affected parts of the 
community.

Source Reduction. Mosquitoes lead two separate lives. Most people think of mosquitoes as the delicate winged 
insects that fl y about biting humans and pets. But before reaching the adult stage, mosquitoes live in water. 
Without these aquatic breeding sites, there would be no adult mosquitoes. Locating and eliminating the breeding 
sites of mosquitoes is one of the most important parts of a community mosquito control program.

Larval mosquito control means treating water breeding sites that cannot 
be drained, fi lled or otherwise eliminated.  Typically the largest portion 
of community mosquito control budgets are devoted to larval mosquito 
control.  Mosquito larvae can be controlled biologically or through the use 
of low-impact pesticides that selectively kill only mosquitoes. Biological 
control of mosquitoes is usually done by releasing Gambusia (mosquito) 
fi sh, or similar minnow species, into water where mosquitoes are breeding. 
Mosquito fi sh are excellent predators and, where established, can quickly bring mosquitoes under control. 
Mosquito fi sh releases are usually made into creeks that periodically dry up and lose their fi sh populations.

Certain pesticides may also be used to control mosquitoes in small bodies 
of water that are inaccessible or impossible to drain. Included are the 
methoprene granules (Pre-StrikeTM or Altosid) or the bacterial insecticides: 
Bacillus thuringiensis israelensis and Bacillus sphaericus (sold in dunks, 
granules or liquids). Special polymers (e.g., Arosurf  SF, or Agnique 
MMF) or oil formulations (e.g., Golden Bear (GB-1111)) are sometimes 
used to coat the surface of water breeding sites, making it diffi cult for 
mosquito larvae to attach to the surface of the water to breath. 

Adult Control. When source reduction proves inadequate, surveillance programs are used to direct health 
department to parts of your community at highest risk of mosquitoes or mosquito-borne diseases. There are 
several good reasons to limit the use of sprays for adult mosquitoes. Besides the high cost of such programs, 
the widespread use of insecticides often leads to community health concerns (especially among highly sensitive 
individuals) and the inevitable impact on benefi cial insect species. Overuse of insecticides can also have the 
unintended effect of increasing the risk of insecticide resistance among target mosquito species. For these 
reasons, adult mosquito control is usually the action of last resort for most health departments.

Public Education. Most of us know how painful and annoying mosquito bites can be, but many people are still
unaware of health threats posed by these insects and what individuals can do to prevent mosquito problems. 
At least 25% of mosquito complaint calls can be traced to the callers property. Learning how to recognize 
mosquito breeding sites, how to report suspected breeding sites and how to protect oneself from bites, are 
important learning objectives for community education programs.

BACKYARD MOSQUITO MANAGEMENT

Despite the desirability of community-wide mosquito control, sometimes the best place to start is in your own
backyard. As a homeowner you have access to all potential breeding sites in your yard, and can start your own
IMM program. The ingredients for a backyard IMM program are similar to those used by community health
departments.

Source Reduction and Larval Control. The fi rst step in developing a 
backyard integrated mosquito management program is to make sure you 
arent contributing to your own problem. Take a walk through your yard 
looking for potential mosquito breeding sites.

All a mosquito needs to breed is a few leaves or small amount of organic 
material (which provides the microoranisms mosquito larvae use as food) 
and water. In as little as a week, this water can produce mosquitoes.  
Mosquito breeding sites are more common in your backyard than you might 
think, and at least one site can be found in nearly every back yard during the warm months.

Backyard source reduction starts with dump it, clean it, drain it or fi ll it. Buckets, wheel barrows, cans, tarps 
over  pools or boats or anything that holds water should be  dumped and stored. Gutters should be cleaned 
regularly, and bird baths cleaned at least weekly. Cisterns or rain barrels should be tightly sealed and screened. 
Tire swings should have holes drilled at the bottom to allow them to drain, and low areas or ditches should 
be drained or fi lled with soil or gravel. Several products (e.g., mosquito dunks and methoprene granules) are 
available to consumers for treating standing water that cannot be easily drained or fi lled. 

  

Adult Control. Adult mosquitoes typically rest on foliage during the day, coming out in the evening to bite.
Many professional pest control companies now offer backyard spray services to control adults resting on foliage 
and in shady areas around the home with long-lasting, residual insecticides. Such treatments can provide 4 to 6
weeks of suppression of mosquito biting rates. Aerosol, do-it-yourself treatments are also available.

Some pest control companies and independent installers offer permanent, outdoor insecticide misting system for 
season-long control of mosquitoes around residences. Pyrethrum, the principal active ingredient used in
these systems, is a proven general purpose insecticide with relatively low toxicity to humans and short life in the
environment. Besides the initial cost of installation, the biggest concerns about these systems include impacts
on benefi cial insects, the potential for insecticide overuse and possible unwanted drift into neighboring 
properties.

You can temporary suppress mosquitoes by applying short-lived, non-residual fogs to the yard and surrounding
foliage. Such treatments have the advantage of temporarily suppressing biting activity with little long-lasting
effect on benefi cial insects like butterfl ies and honey bees. Relatively inexpensive propane- or electric-powered
foggers can be purchased at many discount and hardware stores. These units are ideal for fogging just before a
picnic or other special event in the backyard.

Other backyard devices sold for mosquito protection include candles, bug zappers, ultrasonic mosquito repelling
machines and mosquito suction devices. Citronella candles and torches have been shown to provide relief
from mosquito bites in the areas where the smoke wafts. But wind can limit the size of the protection zone and
disrupt candle effectiveness. Research has shown that bug zappers provide little mosquito control and actually
kill more benefi cial insects than pests. Despite extensive research there is no evidence that electronic devices
sold to repel mosquitoes via sound really work.

Electric or propane-powered suction traps for mosquitoes have been tested and found to work to varying 
degrees.  Unfortunately, according to the American Mosquito Control Association, advertising claims for these
devices are sometimes overstated in the size of the area protected by a single unit. Under the right conditions
it appears that these devices can signifi cantly reduce biting mosquito numbers. If you desire to test one of these
in your backyard, ask the seller about a satisfaction guarantee.

Pest Proofi ng and Personal Protection. The fi rst line of defense against mosquitoes is screened windows and
doors. Make sure all house windows are screened and that screens are in good repair. Protecting yourself and
your family from nighttime biting mosquitoes is as important for your health as it is for getting a good nights
sleep.

Limiting your outdoor activities during evening and morning hours when mosquitoes are most active is another 
effective practice. If you must be outdoors during these times, wear protective clothing (long-sleeved shirt and
pants) or a proven insect repellent. The longest-lasting, most widely sold and effective repellent is DEET (N,
N-Diethyl-3-Methylbenzamide). DEET provides up to 6 hours of high protection from mosquitoes and has an
excellent safety record. People who dislike the smell or oily feel of DEET can choose from two excellent new
repellents. Lemon oil of eucalyptus (an aromatic, plant-derived repellent) and picaridin (odorless) provide 
excellent, though somewhat less long-lived protection than DEET.

As in community-wide management programs, its best to rely on more than one control tactic when treating
yourself or your backyard for mosquitoes.

Funding
Provided by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Region VI offi ce, Dallas, Texas.

Authors
Dr. Mary G. Grodner, Professor & Pesticide Coordinator, Department of Entomology, Louisiana
State University AgCenter, Louisiana Cooperative Extension Service; Dr. Jim Criswell, Pesticide Coordinator,
Oklahoma State University, Dr. Carol Sutherland, Extension Entomologist at New Mexico State University
and State Entomologist for the New Mexico Department of Agriculture; Mr. Ples Spradley, Associate Professor
- Pesticide Education, Dept. of Plant Pathology, University of Arkansas, Division of Agriculture; Dr. Don L.
Renchie, (Extension Program Leader for Agricultural and Environmental Safety; Coordinator-Pesticide Safety
Education Project (PSEP); Assistant Professor and Extension Specialist); Dr. Michael E. Merchant, BCE 
(Professor and Extension Urban Entomologist, Texas A&M University Research and Extension Center, Dallas); 
Dr. Mark Johnsen, (Extension Assistant, Agricultural and Environmental Safety) and Mr. Scott Sawlis, MS 
(County Entomologist, Dallas County Health Department, Dallas, Texas).

Date of publication
June, 2007

