Computer Viruses in Urban Indian Telecenters:

Characterizing an Unsolved Problem

Prasanta Bhattacharya
Microsoft Research India
t-prabha@microsoft.com

William Thies

Microsoft Research India
thies@microsoft.com

ABSTRACT
Computer viruses can pose a serious threat to the operations of
computer kiosks in the developing world.
In this paper, we in-
vestigate the experiences, behaviors, and unmet needs of telecen-
ter owners as they attempt to prevent virus infections on their ma-
chines. Based on interviews in 25 centers in Bangalore, India, we
conclude that virus control is largely an unsolved problem for this
population. We characterize the local strategies for coping with
viruses, barriers to eliminating the problem, and opportunities for
future research.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.6.5 [Management of Computing and Information Systems]:
Security and ProtectionInvasive software; K.4.3 [Computers and
Society]: Organizational Impacts

General Terms
Security, Human Factors

1.

INTRODUCTION

Public-access, shared computing facilities play an important role
in enabling low-income individuals to gain access to computers and
the Internet. In India, it is estimated that there are over 180,000 cy-
ber cafes and 40,000 Internet kiosks [5], and 37% of Indias 22 mil-
lion urban Internet users rely on cyber cafes for access [7]. While
the social impact of such telecenters remains a subject of debate
and active study [17], and there are many barriers to their success
and sustainability in rural areas [3, 11], there is no question that
public and shared-usage environments have become commonplace
across many urban centers in the developing world.

In prior work on telecenters and shared-usage computing, there
has been frequent anecdotal evidence that computer viruses repre-
sent a serious problem [1, 4, 6, 8, 20]. Shared computer centers
are especially vulnerable to viruses due to usage of untrusted me-
dia (customer USB sticks), Internet browsing by untrained users,
and limited human and financial resources for computer security.
However, to the best of our knowledge, there has not yet been a

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for
personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are
not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies
bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. To copy otherwise, to
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific
permission and/or a fee.
NSDR11, June 28, 2011, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.
Copyright 2011 ACM 978-1-4503-0739-0/11/06 ...$10.00.

methodical survey to assess the state of computer viruses in the
developing world. Only by understanding real-world experiences
with computer viruses, including the human processes that dictate
virus detection and control, will it be possible to design new inter-
ventions that can be effective in practice.

In this paper, we survey the multi-faceted impact of computer
viruses on shared-usage computing centers in urban India. Our fo-
cus is on private businesses that provide one or more computers for
direct or intermediated use by customers. While this usually takes
the form of a telecenter or cyber cafe, it also encompasses estab-
lishments such as mobile shops and photo studios. Our methods
consist of semi-structured interviews with owners or employees of
25 shops.

Our findings re-affirm that computer viruses remain a serious
problem for these organizations. More surprisingly, this problem
persists despite 88% of the shops running antivirus software, and
73% of these installations being licensed with a paid subscription.
We describe the diverse practices that have evolved to cope with
computer viruses, spanning regular re-installation of the operating
system to deliberate reduction of customers privacy (curbing vis-
its to risky adult websites). We also survey the barriers and con-
straints that inhibit better virus control, including the importance of
customer convenience and technical misconceptions of shop own-
ers. Finally, we close by outlining research opportunities that lever-
age these findings to enable new systems and protocols for over-
coming the virus problem in developing regions.

2. RELATED WORK

There is a rich literature surrounding telecenters and public-access
computing in the developing world. Despite considerable debate
regarding their efficacy as a vehicle for social development, the im-
pact of telecenters is not rigorously understood and remains an ac-
tive area of study [17]. Researchers have examined the factors that
contribute to the success and sustainability of telecenters in rural
and small-town India [3, 9, 11]. While these studies point to the
general demands of computer maintenance, they do not focus on
the impact of computer viruses.

Most closely related to our work are the surveys of Internet cafes
in urban and small-town India by Rangaswamy [15, 16]. This work
probes the motivations and entrepreneurialism of the owners of 42
Internet cafes [15] and also highlights the grey market surround-
ing software and services in this setting [16]. However, there is no
mention of computer viruses. Other researchers have focused on
user behavior in urban Internet cafes, spanning overnight browsing
in Nigeria [1], collaboration between users in Ghana [2], deliber-
ate planning by users in Nairobi, Kenya [20], gaming in central
Asia [10], and general usage patterns in urban India [6] and Kam-

pala, Uganda [13]. While these works contain occasional refer-
ences to computer viruses, the issue is not explored in depth.

Broader research in the space of technology and development
has grappled with the issues of computer viruses. Brewer et al.
give anecdotes of virus infections and frequent re-installations of
the OS in India and Cambodia, and suggest that antivirus software
is rare in the latter environment [4]. Network traces from the village
of Macha, Zambia show evidence of significant malware traffic [8].
Rahman et al. present an architecture for security and privacy of
rural Internet kiosks [19]. As they utilize a Linux system, viruses
are less common and their focus is on protecting user data.

Overall, despite the considerable interest in telecenters and Inter-
net cafes, and widespread anecdotal evidence regarding computer
viruses in developing regions, we are unaware of any systematic in-
vestigation into the experiences, challenges, and opportunities sur-
rounding virus control in such environments. This provides the
impetus for our study.

3. STUDY ENVIRONMENT

Our study was conducted via semi-structured interviews, per-
formed by the first author over a period of 10 weeks in urban Ban-
galore. The focus was on small and medium-sized shops with one
or more shared-access computers; we visited 25 locations in all.
The target locations were selected via a convenient sampling, in
which we visited three different neighborhoods in urban Bangalore
(spanning lower- and middle-income communities) and searched
for suitable businesses on the street. Interviews were usually with
the owner or manager of the establishment, or (in 3 cases) with an-
other employee. Interviews were conducted in Hindi and usually
lasted between 45 minutes and an hour. As several interviewees
were hesitant to be recorded while discussing software licensing
and security, handwritten notes were taken during the interview and
expanded shortly thereafter.

The vast majority of centers (23 out of 25) provide Internet ac-
cess to the machines; 18 are set up as a cyber cafe for their primary
business while 5 derive their primary income from other offerings
such as mobile services, photo studios, design and printing, and
computer sales and servicing. The two offline locations are primar-
ily photocopy centers that also use computer kiosks for preparation
and printing of documents. Across all locations, the most common
use of computers is for preparing resumes and cover letters, and
searching for jobs online. In addition, customers frequently use the
computers to book tickets (for travel by train, bus, air, etc.), print
documents, or for entertainment (playing games, accessing Face-
book, etc.) Cyber cafes typically charge Rs. 10 ($0.22) per hour
for access to the computers. Supplemental services such as printing
are frequently responsible for a large share of the shops revenue.
Most of the visitors to a given establishment are repeat cus-
tomers, who are familiar with the shop and sometimes insist on
using the same machine. Customers rely heavily on USB sticks to
store their personal data across sessions. While they are discour-
aged from leaving persistent files on the computers in the shop,
sometimes they do so by accident. By law, cyber cafes in India
are required to maintain records of the identity of every customer.
Consequently, several cafes have prominent signs asking customers
to submit ID proof upon entry. However, these practices are rarely
enforced in small shops. When asked about the sign requesting
ID proof, one owner commented, they are only for the authorities
when they visit.

Shops contained between 1 and 20 computers (median=7) as de-
picted in Figure 1, and had been using computers for a period of
3 months to 10 years (median=3). All shops were exclusively run-
ning Windows XP, with the exception of one medium-sized cyber

Figure 1: Number of computers in shops studied.

cafe which was running Windows 2000 (motivated by the man-
agers belief that Windows 2000 was more secure with respect to
viruses than Windows XP). One cyber cafe maintained a Linux ma-
chine, but only for use by the manager. We found only one instance
of genuine Windows across the 25 locations. Respondents were
amused when we asked about genuine Windows, with responses
such as Im sure you have not come across a single cyber cafe that
used a genuine copy of Windows and Who in todays world uses
a genuine copy of Windows Sir?

Maintenance and repair of computers is an ongoing challenge for
all of the establishments that we visited. As detailed later, all shops
make significant investments in controlling computer viruses: of
25 locations, 22 are running antivirus software and 16 are paying
for licensed versions (often the only licensed software on the ma-
chine!). In addition, hardware failures are not uncommon, due in
part to power fluctuations and outages. Most shops have made an
arrangement with a computer repair person, who charges on a per-
visit basis (approximately $5-$10) to come and re-install the OS.
Larger cafes have annual maintenance contracts.

4. THE VIRUS PROBLEM

Computer viruses remain a significant problem in the environ-
ments studied. Viruses often have a serious impact on business
productivity, both due to the direct toll on customers as well as the
human and financial resources consumed in attempting to control
and recover from viruses. Respondents attribute viruses as origi-
nating from customer USB sticks, in addition to Internet websites.
Owners of mobile shops also cite SD cards as a frequent vector for
virus infection.

The prevalence and impact of viruses is summarized in Figure 2.
These results indicate respondents answers to two questions, the
first probing the incidence of virus problems in their shop and the
second inquiring as to the overall impact of those problems on their
business. Answers were provided in free-form conversation and
subsequently coded by the researcher. As evident in the figure,
80% of centers experience moderate to high prevalence of com-
puter viruses, where moderate indicates regular infections that
cause considerable problems and high corresponds to continu-
ous, highly detrimental infections. The impact on daily business
operations is also significant, with approximately one third of re-
spondents indicating moderate impact (noticeable decrease in daily
business, loss of direct revenue and customers good will) and the
same fraction indicating high impact (major threat to health of busi-
ness, severely impacting daily productivity levels).

Interestingly, virus problems persist despite strong awareness
of the problem, as well as extensive usage and investment in an-
tivirus software. Figure 2 also summarizes the average expense on

0246810121412-56-1011-20Number of ShopsNumber of ComputersFigure 2: Prevalence and impact of computer viruses in shared-
usage environments. The table at top summarizes the amount
spent on antivirus software, for each center represented in a
given column.

antivirus software, grouped according to the severity of the virus
problem in a given location. While the expenses on antivirus soft-
ware are highly variable (for reasons detailed in the next section),
it is evident that investment in antivirus software is not sufficient to
spare a shop owner from the problems described above. Those cen-
ters that lack antivirus software (N=3) or have only an unlicensed
version (N=5) observe moderate (N=7) or high (N=1) incidence of
viruses. However, the impact of those viruses on the business is
spread equally from low to high.

We gathered numerous anecdotes that illustrate the severity of
the virus problem for this population. For example, the manager of
a photo studio related to us:

An entire marriage ceremony tape got ruined at one
time. All the audio and video files suddenly changed
type into an unknown format and wouldnt open in any
existing player. The customer ended up losing all the
precious data from the ceremony, and was really furi-
ous about it.

This individual runs a registered version of QuickHeal antivirus
(one of the leading solutions in India). He attributes the problem to
outdated virus definitions. Due to this issue, he has shifted back to
his old VHS camcorder to cover all major events such as weddings.
Virus problems can also have a direct economic impact on the
business, as customers demand compensation for lost data. For
example, the owner of a cyber cafe told us:

The biggest problem was with a customer whose pen
drive got corrupted due to some virus in my system.
Even though the files were still in the drive, we couldnt
see or access them. It was a big problem for us. We
had to take the drive to a shop in Jayanagar [a distant
location] for data recovery and spent some 2000 ru-
pees [$45] on it. We used to frequently visit that shop
for data recovery those days.

Sometimes the goal of preserving customer data stands at odds
with protecting the security of the system. For example, the owner
of a small photocopy center recounted:

The problem with my antivirus is that when I scan
my computer, if it finds an infected file, instead of re-
moving the virus, it ends up removing the whole file.

Figure 3: Expenditure of centers on antivirus software.

Twice, important customer data has got lost due to this
scanning process. Hence, I ignore all such alert mes-
sages.

In addition to losing customer data, viruses commonly impact
businesses by causing machines to crash or become unusably slow.
Due to the magnitude of the virus problem, shop owners have de-
veloped numerous techniques to try to manage the situation, as we
describe in the next section.

5. COPING WITH VIRUSES

In this section we describe the current practices employed by
shop owners in response to the threat of computer viruses. While
some are standard (such as usage of antivirus software), others are
innovative socio-technical protocols that grew organically out of
this environment. We contend that it is important to understand
the strengths and limitations of these approaches, as together they
have yet to arrive at a satisfactory solution to the problem. Also,
some practices are quite laborious (such as re-installing the OS)
and could perhaps be addressed by future technology interventions.
5.1 Antivirus Software

All but 3 of the 25 sites utilized antivirus software of some form.
A variety of antivirus software was employed, and sometimes mul-
tiple brands in one location. The most popular were Kaspersky
(N=9), QuickHeal (N=6), and Avast (N=4). Also represented were
McAfee (N=3), Avira (N=3), Norton (N=2), AVG (N=2) and Xoft-
Spy (N=1). (We discuss usage of rollback software such as Deep
Freeze separately, in Section 5.3.) It bears noting that QuickHeal,
though less common on a global scale, is based in India and is one
of the most popular antivirus packages in the country. The major-
ity of respondents initiated a virus scan on a daily basis, while a
smaller fraction performed manual scans on a weekly or monthly
basis; however, we do not emphasize this data as we believe that
most scans were initiated automatically by the antivirus.

Given that it is rare to find authentic, licensed software in cyber
cafes (see Section 3), we were surprised that most businesses are
paying for licensed versions of the antivirus software. The costs
are illustrated in Figure 3. It is evident that the costs are highly
variable, owing primarily to the fact that different owners utilize
each licensed copy on a different number of machines. In one case,
the owner of a large cyber cafe maintains QuickHeal on only one
machine, but uses it to scan the drives of all 20 machines over the
network. Thus the cost incurred to him is only $4 per computer,
which is over 7 times cheaper than another QuickHeal user that
we interviewed. Nine shops show an antivirus expenditure of zero;
these fall into three categories: 1) there is no antivirus in use (N=3),
2) there is an antivirus but it is cracked (unlicensed) and potentially

02468101214NoneLowModerateHighNumber of ShopsPrevalence and Impact of VirusesPrevalance of virusesImpact on businessAnnualexpenditure on antivirus (USD / computer / year):4.0   4.8         13.1   3.3      1.9   5.5            9.5   9.50246810$0$2 - $5$6 - $10$11 - $20$21 - $30Number of ShopsExpenditure on Antivirus (Per Machine per Year)obsolete (N=4), and 3) the antivirus is a time-limited trial version
(N=2). In one case, a magazine store owner continually re-installs
the latest trial versions, which he extracts from the magazines in his
store.
5.2 Re-Installation of the Operating System

Due to the difficulties of controlling viruses on shared-access
computers, many shop owners frequently revert to performing a
fresh installation of the entire operating system. There is a percep-
tion that virus control is infeasible in a shared-usage environment,
thereby leading to this solution. For example, the owner of a cyber
cafe with six computers notes:

Antiviruses are ideal for home use. For cyber cafes, it
is better to dust, clean and format the systems once in
a while, to keep them safe.

We inquired as to the frequency with which businesses resort to
wiping and re-installing the operating system. Results appear in
Figure 4. It is evident that this practice is quite frequent; the av-
erage period between re-installs is 5 months, with 5 respondents
re-installing once per month and 6 respondents reinstalling once
every 2-3 months. The re-installation is typically done by a com-
puter helper or repair person who brings the requisite software (a
pirated copy) and charges $5-$10 per visit. This implies that for
many locations, the cost of re-installing the OS exceeds that of the
antivirus software.
5.3 Rollback Software

Given the desire to safely restore machines to a prior state in
shared-usage environments, several companies have designed roll-
back and recovery software for exactly this purpose. For example,
systems such as Deep Freeze and Returnil allow the administrator
to freeze the machine, implying that all changes imparted by a
user will be discarded upon reboot. If the administrator wants to
make permanent changes to a machine, he can do so by entering a
password-protected admin mode. (We discuss limitations and ex-
tensions of this idea in Section 7.2).

We encountered four installations of Deep Freeze amongst our
sample set. However, three were inactive, and one was apparently
not helping to control the virus problem in the store. In the last case,
the owner of the store (a cyber cafe with 14 computers) remarked
to us:

Oh, Deep Freeze does not get rid of your virus prob-
lems. I kept having these viruses, due to unsafe brows-
ing, due to which I finally got myself an antivirus.

While this individual had previously demonstrated a basic under-
standing of Deep Freezes functionality, this quote represents a mis-
understanding regarding the usage of the software. If the machine
became infested with viruses, it should be easy to fix with a reboot.
We hypothesize that the machines in this location became infected
when Deep Freeze was running in administrator mode, as owners
had difficulty understanding how to enter and exit administrator
mode at the right times. Due to this issue, rollback software such
as Deep Freeze could actually worsen the situation, as a virus ob-
tained in administrator mode would be impossible to remove from
user mode (the virus would be restored on every reboot).

Overall, our conversations with current and former users of Deep
Freeze indicated a conceptual gap regarding the capabilities of the
software. The respondents strongly associated the notion of an-
tivirus with actively scanning the system, something that is im-
possible to do using Deep Freeze or similar rollback software. Thus

Figure 4: Usable lifetime of a computer before requiring a fresh
installation of the operating system. Figures apply to a single
machine; a shop with many machines performs re-installations
much more frequently.

they gave up on the software without necessarily understanding its
benefits and limitations.

Such usability barriers represent a sobering example of how the
most simple and natural software is not necessarily the most
automatic; rather, it is the one that matches most closely with the
users existing mental model of the problem domain. We hypoth-
esize that including a scan button in a rollback client  even if
implemented via a reboot  would improve the uptake of the soft-
ware.
5.4 Content Control

As many computer viruses originate from pornographic web-
sites, several shop owners have taken steps to control the content
that is viewed from their computers. The owner of a medium-sized
cyber cafe described how he intentionally reduced customers pri-
vacy in an effort to control computer viruses:

Earlier, there were a lot of customers who used to fre-
quent my shop in the evenings to visit pornographic
sites. Those days, at least one system used to go down
every single day, and I had to format the machine in
the mornings. Then I turned the systems to face me,
and they stopped coming.

In a similar vein, another cyber cafe owner described his plans to
move his photocopier to face the computers, so he can better su-
pervise activity there. In two locations, school-aged kids are re-
quired to come with their parents to prevent misuse of the ma-
chines. Several shops also contain prominent signs that prohibit
viewing pornographic content.

Besides pornography, other kinds of activities have been per-
ceived to correlate with viruses in the shops, and the corresponding
behaviors are disallowed due to virus concerns. For example, the
owner of a cyber cafe with 13 computers remarked:

We also allowed a few systems to be used for gaming,
but noticed a rise in viruses in those systems. We have
stopped allotting machines for gaming ever since.

We did not establish whether there was actually a correspondence
between gaming and viruses. Sites hosting cracked games could
be a source of viruses, or perhaps the gamer demographic is more
likely to admit other viruses.

012345671month2-3months4-6months7-10months12monthsirregularNumber of ShopsAverage Lifetime of OS Installation(Time Between Successive Wipe & Re-installs)5.5 Human Vigilance

7.1 An Epidemiology of Computer Viruses

We encountered several instances where shop owners are very
vigilant about preventing unchecked storage devices from being in-
serted into shared computers. An owner of a cyber cafe devotes an
entire machine to scanning users USB drives; the drives must be
scanned there prior to use in any other machine. An owner of a mo-
bile shop completely prohibits users from inserting their SD cards
into shared hardware. In case they want to download content from
his shop, they also have to buy a fresh SD card on the premises.
While these practices are deemed important for virus control, un-
fortunately both locations are still suffering from viruses due to
other sources, presumably the Internet.

6. BARRIERS TO VIRUS CONTROL

To better inform research that seeks to improve virus control in
shared-usage environments, we outline a number of constraints that
any new solutions will have to overcome.
6.1 Customers Must Not be Inconvenienced

While many owners are aware that viruses could be controlled
better if every customers personal USB drives were subjected to
strict scanning protocols, they were dismissive of this idea due to
the potential burden on customers. For example, the owner of a
cyber cafe with six computers stated:

I cannot enforce any such strategy or policy as that
might end up troubling the customers. If a customer
brings an infected disk/drive, I really dont have an op-
tion.

When pressed as to whether he at least asks customers to scan their
drives prior to opening a file, he replies: No, I cannot afford to.
Customers do not seem to have the time.

The same philosophy restricts the adoption of new technologies,
including operating systems. While the owner above administers
his own Linux box with no virus difficulties, he says that customers
would not find the interface to be usable. Other owners have cited
similar familiarity and usability concerns as a reason for not up-
grading the operating system (e.g., from Windows 2000 to Win-
dows Vista) even when they understood that the latter had better
security properties.
6.2 Misconceptions of Shop Owners

Another barrier to the adoption of new technologies is the edu-
cation and awareness of shop owners. Illustrated previously for the
case of rollback and recovery software, there are frequent miscon-
ceptions that have a direct bearing on virus control. For example,
an owner of a small shop (with just one computer) was convinced
that infections from the Internet were no longer possible on his ma-
chine, as the vendor had blocked all suspicious sites. Many owners
remain pessimistic (and perhaps with some justification) regarding
the potential of new technologies, citing that theres little we can
do against certain viruses and viruses such as Autorun present
no alternative than to format the entire system. Finally, the owner
of one Internet cafe was convinced that computer viruses represent
a conspiracy on the part of antivirus companies, who develop and
disseminate viruses to promote their own products.

7. RESEARCH OPPORTUNITIES

Based on our findings, we outline directions for future research
that could have a beneficial impact on the management of computer
viruses in shared-usage environments.

One of the most intriguing aspects of our results is that many
shops remain riddled by viruses despite the installation of up-to-
date, state-of-the-art antivirus software. Which viruses are respon-
sible for these infections, and why are they not being detected? This
question is especially interesting in offline environments, where the
primary vector of virus transmission is USB sticks rather than In-
ternet websites.

We envision a rich scope to perform an epidemiology of the
computer viruses affecting developing regions, to better understand
the prevalence and transmission of certain kinds of viruses. Anal-
ogous to a medical epidemiology, are there specific viruses that
are responsible for most of the problems in computer health? Are
these new viruses that are affecting machines on a global scale, or
are they old viruses that have been eradicated in rich countries?
Are there specific, targeted interventions (such as a virus signature
sent via SMS to offline locations) that can prevent the spread of
such viruses, or quickly cure an outbreak when they occur? An
innovative approach for conducting such an epidemiology was de-
veloped in tandem with this research [14].
7.2

Improve Rollback and Recovery Software
We believe that there is a large opportunity to improve rollback
and recovery software (similar to Deep Freeze) for users in de-
veloping regions. Currently, the available offerings have several
limitations. First, the user interface and mental model is a mis-
match for users, preventing their uptake even in cases where they
may be effective (see Section 5.3). Second, they have not been
designed for the constraints of developing regions. For example,
Deep Freeze assumes that users sessions are never interrupted by
a power-down event; if there is a power outage, Deep Freeze would
discard all temporary files belonging to a user! Finally, existing
rollback and recovery software relies on buffering writes to disk, a
mechanism which viruses can subvert by installing their own disk
driver [12]. This vulnerability recently led to the compromise of
over 45,000 public-access computers in Asia, due to a worm called
SafeSys [18].

To address these shortcomings, we originally envisioned an ap-
proach based on virtualization. By using off-the-shelf virtualiza-
tion software, one could create isolated environments with flexible
rollback and recovery options. We pursued this idea by building a
simple user interface on top of a virtual machine, forcing owners to
choose between administrator mode (changes are saved) and user
mode (changers are discarded) upon every boot. However, when
we deployed this system in an Internet cafe, we discovered that
owners were not willing to tolerate the delay of loading a virtual
machine (about 5 minutes on their slightly outdated hardware) after
every boot. A general-purpose virtual machine may also pose chal-
lenges to steady-state performance and compatibility with older
systems.

Based on this experience, our current interest is in using light-
weight disk imaging software to provide a robust and flexible roll-
back mechanism. Disk images are used by both virtual machines
and backup systems to encapsulate the complete state of a hard
disk. As such, they can be used to clone the entire working envi-
ronment of a shared machine, and to revert to a prior copy in the
event of virus infection. However, to date the available user inter-
faces for disk imaging are highly specialized and not suitable for
routine use by novices. We envision a system whereby at least two
copies of an image are maintained at all times; one is used as a
sandbox for the current session, while the other provides a stable
backup. The backup can be restored either on a regular basis, or as
needed to cope with viruses.

7.3 Leverage Relaxed Privacy Norms

9. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

Relative to rich countries, in the Indian context there is often a
looser expectation of privacy in interacting with technology; many
experiences of technology are shared amongst onlookers. Given
that there is frequently a tradeoff between security and privacy, it
could be possible to leverage this cultural norm in new ways to im-
prove the security of computer systems. One example of this is the
deliberate re-arrangement of a cyber cafe to reduce pornographic
content by decreasing privacy (see Section 5.4). Other owners that
we spoke to expressed similar sentiments, for example:

I think too much of privacy given to the users is not
good. We should monitor the customers to a certain
extent.

While we have not designed specific interventions in this vein,
there could be several possibilities. For example, installation of
lossy screen recorders (which mask personal details such as credit
card numbers, but enable shop owners to monitor ones overall
task) could incentivize users to be careful online without violating
their expectations of privacy.
7.4 Leverage Willingness to Pay

One of the most striking outcomes of our survey is that shop
owners remain unsatisfied with the available solutions for virus
control, and in fact, they are willing to pay more money in exchange
for a better experience. When asked explicitly whether they were
willing to pay more for a better antivirus, 21 out of 25 respondents
answered affirmatively. For example, one of them said:

Im sure all studios like us wouldnt mind in spending
an additional 500-1000 rupees [$11 - $22] on a much
better antivirus software. [...] Even though all major
antivirus providers make tall claims, none of them are
actually significantly useful in tackling the issue.

Perhaps one manner in which to respond to this demand would
be to provide enhanced services in addition to the technology, for
example, subscription-based training as to what best practices should
be followed in a shared usage environment, or suggestions on hu-
man processes (such as scanning USB sticks) that can improve the
virus situation. It may also be possible to leverage this willingness
to pay in order to overcome the traditional barriers facing chal-
lenged environments, for example, to provide updated virus defini-
tions via postal mail rather than over the Internet.
8. CONCLUSIONS

This paper represents an exploratory study of the impact of com-
puter viruses on shared-access kiosks in urban India. We confirm
anecdotal evidence regarding the severity of the virus problem, and
document that the problem persists even when licensed antivirus
software is employed. We describe organic techniques that have de-
veloped to cope with the problem, including regularly wiping and
re-installing the operating system as well as restricting the content
accessible to users. We illustrate social barriers, such as hesitancy
to inconvenience the customer and limited education of the owners,
that could prevent a purely technical solution from taking hold. Fi-
nally, we offer directions for future research that could potentially
make new headway.

One limitation of our study in its current form is the relatively
small sample size (25 locations).
Incorporating a larger sample
would enable us to improve the external validity of the findings, and
also to examine the correlation between specific factors, such as the
size of the shop or the education of the owner, with the prevalence
of computer viruses.

We thank Saurabh Panjwani and Nimmi Rangaswamy for pro-
viding helpful feedback on prior drafts of this paper. We are also in-
debted to our respondents for their kind participation in our study.
10. REFERENCES
[1] E. Adomi. Overnight Internet Browsing Among Cyber Cafe

Users in Abraka, Nigeria. Journal of Community
Informatics, 3(2), 2007.

[2] M. Best. Connecting In Real Space: How People Share

Knowledge and Technologies in Cybercafes. AMIC Annual
Conference, 2010.

[3] M. Best and R. Kumar. Sustainability Failures of Rural
Telecenters: Challenges from the Sustainable Access in
Rural India (SARI) Project. Information Technologies and
International Development, 4(4), 2008.

[4] E. Brewer, M. Demmer, M. Ho, R. Honicky, J. Pal,

M. Plauche, and S. Surana. The Challenges of Technology
Research for Developing Regions. IEEE Pervasive
Computing, 5(2), Apr. 2006.

[5] Cyber Cafe Association of India.

http://www.ccaoi.in/UI/links/cms.php?id=19,
2009.

[6] A. Haseloff. Cybercafes and their Potential as Community

Development Tools in India. Journal of Community
Informatics, 1(3), 2005.

[7] I-Cube 2009-2010 Internet in India.

http://www.imrbint.com/index.php?id=1, Feb. 2010.
[8] D. Johnson, V. Pejovic, E. Belding, and G. van Stam. Traffic

Characterization and Internet Usage in Rural Africa. In
WWW, 2011.

[9] J. Kendall and N. Singh. Internet Kiosks in Rural India:
What Influences Success? NET Institute Working Paper,
06-05, 2006.

[10] B. Kolko and C. Putnam. Computer Games in the Developing

World: The Value of Non-Instrumental Engagement with
ICTs, or Taking Play Seriously. In ICTD, 2009.

[11] R. Kuriyan and K. Toyama. Review of Research on Rural PC
Kiosks. http://research.microsoft.com/research/
tem/kiosks, 2007.

[12] Wilders Security Forums. Virtualization/rollback software

test. http://www.wilderssecurity.com/showthread.
php?t=276210, 2009.

[13] P. Mwesige. Cyber elites: a survey of Internet Cafe users in

Uganda. Telematics and Informatics, 21(1), Feb. 2004.
[14] M. Paik. Gotta Catch Em All! Innoculous: Enabling
Epidemiology of Computer Viruses in the Developing
World. In NSDR, 2011.

[15] N. Rangaswamy. Telecenters and Internet Cafes: The Case of
ICTs in Small Businesses. Asian Journal of Communication,
18(4), 2008.

[16] N. Rangaswamy. The non-formal business of cyber cafes: a

case-study from India. Journal of Information,
Communication and Ethics in Society, 7(2/3), 2009.
[17] A. Sey and M. Fellows. Loose strands: searching for

evidence of public access ICT impact on development. In
Proceedings of the iConference, 2011.

[18] SPAMfighter News. BKIS - Deep Freeze Application Fails to

Detect New Chinese Worm, June 2009.

[19] S. Ur Rahman, U. Hengartner, U. Ismail, and S. Keshav.

Practical Security for Rural Internet Kiosks. NSDR, 2008.

[20] S. Wyche, T. Smyth, M. Chetty, P. Aoki, and R. Grinter.
Deliberate interactions: characterizing technology use in
Nairobi, Kenya. In CHI, 2010.

