Tourism, Marketing and Sustainable
Development in the English National Parks:
The Role of National Park Authorities

Richard Sharpley
Department of Tourism and LeisureManagement, University ofCentral
Lancashire, Preston, UK

Tony Pearce
CN Research,Carlisle, UK

This paper examines the work of the English National Park Authorities (NPAs) in re-
lation to aspects of the development of sustainable tourism. The NPAs have implicitly
sought to achieve sustainable tourism development since the parks were first desig-
nated, striving to balance the needs of visitors and the environment within the context
of living, working landscapes. Studies have revealed, however, that some NPAs are not
fully championing sustainable tourism development. The paper examines the NPAs
use of marketing and marketing perspectives in encouraging sustainable tourism,
exploring attitudes, roles and activities. A diverse, piecemeal and sometimes under-
informed approach is revealed. The paper concludes with ways forward for English
NPAs and for other protected area management organisations.

doi: 10.2167/jost613.0

Keywords: national parks, National Park Authorities, marketing, sustainable
tourism development, partnerships

Introduction

Since their designation 50 years ago, the national parks of England1 have
implicitly sought to achieve sustainable tourism development. Indeed, given
their status within the global family of national parks (the English national
parks embrace living, working landscapes and urban areas, closely reflecting
the IUCNs [1994] protected landscape category), the contemporary objectives
of sustainable tourism, balancing environmental and tourism needs with the
sustainable socioeconomic development of local communities, have long been
the focus of their development and management. More recently, the National
Park Authorities (NPAs)  the organisations with statutory responsibility for
managing each park  have been obliged to embrace the principles and objectives
of sustainable tourism development more explicitly (ANPA, 2004). While the
two statutory purposes of the English national parks remain the protection of the
special qualities of their landscapes and their promotion for the understanding
and enjoyment of visitors (Sharpley, 2003), the NPAs are now required to follow
the sustainable development agenda more closely.

0966-9582/07/05 557-17 $20.00/0
JOURNAL OF SUSTAINABLE TOURISM

C 2007 R. Sharpley & T. Pearce
Vol. 15, No. 5, 2007

557

558

Journal of Sustainable Tourism

There is no legal requirement for NPAs to pursue sustainable tourism
and development. Nevertheless, not only has sustainable development gen-
erally gained increasing currency over the last three decades, but sustainable
tourism development in particular has achieved virtual universal endorsement
as the desirable objective of tourism development and practice (UNEP, 2005;
WTO/WTTC, 1996). Moreover, within the rural context, where the relationship
between tourism and its environment is, perhaps, most intimate and where
tourism is increasingly considered an effective vehicle for socioeconomic regen-
eration and diversification (Roberts & Hall, 2001), sustainable tourism develop-
ment has become a principal, though contested, feature of policy and practice
(Butler et al., 1998).

The national parks in England now operate within the wider context of a
national strategy for sustainable development (Stationery Office, 1999) which is
now reflected in a governmental Planning Policy Statement to encourage rural
planning (and rural tourism development) along national sustainable devel-
opment guidelines (ODPM, 2004). At the same time, and in response to the
increasing public pressure in the 1990s for a clearer response by the tourism in-
dustry to environmental conduct issues (Stevens, 2002: 4), a plethora of national
and international documents has been published which provide guidelines for
the sustainable development of tourism in national parks and other protected
areas (for example, Countryside Commission/ETB, 1989; Countryside Com-
mission, 1995; Denman, 1991; Eagles & McCool, 2004; ETB, 1991; FNNPE, 1993,
1997; WTO/UNEP, 1992).

The NPAs are now heavily committed to sustainable tourism and devel-
opment (ANPA, 2004), both in their management plans and their support for
numerous specific sustainable tourism projects (Stevens, 2002). However, a ques-
tion mark remains over the extent to which they act as champions of sustain-
able tourism development within their respective areas. Although many specific
projects exist, it is apparent that the NPAs are not taking full advantage of the
opportunity to promote sustainable tourism development more widely. Given
the fundamental importance of tourism to the social and economic fabric of the
national parks, this paper explores how the NPAs in England could adopt a
more proactive role in sustainable development and management.

More specifically, drawing on the argument that a marketing perspec-
tive enables organisations such as NPAs to fulfil their (sustainable develop-
ment) management obligations more effectively (Kotler & Andreasen, 1996;
Middleton & Hawkins, 1998), it considers the outcomes of a study into the ac-
tivities and processes of the English NPAs in the development of sustainable
tourism. The study seeks to identify lessons for the management and devel-
opment of sustainable tourism in protected areas both in the NPAs and more
generally. First, however, the paper reviews the evolution of the English national
parks and the NPAs. The potential contribution of a marketing focus to national
parks management is then considered as a research framework.

The National Parks in England

Since the worlds first national park was designated in the USA at
Yellowstone in 1872, the number of national parks globally has grown

Tourism and Sustainability in National Parks

559

Table 1 The English National Parks

Designation

Visitor days Annual Grant

Park

Peak District
Lake District
Dartmoor
North York Moors
Exmoor
Yorkshire Dales
Northumberland
Norfolk Broads
New Forest

date

1951
1951
1951
1952
1954
1954
1956
1989
2005

Area (km2) Population per year (mn)

()a

1404
2292
953
1432
693
1716
1049
303
571

38,100
42,200
29,100
25,500
10,650
17,980
2,200
5,500
38,000

19
22
4
8
1.4
9
1.5
5.4
7.1

7,723,177
6,440,510
4,409,116
5,050,317
3,700,466
5,022,659
3,079,171
4,025,018
3,622,764

Source: Adapted from CNP (2004), DEFRA (2004), GNN (2006).
a 2006/07 figures. The annual grant to NPAs includes the core grant, an access improvement grant
(variable) and funding under the Sustainable Development Fund Scheme (200,000 per NPA).

exponentially. The IUCN currently lists 3881 national parks worldwide, rep-
resenting almost a quarter of the total protected land area and 2.9% of the
worlds land surface (IUCN, 2003).

Seven national parks were designated in England during the 1950s. Table 1
provides details, including the recently designated New Forest National Park
and the Norfolk Broads, an area not officially designated as a national park yet
overseen by an authority with the status equivalent to that of an NPA.

Table 1 shows that the national parks vary significantly in size, population
and visitor numbers and, as a result, the NPAs face differing challenges and
priorities with respect to tourism and other management issues, as well as
varying levels of government funding. In the larger, more popular parks, such
as the Lake District and the Peak District, high levels of tourism activity demand
effective visitor management strategies and appropriate planning controls over
tourism development. In the smaller parks, a lack of tourists has become an
important issue, particularly given the problems facing the farming industry in
all the parks. The Northumberland National Park, for example, seeks to increase
awareness (and, by implication, visitation) of the park by 2007 to 90% locally,
30% regionally and 5% nationally (NNP, 2003: 30). Nevertheless, the parks share
a number of challenges:

(1) They are living, working landscapes, where conservation and recreation pro-
vision must be balanced with the needs of local businesses and communities.
(2) Government support for the parks is relatively low compared with the value
of tourism expenditure they attract. As is common with other national parks
globally, not only are the NPAs highly dependent on government grants,
receiving little direct benefit from tourist expenditure, they must be seen to
use those grants appropriately and effectively in meeting their objectives
(Eagles, 2002).

(3) Although accurate data does not exist, tourism to the national parks has
grown significantly over the decades. Table 1 demonstrates that they collec-
tively attract some 80 million visits annually, the great majority as day trips
travelling by car, bringing significant pressures to bear on the physical and

560

Journal of Sustainable Tourism

social environment. Thus, appropriate marketing or, perhaps, de-marketing
(Beeton & Benfield, 2002) policies are necessary to promote the parks
objectives.

National Park Authorities: Roles and Responsibilities

The development, aims and administrative structures of the national parks
are well documented in the literature (see Blunden & Curry, 1990; MacEwan
& MacEwan, 1982, 1987; Sharpley, 2003). Two specific issues must however
be considered by this paper: the purpose of national parks, and the role and
responsibilities of the NPAs.

National Park purposes

The original statutory purposes of the English national parks were the preser-
vation and enhancement of the natural beauty of their areas and the promotion
of their enjoyment by the public. At designation in the 1950s, relatively limited
tourism demand allowed a balance between these purposes. By the 1970s, how-
ever, recreational pressure on the parks had grown. Lord Sandfords review of
the national parks in 1974 established the so-called Sandford Principle, assert-
ing primacy to the first (conservation) aim where the two purposes came into
conflict. A subsequent review (Edwards, 1991) endorsed this position, whilst leg-
islation in 1995 altered the statutory purposes to (a) conserving and enhancing
the natural beauty, wildlife and cultural heritage of the areas and (b) promoting
opportunities for understanding and enjoying their special qualities. Impor-
tantly, that legislation also requires NPAs to seek to foster the economic and
social wellbeing of local communities (HMSO, 1995: Section 62(1)) by cooperat-
ing with appropriate local bodies. Thus, significantly, the objectives of national
parks are not accorded equal importance; conservation takes precedence over
the promotion of recreational opportunities, which itself takes precedence over
social and economic issues.

NPA roles and responsibilities

The original intention was that the national parks should be managed by a
single central body within the national interest (MacEwan & MacEwan, 1982).
In practice, with the exception of two parks, all were initially administered by
local committees made up of members of local county councils and were lit-
tle more than arms of local government. Since 1995, however, all NPAs have
become independent bodies, albeit with a majority of members being locally
appointed. More importantly, NPAs do not enjoy special planning or manage-
ment powers. To fulfil their statutory purposes, the NPAs act either in place
of, or with local government bodies within existing planning legislation. Thus,
NPAs act as the planning authority for their respective parks, they produce
management plans, and, in terms of tourism, are able to provide facilities such
as car parking and visitor and information/education services. Their roles are
also framed by the legislation which, as observed above, requires them to fos-
ter local socioeconomic wellbeing and to follow the principles of sustainable

Tourism and Sustainability in National Parks

561

tourism development (HMSO, 1995), but within an ecocentric bias in favour of
conservation over development.

They are, therefore, hybrid bodies in structure, accountability and roles (na-
tional vs. local interest). Their responsibilities require them to work in partner-
ship with other bodies and organisations, from tourist boards to conservation
groups, thus reflecting one of the recommendations from the Fifth World Parks
Congress in Durban in 2003 (Eagles, 2004).

The NPAs and Sustainable Tourism Development

The NPAs adherence to the principles of sustainable tourism development
is manifested in both their management plans and their support for spe-
cific projects. Moreover, there is evidence of extensive practical work on the
ground, although both its scope and implementation varies from one park to
another. In the Lake District, for example, the NPA is a founder member of
the Lake District Tourism and Conservation Partnership which operates vis-
itor payback schemes; tourists donate an additional amount on accommoda-
tion and other payments which is put towards local environmental schemes
(www.lakespartnership.org.uk). Exmoor National Park has undertaken a pilot
project under the European Charter for Sustainable Tourism Scheme, encourag-
ing sustainable business practice amongst tourism businesses (Stevens, 2002).
All parks have introduced Sustainable Development Funds, publicly funded
schemes administered locally by NPAs to support sustainable development
projects in or around national parks (see www.peakdistrict.gov.uk/sdf). Most
NPAs provide information and education services through visitor centres to
convey the sustainable tourism message. Research in the Dartmoor National
Park, for example, found that interpretation can help to modify the behavioural
intentions of visitors (Tubb, 2003).

However, there is also evidence to suggest that the NPAs are not taking full
advantage of the opportunity to champion sustainable tourism development
in their respective areas. The most recent review of the parks observed that, in
general, NPAs often punch below their weight and focus too much on detail at
the expense of strategic management (DEFRA, 2002: 12); more specific studies
also point to a lack of leadership on the part of NPAs. Dewhurst and Thomas
(2003) study of small tourism businesses in the Yorkshire Dales National Park,
for example, not only identified a lack of comprehension amongst the business
community about the aims and objectives of sustainable tourism development,
but also revealed an unhealthy relationship between local businesses and the
NPA. Indeed, the NPAs focus on planning and restrictions has proved more
effective in preventing environmental damage than in promoting a proactive
response . . . that encourages the involvement of the local business community
(Dewhurst & Thomas, 2003: 400). Horobin and Long (1996) found that although
NPAs enjoy support amongst local business communities, they are failing to
use this support to promote sustainable tourism development. Pearce (2002)
found that commercial sector stakeholders in the Lake District are critical of the
NPA, considering its preservationist stance as a barrier to development; another
report in the Lake District identified a lack of knowledge, understanding and
participation in sustainable business practice amongst a majority of tourism

562

Journal of Sustainable Tourism

businesses (FLD, 2001). Similar issues were also identified by Thedham (2004)
who found that, amongst businesses involved in a Green Tourism Project at
Hadrians Wall, within the Northumberland National Park, the term green
holds negative connotations for some business owners.

Collectively, these studies suggest that, whilst specific sustainable tourism
projects may be successful and that education/interpretation methods may con-
tribute to modified visitor behaviour on the part of tourists in the national parks,
NPAs are experiencing difficulty in achieving deeper commitment to sustain-
able tourism. In particular, whether as a result of NPA structures and roles or
the fragmented nature of the tourism industry, the latter long-recognised as a
barrier to sustainable tourism development (McKercher, 1993), the NPAs are less
successful in communicating with and influencing the local tourism industry,
despite significant involvement in local partnerships. This, in turn, implies that
a marketing perspective may be an innovative and more appropriate means for
NPAs to champion sustainable tourism development.

Marketing and Sustainable Tourism Development

The marketing process has traditionally been viewed as a means of meeting
customer needs for short term profit; as Wilson and Gilligan (1998: 3) propose,
marketing is the management process for identifying, anticipating and satis-
fying customer requirements profitably. Thus, as environmental concern has
grown, marketing has been seen as the principal influence on ever-increasing
consumption and, hence, firmly implicated in the attendant problems of re-
source depletion, pollution, species destruction and climate change (Crane,
2000: 1). Even initial marketing responses to the environmental challenge fol-
lowed the conventional approach in that so-called green marketing focussed
upon satisfying (profitably) the needs of the environmentally conscious market
segment (Banerjee, 1999).

However, two transformations have occurred in recent years that are of di-
rect relevance here. Firstly, it has become more widely accepted that marketing
represents more than a functional management process associated with com-
petitive advantage and short term profit maximisation for businesses. It can
present tools and processes that permit organisations, from the private, public
or voluntary sectors, to achieve their mission or goals more effectively. Kotler
and Andreasen (1996) argue that a marketing perspective is essential for the
success of non-profit organisations because marketing is, essentially, concerned
with influencing the behaviour of others. Interestingly, however, they suggest
that many non-profit organisations have still not fully embraced the potential
of marketing, according it a minor role as promotion, a factor significant to the
research discussed below.

Secondly, increasing environmental concern has been reflected in the evolu-
tion of an approach to marketing that is concerned with not only what to produce
or make (the traditional focus of marketing) but also with what to take (Fuller,
1999). In other words, it is increasingly suggested that marketing should be
concerned with not only meeting customer needs and organisational objectives,
but also with doing so in a way that is socially and environmentally appro-
priate (Peattie, 1999). A variety of approaches have been proposed to reconcile

Tourism and Sustainability in National Parks

563

marketings influence on production and consumption with broader social and
environmental needs and limitations, including social marketing, green mar-
keting (Peattie, 1992) and eco-marketing. Fuller (1999: 4) usefully summarises
them as sustainable marketing:

the process of planning, implementing, and controlling the development,
pricing, promotion and distribution of products in a manner that satisfies
the following three criteria: (1) customer needs are met, (2) organisational
goals are attained, and (3) the process is compatible with ecosystems.

It follows that, once the social and environmental dimension of marketing is
accepted, traditional techniques and activities can be applied to specific manage-
ment contexts. Middleton and Hawkins (1998: 118) argue that a sustainable mar-
keting perspective provides the optimum management process for achieving
sustainability at tourism destinations. They demonstrate how existing market-
ing processes may be applied to effective destination management, highlighting
three principal areas of activity (Table 2)  see also Fuller (1999: 111) for a model
of a sustainable marketing mix.

It is not possible to explore here in detail how these processes may be op-
erationalised and, certainly within the context of national parks, it is likely to
be determined by local factors and structures. Nevertheless, it is evident that
for NPAs and similar protected area management organisations, a marketing
approach may offer a more appropriate means of achieving their sustainable
tourism objectives. And although most NPAs are already members of partner-
ships, the evidence suggests that those partnerships may not be being exploited
effectively.

Table 2 Marketing processes for sustainable tourism development

Understanding demand
& supply

Influencing behaviour

Monitoring progress

 Market research into

 Setting targets

visitor numbers,
motivations,
expenditure,
expectations and
behaviour

 Customer research
(partnerships with
private
sector)

 Development of

 Influencing visitor

 Destination research

appropriate products

behaviour:
information/education,
product development,
quality control, branding

 Influencing business

behaviour:
regulatory/non-
regulatory (codes of
conduct, awards
schemes, etc.),
promotion of
purchasing policies

Source: Adapted from Middleton and Hawkins (1998).

564

Journal of Sustainable Tourism

The Research: The Role of NPAs in Sustainable Tourism
Development

To date, no study has been undertaken into the activities, processes and
structures of NPAs as a whole with respect to managing the development of
sustainable tourism  with respect to their fulfilment of the second statutory
purpose of English national parks within the broader context of the socioeco-
nomic wellbeing of local communities. In addressing this issue, this research
seeks to:

r identify the extent to which NPAs have embraced the sustainable tourism

development agenda in practice;

r explore the roles/processes adopted by NPAs in delivering sustainable

tourism, and

r evaluate the role of marketing in general, and its contribution in achieving

sustainable tourism development in particular, in NPAs.

Methodology

The research was based upon a series of semi-structured interviews conducted
by one of the authors with key personnel from each of the English NPAs. The
interviews, each lasting between 30 and 45 minutes, took place during the
summer of 2004; half were conducted face-to-face, the remainder, for reasons of
convenience, by telephone.

Initial contact was made with those officers with a responsibility for market-
ing, tourism or sustainable development within each NPA, providing them with
details of the research and requesting their support. The aim was to complete at
least two interviews within each NPA in order to obtain the depth of information
required and to permit cross-referencing of responses. Given the varying organ-
isational structures of the NPAs, the initial request was, in some cases, passed
on to officers with more relevant responsibilities. Subsequent contact was made
with all potential respondents and they were provided with a question schedule
prior to the interview taking place. The roles of respondents are listed in Table 3;
to preserve anonymity, their NPAs are not indicated.

Table 3 Respondents roles

Respondent

Head of recreation, tourism & strategy
Transport & visitor management officer
Head of external affairs
Visitor services manager
Director of enjoyment & understanding
Sustainable tourism officer
Head of information
Tourism & marketing manager

a SDF  sustainable development fund.

Role

SDF officera
Head of recreation & tourism
SDF officera
Tourism officer
SDF officera
National park officer
Team leader, visitor services
Marketing officer

Tourism and Sustainability in National Parks

565

The question schedule focussed on:

r the structure of/roles within the NPA;
r the perceived role of marketing within the NPA;
r specific marketing activities;
r understanding of and approach to sustainable tourism development;
r the mode of delivering of sustainable tourism development messages;
r the measurement of the effectiveness of these messages;
r the relationship of the NPA with other tourism stakeholders.

Sixteen interviews were conducted with at least one respondent from each
NPA in England (including the Broads Authority). Transcripts of the inter-
views were analysed and responses were initially categorised according to topics
within the question schedule; from the subsequent analysis and interpretation
of responses a number of key themes and issues emerged. It is under these
thematic headings that the research outcomes are now considered.

Research Outcomes

Nine key themes emerged from the interviews. These are presented in the

following sections:

Marketing and organisational structure

An initial focus of the interviews was on organisational structure in order
to identify commonalities in structure across the NPAs and any priority given
to marketing as evidence of a marketing perspective to the NPAs activities.
The majority of respondents commented that there was currently no specific
marketing role within their NPA and that, where marketing activity was under-
taken, it was spread across several individuals within the organisation. For one
respondent, the lack of a marketing role was because of financial constraints:
We have no dedicated officer for marketing. We are under-resourced for mar-
keting, really, whilst two others claimed that their organisations do little or
no real marketing. Nevertheless, the research indicated that marketing is in-
creasingly being seen by NPAs as an important function, and evidenced by
recent and planned structural changes. One NPA has restructured its communi-
cations department including the appointment of a dedicated marketing officer;
two others are considering appointing to a specific marketing role. Several re-
spondents also mentioned increased emphasis on the strategic contribution of
marketing, one observing that they had initially employed a promotions officer
but this role had widened to a more strategic and tactical role and the title was
changed to marketing officer. However, the research revealed relatively little
overall evidence of a commitment to developing the marketing role in terms of
organisational structures.

Marketing, interpretation and sustainable tourism

All NPAs have traditionally used information provision in general, and in-
terpretation in particular, to promote the special qualities of the parks and
encourage appropriate behaviour. However, several respondents commented

566

Journal of Sustainable Tourism

that, within NPAs, the role of interpretation is increasingly seen as limited and
passive, seeking only to educate visitors about the special qualities of national
parks after they had arrived. Recognition of the value of marketing sustainable
tourism more proactively, to communicate with tourists before they travel to the
parks, is seen by some NPAs as an important step forward. One respondent
observed that historically, it has not been the National Park Authoritys role to
promote tourism but to promote understanding to tourists once they are here.
This is changing and we do understand the socioeconomic interests and we are
promoting sustainable tourism through other organisations.

Marketing apprehension

The research revealed a significant degree of apprehension amongst NPA staff
about the role of marketing. It was apparent that marketing is still considered
from the traditional sales-profit point of view rather than as a potentially
powerful tool to influence tourist behaviour according to the NPAs sustainable
tourism objectives. A number of respondents equated marketing with simply
increasing the number of visitors  there is a lot of sensitivity about marketing
from people here as well as outside. People often say we have already got
enough visitors  whilst one respondent stated: I avoid calling [what I do]
marketing as it smacks of commercialism . . . [we] . . . practice marketing by
stealth, reflecting a fear of being seen to undertake marketing within an NPA.
Thus, there remains a fundamental misunderstanding of marketings potential
role within many NPAs and, hence, an unwillingness to engage in marketing
activities more explicitly.

Tourism and the foot and mouth outbreak

Despite the identified apprehension referred to above, the 2001 outbreak of
foot and mouth disease, which had a devastating impact on rural tourism across
the whole of the UK, featured in the discussions with a number of respondents.
Whilst highlighting the importance of tourism to the local economy, surprisingly
unrecognised until then, the outbreak, according to some respondents, had a
significant impact on how the NPAs perceived their role in developing tourism.
One respondent noted that things changed after foot and mouth. We decided
there was considerable capacity to increase visitor numbers. We needed to be
more proactive about what we are and what was unique about the national park.

Marketing and tourism development

Not surprisingly, a significant part of all interviews focused upon marketing
and tourism development in the national parks. Within this theme, three issues
emerged that are discussed below:

The need for tourismmarketing

Not all NPAs shared the view that they should be more proactively marketing
their parks. A number of respondents suggested, for example, that it is not the
role of NPAs to promote the national parks whilst one respondent argued that
we dont market the national park because the national park is bigger than us.
In other words, it was suggested that the national park brand name was in

Tourism and Sustainability in National Parks

567

itself a powerful attraction for tourists. Much depends of course on the park in
question. Another stated that it is the role of NPAs to engage with visitors once
they have arrived; rather than encouraging people to visit, they should focus on
the quality of the visitor experience.

Involvement in tourismmarketing

The manner and extent to which NPAs undertake or support tourism mar-
keting varied greatly, undoubtedly reflecting the differing macro environments
and the tourism concerns of each park. At one extreme, one respondent sug-
gested that all the marketing for the area as a whole is undertaken by the local
tourist board and that, surprisingly perhaps, the NPA has no influence over
the tourist boards marketing strategy for the area. At the other extreme, an-
other respondent stated that the NPA undertakes all the marketing for the area,
actually doing the marketing for the tourist board. More commonly, however,
respondents recognised that tourist boards possess both the skills and the re-
sources to undertake marketing and considered that the best approach for NPAs
is to try to influence that marketing activity. The extent to which this occurs,
however, remains unclear.

Partnerships

All but one NPA was involved in some form of regional or subregional part-
nership to promote and develop tourism. However, the nature of these partner-
ships varies considerably, even within particular types of partnership. Respon-
dents reported differing relationships with their local tourist board, from very
good to stormy, whilst the overall situation had been rendered more complex
by the uncertainty over the future of English regional tourism agencies. The
majority of NPAs are involved in subregional partnerships to deliver tourism
development and management, either with public sector bodies, such as district
councils, or with the private sector. However, many of these partnerships are re-
active, being focussed on specific, funding-led projects. Conversely, those NPAs
managing parks with a declining or relatively low level of tourism appeared
to be more proactively involved in developing tourism with the local tourism
industry, with many respondents stating that they wanted to maximise income
and minimise visitor impacts. At the same time, however, there appeared to
be some conflict between this tourism strategy and the role of national parks,
the desire for high spending, quality tourists competing with the social in-
clusion aim of the parks. Overall, the commitment of the NPAs to developing
partnerships was summed up by the comment of one respondent: Youve got
to be in the tourism debate to affect it.

Marketing and sustainable tourism development

Conflicting attitudes and approaches were found about the extent to which
the NPAs are embracing and promoting sustainable tourism development as
a core activity. Some respondents indicated that their NPAs are beginning to
adopt the role of sustainable development champion, a role usually including
the promotion of sustainable development activities and messages within the
tourism agenda. One respondent suggested that NPAs should be tied closer
to the sustainable development movement whilst another stated we are the

568

Journal of Sustainable Tourism

voice of sustainability in our tourism partnership; its inherent in everything we
do as a National Park Authority. Others saw the role of NPAs as promoting
sustainable tourism development, their task being to keep sustainability in the
forefront of tourism marketers minds when promoting the area; one respondent
suggested that they actively promote tourism, but with sustainable messages.

On the other hand, a number of respondents indicated that sustainable
tourism development is not a high priority for their NPAs. Reflecting earlier
studies which highlighted the preservationist stance of some NPAs, the research
revealed a surprising misunderstanding about the role of tourism in sustainable
development: As a National Park Authority we are more interested in tourisms
impact on the landscape, not in sustainability. Similarly, another respondent
suggested that, although they actively supported tourism in the national park,
they believed that the principal aim of tourism development was not to conflict
with national park purposes. It was also suggested that our role is landscape
(in its broadest sense) based on not exploiting the landscape for profit, which
is what the tourist board is about. Thus, within some NPAs, tourism remains
something to be controlled or restricted rather than developed appropriately
according to wider developmental needs.

Those NPAs actively pursuing sustainable tourism do so both through sus-
tainable messages and partnership activity. One NPA feeds the conservation
messages into publicity material provided by others and actively promotes sus-
tainable tourism through [the] local tourism partnership whilst another devel-
oped a Tourism Forum with local businesses, with sustainable development an
integral part of the Forums constitution. More specifically, a number of NPAs
focus their sustainable tourism marketing effort through branding although,
again, a variety of approaches were identified from the research. In one case, the
national park brand was used to lead on sustainable messages, whilst another
was developing a new brand to include areas beyond the parks boundaries.
Significantly, in one NPA there was a reluctance to promote the specific national
park to avoid conflict with partners: we dropped all National Park branding
because . . . it was seen as a barrier to working with partners. In other words,
despite their strong identity as national parks (and the inherent sustainability
message the national park brand may convey), in order to maintain effective
regional partnerships, that identity is not being fully exploited.

Integration and coordination

A major issue to emerge from the research was that activities related to sus-
tainable tourism development tend to be poorly integrated or coordinated, both
internally and externally. It was frequently observed that, within NPAs, there is
a lack of coordination; it is not unusual, for example, to find colleagues within
the same organisation working separately on similar projects.

Equally, a lack of integration diminishes the impact of sustainable develop-
ment policies. For example, in one NPA it was noted that transport needs to be
integrated with accommodation, yet there is no forum for this. People are too
busy pursuing their own agendas.

A number of more specific issues were raised in the interviews, all pointing
to the lack of an overall plan or strategy for sustainable tourism development

Tourism and Sustainability in National Parks

569

within most NPAs. In particular, many projects are developed because of the
motivation or interest of key individuals: Sustainable projects are fragmented,
there is little coordination between projects or overall prioritisation. I think its
down to who has an interest and where it sits structurally, whilst the nature of
funding for sustainable tourism projects tends to encourage duplication and
a lack of coordination. For example, as much funding is short term, many
projects are repeated even within individual parks; as one respondent observed,
sustainable funding is not sustainable  its always short term and therefore
projects come and go and get re-invented. They are not talked about, marketed
or archived. Nobody has all this information.

Measurement of sustainable activities in national parks

Despite the stated commitment to sustainable development by a number of
NPAs, respondents indicated that the outcomes of sustainable strategies are
either not measured at all or are assessed simply in economic, rather than envi-
ronmental or social terms. To an extent, this is related to the requirements of the
funding schemes that support sustainable development projects  the projects
are assessed in economic terms of jobs made, money saved, numbers involved.
Because the funding is dependent on economic outcomes, thats how it tends
to be measured. However, a number of respondents suggested that they did
not know how the environmental or social sustainability of projects could be
measured other than according to tangible, measurable economic parameters.

NPAs as sustainable organisations

Finally, an interesting issue to emerge was that, although some NPAs actively
promote sustainable development, they are not leading by example; that is,
they are not sustainable organisations. Respondents comments referred to the
lack of a sustainable ethos within the NPAs and the need to lead by example
by putting our own house in order. One respondent mentioned an internal
initiative to encourage sustainability: we have an environmental policy and
a green team here . . . we advise on sustainability issues for a whole range of
things from procurement and printing [but] were often referred to as the green
police.

Discussion and Conclusions

Given the policy environment, with its increasing emphasis on sustainable
development, within which the NPAs function, it is not surprising that NPAs
consider sustainable development to be, in principle, a core objective. Indeed,
the context of the national parks second purpose, embracing conservation, local
socioeconomic welfare and tourism, suggests that the NPAs role cannot be
separated from sustainable tourism development and marketing policies which
impact directly or indirectly on the local rural economy and communities. What
is surprising, therefore, is the diversity of policies and approaches on the part
of NPAs revealed by this research. Although all NPAs are subject to the same
statutory purposes, those purposes appear to be variously interpreted with
differences in policy regarding tourism development, from proactive marketing

570

Journal of Sustainable Tourism

and promotion of sustainable tourism to implicitly protecting the landscape
from tourism. This suggests that there remains in some NPAs a fundamental
misunderstanding of the concept of sustainable tourism development and its
close relationship with the social and economic welfare of local communities.
The need exists perhaps for clearer guidelines about how national parks can
take advantage of the contribution sustainable tourism may make to meeting
their statutory purposes.

No standard prescription emerged as to how NPAs should meet the chal-
lenges of sustainable tourism in national parks. The dynamic environments
within which the NPAs function are unique to each park, with variables in-
cluding the demand for tourism, the roles and influence of other regional or-
ganisations, stakeholder relationships, and so on. Nevertheless, the evidence
suggests that not only are a number of NPAs adopting the role of champion
in promoting and developing regional sustainable tourism strategies, but also
that the potential contribution of an overall marketing perspective to that role
is being increasingly recognised, even though organisational structures and
practice have yet to respond to that recognition. However, a significant de-
gree of marketing apprehension still exists within NPAs, as well as a predom-
inant view of marketing as simply promotion; the perception that marketing
is equated with commercialism and, hence, not something that national parks
should do remains a barrier to the wider adoption of marketing to achieve NPA
objectives.

Despite these somewhat negative findings, the research revealed that most, if
not all NPAs, are engaged in partnerships both regionally and locally; indeed,
the need for cooperation with relevant organisations is explicitly noted within
the legislation to avoid NPAs incurring significant expenditure (HMSO, 1995:
Section 62(1)). There is evidence that some NPAs are utilising their position
within these partnerships to convey sustainable tourism messages either to
local tourism businesses or to visitors. Nevertheless, the widespread existence of
partnerships indicates that significant opportunities exist for all NPAs to adopt
a more proactive role in the development of sustainable tourism in the national
parks. It is widely recognised in the literature that a partnership approach offers
significant advantages in tourism planning and management (Bramwell & Lane,
2000); the evidence from this research suggests that a solid foundation exists for
developing effective tourism partnerships within national parks. However, the
following implications also emerge:

r Generally, an holistic approach to managing national parks should be
adopted. The current piecemeal approach to developing sustainable tourism
and the lack of integration and varying influence of NPAs within partnerships
revealed by the research is undoubtedly reducing the ability of the parks to
meet their statutory purposes with a sustainable framework.

r Whilst seeking to maintain and build partnerships, NPAs should exploit the
opportunity to communicate appropriate sustainable tourism messages. The
challenges of maintaining effective collaboration or partnerships are well
known, but efforts should be made to optimise the benefits of working in
partnership with other stakeholders. There may be a need for appropriate
training and advice to be provided to both NPA representatives and other
partnership members.

Tourism and Sustainability in National Parks

571

r NPAs should adopt a marketing-focussed strategic approach for managing
national parks. This would encourage, through research with partners, the
identification of specific developmental and management needs, the estab-
lishment of appropriate communication and information channels for visi-
tors, the local tourism industry, local communities and other stakeholders,
and the basis for an integrated, planned approach to sustainable tourism
development. Specific projects, though funding-driven, should be supported
and monitored as part of the overall strategy. Appropriate training may be a
specific prerequisite here.

r NPAs should monitor and communicate all sustainable development activi-

ties, both internally and externally.

r The research revealed, in some cases, an unwillingness to fully exploit the
national park as a quality brand in tourism initiatives. However, the special
qualities of national parks, encapsulated in their designation as protected
areas, undoubtedly add value to the overall tourism product. Ways to use the
brand to promote sustainable tourism should be explored.

r The NPAs should play a key role in promoting sustainable practice amongst
local tourism operators and businesses. This will require innovative mar-
keting activity, such as the development of dedicated web-based forums to
promote, educate and share best practice or the introduction of green ac-
creditation/awards. Importantly, it will also require NPAs to lead by example,
to become recognised as sustainable organisations in their own right.

Importantly, there is a strong requirement for appropriate training and ad-
vice for NPA staff in sustainable tourism marketing, including both policy for-
mulation and implementation. Training can help lift misunderstandings about
sustainable tourism and the widespread suspicion of the role of marketing, as
well as introduce innovative practice. Finally, there is a key need for NPAs to
share experiences, to coordinate their work and disseminate their results, good
and bad.

Correspondence

Any correspondence should be directed to Professor Richard Sharpley, De-
partment of Tourism and Leisure Management, Lancashire Business School,
University of Central Lancashire, Preston, PR1 2HE, UK (rajsharpley@
uclan.ac.uk).

Note
1. Other areas in the UK also enjoy national park status. In addition to the English
national parks, three were designated in Wales in the 1950s whilst, since 2000, two
national parks have been established in Scotland. However, the Welsh and Scottish
parks are subject to different legislative contexts and, hence, not directly comparable.

References
ANPA (2004) The Work of the National Park Authorities. The Association of National

Park Authorities, www.anpa.gov.uk.

Banerjee, S. (1999) Corporate environmentalism and the greening of strategic marketing.
In M. Charter and M. Polonsky (eds) Greener Marketing: A Global Perspective on Greening
Marketing Practice (pp. 1640). Sheffield: Greenleaf Publishing.

572

Journal of Sustainable Tourism

Beeton, S. and Benfield, R. (2002) Demand control: The case for demarketing as a visitor

and environmental management too. Journal of Sustainable Tourism 10 (6), 497513.

Blunden, J. and Curry, N. (1990) A Peoples Charter. London: Countryside Commis-

sion/HMSO.

Bramwell, B. and Lane, B. (eds) (2000) Tourism Partnerships and Collaboration: Politics,

Practice and Sustainability. Clevedon: Channel View Publications.

Butler, R., Hall, C.M. and Jenkins, J. (1998) Tourism and Recreation in Rural Areas.

Chichester: John Wiley.

CNP (2004) Facts and Figures. www.cnp.org.uk/facts & figures.htm.
Countryside Commission/ETB (1989) Principles for Tourism in National Parks. Cheltenham:

Countryside Commission.

Countryside Commission (1995) Sustainable Rural Tourism: Opportunities for Local Action.

CCP 483. Cheltenham: Countryside Commission.

Crane, A. (2000) Marketing, Morality and the Natural Environment. London: Routledge.
DEFRA (2002) Review of English National Park Authorities. London: Department for Envi-

ronment, Food and Rural Affairs.

DEFRA (2004) National Parks. www.defra.gov.uk/wildlife-countryside/issues/

landscap/natparks.htm.

Denman, R. (1991) Tourism in the National Parks: A Guide to Good Practice. Ledbury: The

Tourism Company.

Dewhurst, H. and Thomas, R. (2003) Encouraging sustainable business practices in a
non-regulatory environment: A case study of small tourism firms in a UK national
park. Journal of Sustainable Tourism 11 (5), 383403.

Eagles, P. (2002) Trends in park tourism: Economics, finance and management. Journal of

Sustainable Tourism 10 (2), 132153.

Eagles, P. (2004) Tourism at the Fifth World Parks Congress, Durban, South Africa, 817

September 2003. Journal of Sustainable Tourism 12 (2), 169173.

Eagles, P. and McCool, S. (2004) Tourism in National Parks and Protected Areas: Planning

and Management. Wallingford: CABI.

Edwards, R. (1991) Fit for the Future: Report of the National Parks Review Panel. CCP 334.

Cheltenham: Countryside Commission.

ETB (1991) Tourism and the Environment: Maintaining the Balance. London: English Tourist

Board.

FLD (2001) Green Horizons: An Assessment of the Sustainability of the Tourism Industry in the

Lake District. Kendal: Friends of the Lake District.

FNNPE (1993) Loving Them To Death? Sustainable Tourism in Europes Nature and National

Parks. Grafenau: Federation of Nature and National Parks of Europe.

FNNPE (1997) European Charter for Sustainable Development in National Parks. Grafenau:

Federation of Nature and National Parks of Europe.

Fuller, D. (1999) Sustainable Marketing: Managerial-Ecological Issues. Thousand Oaks,

CA: Sage Publications.

GNN (2006) Government news network. www.gnn.gov.uk/Content/Detail.asp?Release

ID194956&NewsAreaID=2.

HMSO (1995) The Environment Act. London: HMSO.
Horobin, H. and Long, J. (1996) Sustainable tourism: The role of the small firm. Interna-

tional Journal of Contemporary Hospitality Management 8 (5), 1519.

IUCN (1994) Guidelines for Protected Area Management Categories. Gland, Switzerland:

World Conservation Union.

IUCN (2003) The 2003 United Nations List of Protected Areas. Gland, Switzerland: World

Conservation Union.

Kotler, P. and Andreasen, A. (1996) Strategic Marketing for Non-Profit Organisations. New

Jersey: Prentice Hall.

MacEwan, A. and MacEwan, M. (1982) National Parks: Conservation or Cosmetics? London:

George Allen & Unwin.

MacEwan, A. and MacEwan, M. (1987) Greenprints for the Countryside. London: George

Allen & Unwin.

Tourism and Sustainability in National Parks

573

McKercher, B. (1993) Some fundamental truths about tourism: Understanding tourisms

social and environmental impacts. Journal of Sustainable Tourism 1 (1), 616.

Middleton, V. and Hawkins, R. (1998) Sustainable Tourism: A Marketing Perspective. Oxford:

Butterworth Heinemann.

NNP (2003) Northumberland National Park Management Plan, 3rd Review: Framework

Document. Hexham: Northumberland NPA.

OPDM (2004) Planning Policy Statement 7: Sustainable Development in Rural Areas. London:

Office of the Deputy Prime Minister. www.opdm.gov.uk/index.asp?id=1143823.

Pearce, T. (2002) Lake District National Park: Stakeholder Survey. Kendal: LDNPA.
Peattie, K. (1992) Green Marketing. London: Pitman Publishing.
Peattie, K. (1999) Rethinking marketing. In M. Charter and M. Polonsky (eds) Greener
Marketing: A Global Perspective on Greening Marketing Practice (pp. 5770). Sheffield:
Greenleaf Publishing.

Pigram, J. (1993) Planning for tourism in rural areas: Bridging the policy implementa-
tion gap. In D. Pearce and R. Butler (eds) Tourism Research: Critiques and Challenges
(pp. 156174). London: Routledge.

Roberts, L. and Hall, D. (2001) Rural Tourism and Recreation: Principles to Practice.

Wallingford: CABI.

Sharpley, R. (2003) Tourism and Leisure in the Countryside (3rd edn). Huntingdon: Elm

Publications.

Stationery Office (1999) A Better Quality of Life: A Strategy for Sustainable Develop-
ment in the UK. Cmnd. 4345. London: The Stationery Office. www.sustainable-
development.gov.uk.

Stevens, T. (2002) Sustainable Tourism in National Parks and Protected Areas: An Overview.

Scottish Natural Heritage Commissioned Report F01NC04.

Thedham, J. (2004) Hadrians Wall and Northumbria National Park: Environmental Project,

Initial Phase Report. Hexham: Northumberland National Park.

Tubb, K. (2003) An evaluation of the effectiveness of interpretation within Dartmoor
National Park in reaching the goals of sustainable development. Journal of Sustainable
Tourism 11 (6), 476498.

UNEP (2005) Making Tourism More Sustainable: A Guide for Policy Makers. Paris: United

Nations Environment Programme.

Wilson, R. and Gilligan, C. (1998) Strategic Marketing Management: Planning, Implementa-

tion and Control (2nd edn). Oxford: Butterworth Heinemann.

WTO/UNEP (1992) Development of National Parks and Protected Areas for Tourism. Madrid:

World Tourism Organisation/United Nations Environment Programme.

WTO/WTTC (1996) Agenda 21 for the Travel and Tourism Industry: Towards Environmen-
tally Sustainable Development. Madrid: World Tourism Organisation/World Travel and
Tourism Council.

