T r o p i c a l   F o r e s T s   a n d   c l i m a T e

Tropical Deforestation and Global Warming: 
A Solution

Tropical deforestation accounts for 

about 15 percent of the worlds global 
warming pollutionmore than that 
produced by every car, truck, plane, ship, 
and train on Earth. This fact sheet ex-
plains how tropical deforestation contributes  
to global warming, and how actions to protect 
tropical forests (including a set of policies known 
as REDD+) will reduce global warming while 
providing many additional benefits.

Why Tropical Forests Are So Vital
Tropical forest trees, like all green plants, take 
in carbon dioxide and release oxygen during 
photosynthesis. During respiration they emit 
carbon dioxide, but in generally smaller amounts 
than what they take in during photosynthesis. 
The remaining carbon is stored in the tree, 
allowing it to grow bigger. That stored carbon 
is released into the air as carbon dioxide if the 
tree is burned or cut down and allowed to rot.

Tropical forests must be  
protected if we are to reduce 
carbon emissions to the levels 
needed to avoid the most  
dangerous and expensive  
global warming impacts.

 
Since carbon dioxide is the principal gas 
trapping heat in Earths atmosphere, tropical 
deforestation is an important contributor to 
global warming. Tropical forests must therefore 
be protected from deforestation and degradation 
if we are to reduce carbon emissions to the levels 
needed to avoid the most dangerous and expen-
sive global warming impacts. Ending deforesta-
tion will not solve global warming by itself 
urgent action is needed to lower the other  
85 percent of the worlds emissionsbut the 
problem cannot be solved if the 15 percent of 
emissions from tropical deforestation is ignored.
 
concerns that extend beyond global warming. 
Tropical forests are home to many species of 

Reducing deforestation also addresses  

plants and animals that could become extinct 
(such as the jaguar) if we do not act to protect 
their habitat. In addition, tropical forests are 
crucial sources of food, medicine, and clean drink-
ing water for people in developing countries, 
and help prevent both floods and droughts  
by regulating regional rainfall. Thus, reducing 
deforestation is not only beneficial in reducing 
global warming pollution, but also in preserving 
biodiversity and protecting the quality of life 
of many people in the region.

How REDD+ Works
REDD+ is an acronym for a set of policies 
aimed at reducing emissions from deforesta-
tion and forest degradation in developing 
countries (REDD) and restoring forests and 
increasing carbon storage in existing forests 
(the plus). Developing countries led by Papua 
New Guinea and Costa Rica proposed this in-
novative approach at the international climate 
negotiations in 2005, and it has been gaining 
momentum since then as an affordable way  
to reduce global warming pollution. REDD+ 
could not only help reduce heat-trapping emis-
sions but also support sustainable development 
in the worlds tropical nations.
  The basic idea is that tropical countries  
are compensated if they reduce their carbon 
emissions from forest clearing. This can be  
verified by remote sensing technology (e.g., 
satellite images) that has already been used to 
monitor deforestation. A strict set of criteria 
must be adhered to in order to certify the   
reductions, and once a country reaches its 
emissions target and the reductions are certi-
fied, it is eligible for monetary compensation.
 
In order to create enough economic incen-
tive for developing nations to reduce the clear-
ing of their tropical forests, these nations need 
to be paid more than they could make by clearing 
the land and using it for activities such as raising 
cattle or crops. It turns out that REDD+ is an 
affordable solution for reducing global warm-
ing pollution because the cost of compensating 
tropical nations is considerably lower than the 
current costs of reducing carbon emissions from 
industries, vehicles, and power plants.1 REDD+ 

can greatly reduce tropical deforestation, 
and thus reduce global warming, with 
relatively modest funding.

How REDD+ Is Funded
Funding for REDD+ comes from a 
combination of three sources.2 The first, 
voluntary funding from countries, 
individuals, or organizations, helps de-
veloping nations build up the capacity 
needed to protect tropical forests,  

The cost of compensating 
tropical nations is considerably 
lower than the current costs 
of reducing carbon emissions 
from industries, vehicles, 
and power plants.

measure their reductions, and make 
national plans for how to reduce defor-
estation. Training and technology transfer 
will be needed along with programs de-
signed to ensure that certifiable reduc-
tions are made. In 2009, 12 countries 
pledged more than $4 billion in volun-
tary funding for REDD activities over 
three years (20102012). Voluntary 
funding is already having a large impact; 
Brazil, for example, announced in 2010 
that it has greatly reduced its rate of 
deforestation over the last five years,  
in large part due to voluntary funding. 
 
A second source is market-linked 
funding, such as the revenue generated 
by a cap-and-trade program. Under a 
cap-and-trade program (such as those 
programs already in place in California 
and 10 Northeast states), companies 
that produce global warming pollution 
are required to buy allowances to cover 
the amount of heat-trapping emissions 
they expect to produce in a given year. 
Every year thereafter, fewer allowances 

are made available, forcing companies 
to cut their emissions over time. Allow-
ances are sold each year in an auction, 
and a portion of the revenue from these 
sales could be used to fund REDD+. 
This arrangement, therefore, would 
lower the global warming pollution 
produced by developed nations and also 
provide funding to reduce pollution 
from tropical deforestation in  
developing nations.
  The third source is direct carbon-
market funding, which also derives 
from cap-and-trade systems, but in a 
different way than market-linked fund-
ing. As fewer allowances are offered  
at auction in a cap-and-trade program, 
some companies will want a way to 
acquire additional allowances if they 
have not yet found a way to reduce their 
emissions. They could, for example,  
be permitted to buy allowances from  
a REDD+ program that has succeeded 
in reducing emissions, thus offsetting 
the higher pollution produced by com-
panies in the cap-and-trade program. 
This type of funding will be useful in 
the future once tropical countries have 
built up the capacity and experience to 
ensure that any carbon offsets made 
available through REDD+ meet strict 
criteria and are therefore associated 
with real emissions reductions.

How the United States  
Can Help
The world will not be able to meet the 
aggressive emissions reduction targets 
that scientists tell us are necessary3 with-
out addressing the emissions produced 
by tropical deforestation and forest 
degradation. In international climate 
meetings, the United States and coun-
tries from around the world have made 
great progress on creating guidelines 
for strong REDD+ policies. 

  Congress should support this work 
through voluntary funding in the 
appropriations bill. By fulfilling the 
United States $1 billion pledge (as part 
of countries $4 billion total contribu-
tions; see How REDD Is Funded) 
through appropriations funding and 
devoting additional voluntary funding, 
the United States would help countries 
gain access to the training and technology 
needed to begin reducing their emissions 
from deforestation and degradation.
 
Additionally, state, regional, or 
federal cap-and-trade legislation should 
include:
  Revenue for REDD+. A strong cap-
and-trade system should allocate a 
percentage of the revenue from cap-
and-trade allowance auctions for the 
purpose of protecting tropical forests.
  Carbon offsets. The system should 
also allow for small amounts of offsets 
that can be certified as the product 
of reduced emissions from tropical 
deforestation.

REDD+ policies will help slow global 
warming, preserve biodiversity, and 
protect precious natural resourcessome 
of the most serious problems facing the 
world in the twenty-first century.

Endnotes
1  See the UCS fact sheet Estimating the cost and 
potential of reducing emissions from deforestation 
and the ucs report Out of the woods: A realistic role 
for tropical forests in curbing global warming. Both 
are available online at www.ucsusa.org/REDD.

2  See the UCS fact sheet Filling the REDD basket: 

Complementary financing approaches, online at 
www.ucsusa.org/REDD.

3  See the United Nations Environment Programme 
report The emissions gap report: Are the Copenhagen 
accord pledges sufficient to limit global warming  
to 2C or 1.5C?, online at www.unep.org/
publications/ebooks/emissionsgapreport.

Doug Boucher, Estrellita Fitzhugh, Sarah Roquemore, Patricia Elias, Calen May-Tobin, and Katherine 
Lininger (Tropical Forest and Climate Initiative, Union of Concerned Scientists) prepared this summary.

 January 2011 Union of Concerned Scientists

Printed on recycled paper with vegetable-based inks

Two Brattle Square, Cambridge, MA 02138-3780. Main Office (617) 547-5552  Washington, DC (202) 223-6133

An online version is available at www.ucsusa.org/REDD

