T r o p i c a l   F o r e s T s   a n d   c l i m a T e

Tropical Deforestation and Global Warming: 
A Solution

Tropical deforestation accounts for 

about 20 percent of the worlds global 
warming pollutionan amount equiv-
alent to the total emissions of China or 
the United States, and more than that 
produced by every car, truck, plane, ship, and 
train on Earth. This fact sheet explains how 
tropical deforestation contributes to global 
warming, and how actions to protect tropical 
forests (including a set of policies known as 
REDD) can reduce global warming while 
providing many additional benefits. 

Why Tropical Forests Are So Vital
Tropical forest trees, like all green plants, take 
in carbon dioxide and release oxygen during 
photosynthesis. During respiration they emit 
carbon dioxide, but in generally smaller amounts 
than what they take in during photosynthesis. 
The remaining carbon is stored in the tree, 
allowing it to grow bigger. That stored car- 
bon is released into the air as carbon dioxide  
if the tree is burned or cut down and allowed 
to rot. 

Tropical forests must be  
protected if we are to reduce 
carbon emissions to the levels 
needed to avoid the most  
dangerous and expensive  
global warming impacts.

 
Since carbon dioxide is the principal gas 
trapping heat in Earths atmosphere, tropical 
deforestation is an important contributor to 
global warming. Tropical forests must therefore 
be protected from deforestation and degradation 
if we are to reduce carbon emissions to the levels 
needed to avoid the most dangerous and expen-
sive global warming impacts. Ending deforesta-
tion will not solve global warming by itself
urgent action is needed to lower the other 80 
percent of the worlds emissionsbut the prob-
lem cannot be solved if the 20 percent of emis-
sions from tropical deforestation is ignored.

 
Reducing deforestation would also address 
concerns that extend beyond global warming. 
Tropical forests are home to many species of 
plants and animals that could become extinct 
(such as the jaguar) if we do not act to protect 
their habitat. In addition, tropical forests are 
crucial sources of food, medicine, and clean drink-
ing water for people in developing countries, 
and help prevent both floods and droughts  
by regulating regional rainfall. Thus, reducing 
deforestation would not only be beneficial in 
reducing global warming pollution, but also  
in preserving biodiversity and protecting the 
quality of life of many people in the region.

How REDD Works
REDD, an acronym for reducing emissions 
from deforestation and forest degradation in 
developing countries, is an innovative approach 
to protecting tropical forests. Developing coun-
tries led by Papua New Guinea and Costa Rica 
proposed this approach at the international 
climate negotiations in 2005, and it has been 
gaining momentum since then as an affordable 
way to reduce global warming pollution. REDD 
could not only help reduce heat-trapping emis-
sions but also support sustainable development 
in the worlds tropical nations. 
 
The basic idea is that tropical countries 
would be compensated if they reduce their 
carbon emissions from forest clearing. This 
would be verified by remote sensing technolo-
gy (e.g., satellite photos) that has already been 
used to monitor emissions from deforestation. 
A strict set of criteria would be developed to 
certify the reductions, and once a country 
reaches its emissions target and the reductions 
are certified, it would be eligible for monetary 
compensation. 
 
In order to create enough economic incen-
tive for developing nations to reduce the clear-
ing of their tropical forests, these nations would 
need to be paid more than they could make by 
clearing the land and using it for activities such 
as raising cattle or crops. It turns out that REDD 
is an affordable solution for reducing global 
warming pollution because the cost of compen-
sating tropical nations is considerably lower 

than the current costs of reducing 
carbon emissions from industries, 
vehicles, and power plants. REDD 
can greatly reduce tropical deforesta-
tion, and thus reduce global warming, 
with relatively modest funding.

How REDD Would Be Funded
Funding for REDD can come from  
a combination of three sources.2 The 
first, voluntary funding from countries, 
individuals, or organizations, would be 

The cost of compensating 
tropical nations is considerably 
lower than the current costs 
of reducing carbon emissions 
from industries, vehicles, 
and power plants.

the fastest way for developing nations 
to build up the capacity needed to 
protect tropical forests, measure their 
reductions, and follow the required cer-
tification process. Training and tech-
nology transfer will be needed along 
with programs designed to ensure that 
certifiable reductions are made. Some 
countries have already begun volun-
tarily funding REDD programs; Nor-
way, for example, provides more than 
$500 million yearly. 
A second source is market-linked 
 
funding, such as the revenue generated 
by a cap-and-trade program in indus-
trialized nations including the United 
States. In this type of system, companies 
that produce global warming pollution 
would be required to buy allowances 
to cover the amount of heat-trapping 
emissions they expect to produce in  
a given year. Every year thereafter, 
fewer and fewer allowances would  
be made available, forcing companies 

The third source is direct carbon-

to cut their emissions over time. Allow-
ances would be sold each year in an 
auction, and a portion of the revenue 
from these sales could be used to fund 
REDD. This arrangement, therefore, 
would lower the global warming pollu-
tion produced by industrialized nations 
and also provide funding to reduce 
pollution from tropical deforestation 
in developing nations. 
 
market funding, which also derives 
from cap-and-trade systems, but in a 
different way than market-linked fund-
ing. As fewer allowances are offered at 
auction in a cap-and-trade program, 
some companies will want a way to 
acquire additional allowances if they 
have not yet found a way to reduce 
their emissions. They could, for ex-
ample, be permitted to buy allowances 
from a REDD program that has suc-
ceeded in reducing emissions, thus off-
setting the higher pollution produced 
by companies in the cap-and-trade 
program. This type of funding will  
be more useful in later years because 
tropical countries will have built up 
the capacity and experience to ensure 
that any carbon offsets made available 
through REDD meet strict certification 
criteria and are therefore associated 
with real emissions reductions. 

How the United States  
Can Help
The world will not be able to meet the 
aggressive emissions reduction targets 
that scientists tell us are necessary 
without addressing the emissions pro-
duced by tropical deforestation and 
forest degradation. Negotiations over 
the next international climate treaty 
have begun, and U.S. negotiators should 
work for the inclusion of strong  
REDD policies in the treaty. 

 

In addition, Congress should 

 
adopt the following policies to help 
reduce global warming pollution   
by protecting tropical forests:
  Five for Forests. A strong 

climate bill should allocate at least 
five percent of the revenue from cap-
and-trade allowance auctions for the 
purpose of protecting tropical forests. 

  Carbon offsets. The bill should  

also allow for small amounts of offsets 
that can be certified as the product of 
reduced emissions from tropical 
deforestation. 

  Voluntary funding. The United 

States should allocate foreign aid 
money for developing countries that 
are establishing programs to protect 
tropical forests. 

Such policies will strengthen the United 
States position in the international 
climate treaty negotiations and help  
us return to a leadership role in setting 
global policy. More importantly, these 
policies will help slow global warming, 
preserve biodiversity, and protect preci-
ous natural resourcessome of the most 
serious problems facing the world in 
the twenty-first century.

Endnotes
   See the UCS fact sheet Estimating the Cost and 

Potential of Reducing Emissions from Deforestation 
and the UCS report Out of the Woods: A Realistic 
Role for Tropical Forests in Curbing Global 
Warming. Both are available online at www.
ucsusa.org/REDD.

2  See the UCS fact sheet Filling the REDD Basket: 
Complementary Financing Approaches, online at 
www.ucsusa.org/REDD.

   See the UCS report How to Avoid Dangerous 
Climate Change: A Target for U.S. Emissions 
Reductions, online at www.ucsusa.org/global_
warming/solutions/big_picture_solutions/a-target-
for-us-emissions.html.

Doug Boucher, Diana Movius, Estrellita Fitzhugh, Sarah Roquemore, and Patricia Elias  

(Tropical Forest and Climate Initiative, Union of Concerned Scientists) prepared this summary. 

 February 2009 Union of Concerned Scientists.

Printed on recycled paper with vegetable-based inks

Two Brattle Square, Cambridge, MA 02238-9105. Main Office (617) 547-5552  Washington, DC (202) 223-6133

An online version is available at www.ucsusa.org/REDD

