Forest 
ecosystems in 
the transition 
to a green 
economy and 
the role oF 
redd+ in the 
united republic 
oF tanzania

Published by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), 2015
Copyright  UNEP 2015

reproduction
This publication may be reproduced in whole or in part and in any form for educational 
or non-profit services without special permission from the copyright holder, provided 
acknowledgement of the source is made. UNEP would appreciate receiving a copy of 
any publication that uses this publication as a source. No use of this publication may be 
made for resale or any other commercial purpose whatsoever without prior permission 
in  writing  from  the  United  Nations  Environment  Programme.  Applications  for  such 
permission, with a statement of the purpose and extent of the reproduction, should be 
addressed to the Director, DCPI, UNEP, P.O. Box 30552, Nairobi 00100, Kenya. The use of 
information from this document for publicity or advertising is not permitted.

disclaimers
Mention  of  a  commercial  company  or  product  in  this  document  does  not  imply 
endorsement by UNEP. Trademark names and symbols are used in an editorial fashion 
with  no  intention  on  infringement  on  trademark  or  copyright  laws.  The  designations 
employed  and  the  presentation  of  material  in  this  publication  do  not  imply  the 
expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of UNEP concerning the legal status 
of any country, territory or city or its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its 
frontiers and boundaries.

We regret any errors or omissions that may have been unwittingly made.

This  work  has  been  designed  and  implemented  under  the  direction  of  Dr.  Pushpam 
Kumar, Chief, Ecosystem Services Economics Unit, UNEP

Authors:  Babatunde  Abidoye1,  Eric  Mungatana1,  Linda  Mahlalela1,  Thabo  Sacolo1  and 
Folaranmi Babalola1

Edited by: Ivo Mulder (UNEP) and Beth Mbote (UNEP)

1Centre for Environmental Economics and Policy in Africa (CEEPA), University of Pretoria

Cover photo: Ngorongoro crater  Jessica Bethke/Shutterstock

acknowledgement
The authors wish to thank the Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism, United Republic 
of Tanzania, notably Mr. Juma Mgoo and Mr. Evarist Nashanda for their contributions, 
support and guidance throughout this study. We would also like to thank Prof. Rashid 
Hassan, (Centre for Environmental Economics and Policy in Africa (CEEPA), University of 
Pretoria), for his support in developing the work.

The  authors  would  also  like  to  acknowledge  Dr.  Pushpam  Kumar  and  Mr.  Tim 
Christophersen (UNEP) for their oversight and support for this project. We would like 
to  thank  the  reviewers  who  provided  detailed  feedback  on  the  report:  Unai  Pascual, 
(Basque  Centre  for  Climate  Change  (BC3),  Spain),  Priscilla  Cooke,  (Pacific  Lutheran 
University,  USA),  Niklas  Hagelberg,  (UNEP),  Stephen  Gitonga,  UN  REDD  Programme, 
(UNEP),  Paulo  Nunes  (UNEP),  Suzannah  Goss  and  Soren  Dalsgaard,  (Royal  Norwegian 
Embassy, Tanzania).  

We  would  also  like  to  thank  the  many  stakeholders  in  Dar  es  Salaam,  Tanzania,  who 
provided critical guidance at the outset of the study at an inception meeting in Dar es 
Salaam in July, 2013, and who offered critical feedback on the results in July, 2014.

This  publication  was  produced  in  partnership  with  the  United  Nations  Collaborative 
Programme  on  Reducing  Emissions  from  Deforestation  and  Forest  Degradation  in 
Developing Countries (UN-REDD Programme), which harnesses the technical capacities 
of FAO, UNDP and UNEP to support the REDD+ readiness and implementation capacities 
of developing countries. More information available at www.un-redd.org

This  study  was  implemented  by  the  Ecosystem  Services  Economics  Unit,  Division  of 
Environmental Policy Implementation (DEPI), United Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP).

Job Number: DEP/1929/NA
ISBN: 978-92-807-3470-6
Layout and printing: UNON, Publishing Services Section, Nairobi, ISO 14001:2004-certified.
D1 No.: 15-01965/200 copies

UNEP promotes 

environmentally sound practices 

globally and in its own activities. This 

report is printed on paper from sustainable 
forests. The paper is chlorine free and the inks 
vegetable-based. Our distribution policy aims 

to reduce UNEPs carbon footprint.

Forest 
ecosystems in 
the transition 
to a green 
economy and the 
role oF redd+ 
in the united 
republic oF 
tanzania

table of contents

Foreword 

executive summary 

acronyms and abbreviations
 o1. introduction and background
 o2. Forest ecosystem services included in the 
valuation study
 o3. intersectoral linkages and value added 
by the forestry and hunting sector
o4. Value of the catchment forests of the 
united republic of tanzania
 o5. towards a sustainable forestry 
management in the united republic of 
tanzania
 o6. references
appendices

05

06

11

12

16

19

39

46

51

53

Ngorongoro crater  Jessica Bethke/Shutterstock

Foreword

Goods  and  services  provided  by  ecosystems, 
including  forests,  are  consistently  undervalued 
in  standard  economic  indicators  such  as  gross 
domestic  product  (GDP).  As  a  result,  forests 
and  other  ecosystems  are  degraded  and  used 
unsustainably,  which 
impacts  many  groups 
in  society,  not  least  the  rural  poor,  who  often 
depend  on  timber  and  other  ecosystem  goods 
and  services  for  their  livelihoods.  A  growing 
recognition is developing, of the urgent need for 
action  to  halt  the  degradation  and  loss  of  this 
natural capital.

One  of  the  key  policy  recommendations  of 
the  Millennium  Ecosystem  Assessment  was  to 
integrate  sustainable  ecosystem  management 
in  national  policies,  plans  and  programmes  to 
ensure human well-being, while acknowledging 
that all sectors of the economy benefit directly 
and  indirectly  from  nature  in  terms  of  added 
value  through  links  with  other  sectors.  The 
adoption  of  the  outcome  document  during  the 
UN  Conference  on  Sustainable  Development 
(Rio+20)  further  reiterated  the  need  to  better 
account for natural capital and critical ecosystem 
services towards a transition to a Green Economy.

This work is part of a range of activities offered 
by  the  UN-REDD  programme  to  support  the 
Government of Tanzania by enabling it to build 
the economic case for sustainable management 
and  conservation  of 
forest 
ecosystems  as  part  of  REDD+  implementation. 
The  analysis  provides  insight  for  the  National 
Bureau of Statistics, the Ministry of Finance and 
Presidents Office Planning Commission on how 
to start accounting for Tanzanias natural capital 
and  how  this  can  be  linked  to  the  countrys 
national accounts.

the  countrys 

investment 

The  findings  show  that 
in  the 
forestry sector has a disproportionately positive 
impact  on  the  incomes  of  rural  households  in 
comparison  to  stimulating  output  from  other 
sectors,  meaning  that  investment  in  forestry 
could  contribute  to  alleviating  poverty.  Taking 
these  findings  together,  this  report  presents 
a  solid  case  for  Tanzania  to  integrate  REDD+ 
policies into key economic sectors such as energy, 
agriculture,  livestock,  industries,  transport  and 
water  to  address  the  drivers  of  deforestation 
and  forest  degradation  while  identifying  how 
the  implementation  of  REDD+  can  be  part  of 
Tanzanias  broader  economic  and  development 
strategy, as the country plans to move towards 
REDD+  results-based  actions  that  could  lead  to 
results-based payments and then towards Green 
Economy pathways to sustainable development 
and poverty eradication in Tanzania.

of 

System 

The 
Environmental-Economic 
Accounting  Experimental Ecosystem Accounting 
(SEEA    EEA)  of  the  United  Nations,  published 
in 2013, provides an important first step in the 
development  of  a  statistical  framework  for 
ecosystem accounting. The SEEA-EEA framework 
was  used 
for  this  report  to  assess  how 
deforestation  affects  the  economy  of  Tanzania, 
both by looking at the limited ecosystem goods 
and  services  currently  reflected  in  GDP  and  by 
looking  at  the  effects  on  the  economy  if  the 
full suite of forest ecosystem services are taken 
into  account.  Based  on  current  available  data 
(NAFOMA  2014),  the  results  show  that  current 
deforestation  levels  are  unsustainable  from  a 
macro-economic point of view. The effect on the 
economy is stronger if degradation of currently 
unaccounted  for  ecosystem  services    such  as 
water  provisioning  for  agriculture,  hydropower, 
domestic and industrial, water for environment 
and non-wood forest products  are integrated in 
the countrys national accounts.

	  

Juma S. Mgoo

Tanzania Forest Services

Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism

July 2015

Achim Steiner

UNEP Executive Director

United Nations Under-Secretary General

5

executive summary

Key messages

	

 

The	main	objective	of	this	study	is	to	assess	whether	there	is	an	economic	rationale	for	the	
reduction	of	deforestation	in	the	United	Republic	of	Tanzania,	by	calculating	the	economic	
costs	and	benefits	based	on	current	levels	of	deforestation. The study is part of a range 
of activities offered by the UN-REDD Programme in support of the Tanzanian Government. 
REDD+1 is a concept designed to reward developing countries for their verified reductions or 
removals of forest carbon emissions compared to a forest reference level or forest reference 
emission level that complies with the relevant safeguards. 

The Tanzanian mainland is estimated to have a total of 48 million hectares (ha) of forest, 
which is 51 per cent of the total area, with woodlands occupying about 90 per cent of the 
total forest area and the remainder being shared by mangrove forests, montane forests, 
small  patches  of  coastal  forests,  and  plantations  of  softwood  and  hardwood.  Annual 
deforestation on the Tanzanian mainland is estimated by the National Forest Monitoring 
and Assessment (NAFORMA, 2014) at 372,816 ha between 1995 and 2010. 

	 A	 cost-benefit	 analysis	 revealed	 that	 the	 present	 value	 of	 net	 economic	 losses	 from	
deforestation	to	the	Tanzanian	economy	over	the	next	20	years	(20132033)	is	TSh	273	
billion	(US$	171	million).	This analysis only included those provisioning forest ecosystem 
services that are captured by the system of national accounts and which can therefore be 
reflected in the gross domestic product (GDP). A discount rate of 5 per cent was used, which 
is the rate that the Bank of Tanzania uses in analysing long-term investments. This means that 
based on available data, it makes economic	sense	to	reduce	deforestation	and	implement	
policies	and	measures	that	tackle	the	direct	and	underlying	drivers	of	deforestation.2 

  A second scenario analysis using data from Catchment Forest Reserves took into account 
the  economic  effect  of  deforestation  not  only  on  timber  resources,  but  also  on  other 
provisioning services, including non-timber forest products, regulating services such as water 
provisioning for domestic use and livestock, and supporting services such as biodiversity. 
The present	value	of	net	losses	from	deforestation	to	the	Tanzanian	economy	in	the	period	
20132033	amounts	to	TSh	5,588	billion	(US$	3.5	billion). This	shows	that	the	present	
value	of	net	losses	are	an	order	of	magnitude	higher	when	taking	into	account	the	effect	
of	deforestation	on	the	full	range	of	forest	ecosystem	services.

 

 

1 

2 

Lastly, additional analysis also highlighted that investments	in	the	forestry	sector	lead	to	
comparatively	higher	income	for	rural	populations	than	the	same	investments	in	the	sec-
tors	of	agriculture	and	wood,	paper	and	printing.	Hence, investments in the forestry sector 
could potentially also be beneficial from the perspective of poverty alleviation. 

These  findings  highlight  that  it  is  economically  interesting  for  the  United  Republic  of 
Tanzania to invest in conserving its forests, and therefore present a case for the Government 
to tackle the direct and underlying drivers of deforestation and transition, moving towards 
an economic model that stimulates sustainable use and conservation of forest ecosystems 
by implementing REDD+. In that sense, this report provides further rationale for efforts to 
accelerate the implementation of the REDD+ National Strategy and Action Plan. 

REDD and REDD+ refer to the mechanism called Reducing emissions from deforestation 
and forest degradation in developing countries, which emerged in 2008, building in the roles of 
conservation and sustainable management of forests, forest restoration and reforestation. REDD+ is an 
enhanced version of the mechanism.
It should be noted however, that the cost-benefit analysis does not take into consideration the potential 
alternative income from activities after land is deforested (e.g. agriculture).

6

introduction

The  United  Republic  of  Tanzania  is  one  of  the  60  partner 
countries  of  the  UN-REDD  Programme  and  one  of  the  21 
countries with a national programme (as of May 2015). The 
United Republic of Tanzania has made progress in a range 
of areas that are part of the Warsaw Framework for REDD+, 
or  the  so-called  REDD+  Rulebook.  The  valuation  of  the 
countrys  forest  ecosystems  and  their  contribution  to  its 
economy was one of the activities that continued after its 
national programme closed in 2013 as part of the UN-REDD 
support for national actions. 

The  country  is  highly  biodiverse  and  is  renowned  for  the 
richness  of  its  wildlife.  Approximately  38  per  cent  of  the 
countrys  mainland  is  set  aside  in  protected  areas  for 
conservation. The Tanzanian mainland is estimated to have 
a  total  of  48  million  ha  of  forest,  which  is  51  per  cent  of 
the total area, with woodlands occupying about 90 per cent 
of  the  total  forest  area  and  the  remainder  being  shared 
by  mangrove  forests,  montane  forests,  small  patches  of 
coastal forests, and plantations of softwood and hardwood 
(NAFORMA, 2014).

Forests  provide  a  range  of  ecosystem  services,  of  which 
some can be reflected in market prices, such as timber and 
derivative products like paper. Other services that are also 
important for the economy, such as the ability of forest soils 
to purify water for domestic and industrial use, regulate run-
off  to  support  hydroelectric  power  generation,  sequester 
carbon,  etc.,  are  usually  quantified  using  shadow  prices 
as opposed to market prices (see figure 1 for an overview 
of  some  ecosystem  services  that  forests  provide  to  the 
Tanzanian economy and society). The current contribution 
of  the  forestry  sector  to  the  countrys  gross  domestic 
product (GDP)3 is 3 per cent (National Bureau of Statistics, 
Ministry of Finance 2013). 

Deforestation in the United Republic of Tanzania is driven 
by  the  expansion  of  agricultural  activities, 
including 
through shifting cultivation, wildfires, lack of clearly defined 
boundaries, illegal logging, livestock grazing, unsustainable 
charcoal  production  for  domestic  and  industrial  use,  lack 
of  systematic  management,  introduction  of  alien  and 
invasive species, etc. These driving forces are depreciating 
the  countrys  natural  capital  or  stock  of  forest  ecosystem 
assets, because, as forests disappear, so may the benefits 
that  these  provide  in  terms  of  regulating  water  run-off, 
reducing  soil  erosion,  capturing  and  sequestering  carbon, 
etc. Deforestation rates range from 130,000 to 500,000 ha 
per annum (FRA, 2010), with different sources setting the 
rate at 142,720 ha in 2013 (GFW, 2015) and 372,816 ha per 
annum  between  1995  and  2010  (NAFORMA,  2014).  The 
NAFORMA figure has been used for the analysis in this study. 

The primary goal of this study is to provide an insight into 
the  economic  costs  and  benefits  of  deforestation  in  the 
United  Republic  of  Tanzania.  The  analysis  focuses  both 

3  The contribution was 3.10 per cent at 1992 prices and 2.70 

per cent at 2001 prices.

on  the  specific  effect  of  deforestation  on  the  GDP  of  the 
forestry sector, and also on the impact of deforestation on 
the broader economy. One way to look at this is as follows: 
If deforestation affects the water cycle it will have a negative 
impact  on  the  value  added  of  the  hydropower  or  energy 
sector if energy generation is impaired. In a similar fashion, 
agriculture  can  be  affected  if  deforestation  increases  soil 
erosion  or  impairs  the  irrigation  system.  This  can  lead  to 
higher costs (e.g. additional fertlizers) or lower yields (due 
to poorer soil quality). In that way, this analysis provides a 
broader perspective of deforestation on the economy. The 
System of National Accounts (SNA) is used by governments 
around  the  world  for  macroeconomic  policy  making  and 
defines how GDP is calculated. 

As  a  second  step,  the  report  gives  policy  makers  in  the 
Tanzanian  Forest  Service  (TFS),  the  National  Bureau  of 
Statistics  (NBS),  the  Ministry  of  Finance  and  Economic 
Affairs, the Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism and 
other public and private stakeholders in th United Republic 
of Tanzania more visibility about the important roles that the 
forest sector plays in supporting the welfare of households 
across the country and its direct and indirect contribution to 
the economy in terms of added value through interlinkages 
with  other  sectors.  In  doing  so,  the  study  provides  the 
rationale for the United Republic of Tanzania to move ahead 
with the implementation of REDD+ through actions, policies 
and measures that could generate results-based payments. 

Costs and benefits of deforestation for 
the tanzanian economy

1.		 Monetary	costs	and	benefits	of	deforestation	captured	

by	the	System	of	National	Accounts

The  first  scenario  analysed  how  the  monetary  benefits 
that  society  obtains  from  cutting  down  forests  (in  terms 
of  obtaining  useful  provisioning  services  such  as  timber) 
compare  to  the  monetary  costs  to  the  economy  of  the 
lost  value  added  of  the  forestry  sector.  In  doing  so  the 
interlinkages that the forestry sector has with other sectors 
were taken into account by using an input-output analysis 
and  social  accounting  matrices.  The  social  accounting 
matrix is an extension of an input-output table, which, in 
addition to income and expenditure flows of industries and 
their  outputs  which  are  captured  by  input-output  tables, 
contains  detailed  information  that  captures  all  transfers 
and real transactions between industries and institutions in 
the economy. The values presented below can be directly 
captured by the SNA4. 

1.	 Benefits	 of	 deforestation:  The  benefits  are  one-off 
financial  benefits  from  provisioning  services  (mainly 

4  The analysis assumed that deforestation levels, which on 
average were 372,816 ha per year between 1995 and 2010 
(NAFORMA, 2014), would remain constant for the next 
20 years: 20132033. A discount rate of 5 per cent was 
used, which is the rate that the Bank of Tanzania uses in 
analysing long-term investments (see Sanga and Mungatana, 
forthcoming).

7

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA2.		 Visualizing	 the	 economic	 costs	 and	 benefits	 of	

deforestation	on	the	broader	economy

The second scenario assessed how the one-time monetary 
benefits that society obtained from deforestation compared 
to the monetary costs of lost provisioning, regulating and 
supporting ecosystem services. The analysis is based on data 
from catchment forest reserves (CFRs) issued by the Ministry 
of Natural Resources and Tourism (MNRT, 2003). The CFRs in 
the survey covered 677,203 ha and are found in Morogoro, 
Tanga, Kilimanjaro and Arusha. The survey includes services 
produced by the forestry sector that supports value added 
in other sectors (e.g. agriculture, tourism, energy) such as:

 

 

Provisioning  services  (timber-related):  timber,  poles, 
firewood, withies

Provisioning  services  (non-timber  forest  products): 
wild  fruits,  traditional  medicines,  wild  vegetables, 
bushmeat, mushrooms, ropes

  Other 

provisioning, 

cultural 

regulating 
(intermediate) 
for 
domestic use and livestock, water for irrigation, water 
for  electricity  generation  (hydropower),  fisheries, 
prevention of soil erosion and tourism.

services:  water  provisioning 

and 

The  benefits  of  managing  CFRs  on  a  sustainable  basis, 
extracting timber resources, non-timber forest products, and 
intermediate services, amount to TSh 1 million per hectare 
per year. The decision to cut down a hectare of forest in the 
CFRs has costs and benefits. There are one-off benefits in 
terms of the economic value of timber forest products of 
about TSh 102,993 per hectare. The costs can be computed as 
lost timber (after a hectare is cut down it does not deliver any  
timber-related  products  from  the  next  year  onwards), 
non-timber forest products and regulating and supporting 
services, which on an aggregate basis are TSh 1 million per 
hectare. Discounting the costs and benefits for the next 20 
years leads to net benefits of TSh	38	billion	(US$ 24 million) 
and  net  costs  of	 TSh	 5,627	 billion	 (US$  3.5  billion),  see 
figure 2. 

This  shows  that  when  taking  into  account  the  full  range 
of forest ecosystem services, it is even more economically 
unattractive to continue current deforestation rates. Please 
note some of  the costs  are compatible  with  the  SNA and 
reflected in GDP through lower value added of other sectors 
such as agriculture, tourism and energy. For example, more 
irregular water availability due to deforestation can impact 
agricultural output, or lead to higher costs for hydro-electric 
utilities.  The  UN-REDD  Programme  has  also  emphasized 
the  importance  of  recognizing  the  multiple  benefits  that 
forest ecosystems provide (UNEP, 2014). Other costs such 
as effects on biodiversity, carbon sequestration and other 
non-use values are not compatible with the SNA and hence 
not reflected in the GDP. 

timber).  These  are  TSh  29,233  per  hectare  per  year 
(2013).  Based  on  deforestation  levels  of  372,816  ha 
per  year,  the	 discounted	 benefits	 over	 the	 period	 
20132033	 are	 estimated	 at	 TSh	 147	 billion  
(US$ 92 million). 

2.	 Costs	of	deforestation: There are two types of costs. 
First, once a hectare of forest has been cut down that 
same  hectare  does  not  contribute  any  more  to  the 
value added of the forestry sector the following year. 
Second,  there  are  multiplier  effects  as  investments 
in  the  forestry  sector  contribute  to  the  value  added 
of  other  sectors  in  the  country.  In  other  words, 
deforestation  will  reduce  this  positive  indirect  effect 
on other sectors. Combining these two costs results in 
total costs of TSh 83,771 per hectare per year (2013). 
Based on deforestation rates of 372,816 ha per year, the 
discounted	costs	for	the	period	2013	to	2033	amount	
to	a	total	cost	of	TSh	420	billion	(US$ 263 million). 

Figure  1.  Present  value  of  net  benefits  and  costs  of 
deforestation captured by the System of National Accounts 
(SNA) between 2013 and 2033

Present value of net benefits/costs of deforestation (million dollars)
captured by the System of National Accounts* between 20132033

s
t
fi
e
n
e
B

s
t
s
o
C

TShs 147 billion
(USD 92 million)

TShs 420 billion
(USD 263million)

*Based on CBA with 5% discount rate (used by National Bank of Tanzania);
assuming constant deforestation rates. Underlying analysis conducted using 
IO table in combination with Social Accounting Matrices

In  conclusion,  the  present	 value	 of	 net	 losses	 from	
deforestation	to	the	Tanzanian	economy	amounts	to	TSh	
273	 billion	 (US$	 171	 million),  as  shown  in  figure  1.  This 
means  that  deforestation 
is  economically  unattractive 
purely  from  the  perspective  of  the  forestry  sector-related 
contribution to GDP (see boxes 1 and 2). 

Box 1. Brief note of clarification on the cost-benefit analysis
In this analysis the amount of land that is removed from 
forestry and transferred to an alternative use, such as 
agriculture,  does  not  enter  as  a  sector  in  the  input-
output matrix. Additional policy-scenario analysis can 
be carried out to assess this marginal income impact 
generated  from  deforested  land  through  alternative 
land  use.  This  exercise  is  beyond  the  scope  of  the 
present report.

8

Figure  2.  Present  value  of  net  benefits  and  costs  of 
deforestation in CFRs between 2013 and 2033

s
t
fi
e
n
e
B

s
t
s
o
C

Present value of net benefits and costs of deforestation

partly captured by the System of National Accounts between 20132033 

TShs 38 billion
(USD 24 million)

TShs 5,627 billion
(USD 3.5 million)

Please note that part of the costs are compatible with the SNA and hence reflected in GDP, but not in the forestry sector 
but in other sectors. This concerns effects of deforestation on providing water for domestic use and livestock, 
preventing soil erosion, etc. If deforestation affects these services this can lead to lower value added of sectors such 
as agriculture, tourism and energy. Other forest ecosystem services that are affected because of deforestation, 
such as biodiversity and non-use values, are not compatible with the SNA and hence not reflected in GDP.

policy implications

Following  these  results,  the  Tanzanian  economy  would 
benefit  from  reducing  deforestation  and  increasing  the 
conservation  and  sustainable  use  of  forest  ecosystem 
services. Suggestions are provided for different government 
ministries  and  agencies,  regarding  how  they  could 
strengthen the integration of forest ecosystem services in 
their policies and decision-making procedures. 

Suggestions	 for	 the	 National	 Bureau	 of	 Statistics	 (NBS)	
and	 the	 Ministry	 of	 Finance	 and	 Economic	 Affairs:  The 
marketable  outputs  provided  by  forests  are  captured  by 
the SNA and reflected in the GDP, whereas the majority of 
non-marketable outputs are not captured at all. However, 
restricting  the  attention  of  decision-makers  exclusively  to 
the share of the forests contribution to the countrys GDP 
presents  a  skewed  picture  of  its  true  contribution.  Given 
that the present value of the marketable forest goods and 
services  shows  a  net  loss  for  the  Tanzanian  economy,  a 
recommendation for the NBS and the Ministry of Finance 
and  Economic  Affairs  could  be  to  start  assessing  how  the 
value  of  the  countrys  natural  capital  can  be  linked  to  its 
national accounts, for example by developing an inclusive 
wealth account that includes the value of the natural capital 
in  addition  to  social,  manufactured  and  other  types  of 
capital. In that way changes in the forest stock and other 
natural capital assets can be tracked on a periodic basis. 

The use of forests in many developing countries is usually 
undervalued  (e.g.  Roe  and  Elliot,  2010).  In  addition,  the 
income  from  forests  to  households  is  typically  stated  as 
income,  which  is  likely  to  understate  the  true  income 
because  of  the  prevalence  of  informal  markets.  In  the 
United  Republic  of  Tanzania  for  example,  forests  are  a 
source of income for a significant number of households or 
consumed as a complement to other goods. For instance, in 

order to prepare food in many communities, wood provides 
the  cooking  energy.  However,  data  on  these  activities  are 
typically not available at the national level. This results in 
undervaluing the contribution of the forestry sector to the 
economy. The study by Agrawal et al. (2012) highlights that 
in  many  developing  countries  non-industrial  economic 
contributions  of  forests  are  typically  unavailable  and  in 
many cases are three to ten times higher than that collected 
in national accounts. The analysis presented in this study, 
however,  shows  that  indeed  the  net  non-market  benefits 
and losses of forest ecosystems are ten times as large as the 
marketed losses. 

A natural capital account that is part of a countrys inclusive 
wealth  account  and  which  is  linked  to  its  existing  system 
of  national  accounts  can  inform  the  Ministry  of  Finance 
and  Economic  Affairs  and  the  NBS  when  it  develops  or 
adapts policies to stimulate economic growth. The United 
Nations  system  of  environmental-economic  accounting 
and  experimental  ecosystem  accounting  (UN  SEEAEEA, 
2013) provides three ways in which ecosystem accounting 
information may be used to augment the economic accounts 
of the SNA:

A.  The  compilation  of  balance  sheets  that  compare  the 
values  of  ecosystem  assets  with  value  of  produced 
assets,  financial  assets  (and  liabilities),  and  other 
economic  assets.  This  approach  also  brings 
into 
consideration an approach described in the literature 
as wealth accounting; 

B.  The compilation of a sequence of economic accounts 
taking  into  account  ecosystem  services  and  other 
ecosystem flows, especially ecosystem degradation;

C.  The  derivation  of  aggregate  measures  of  economic 
activity, such as income and saving, that are adjusted 
for ecosystem degradation.

Suggestions	for	the	TFS: Deforestation has a net negative 
impact  on  the  economy  from  the  perspective  of  the 
forestry  sector  and  fails  to  take  into  account  potential 
alternative  income  from  other  sectors  (see  box  1).  These 
results could therefore be used to advocate the provision 
of additional domestic resources to tackle the driving forces 
behind deforestation. In addition, this study looked at how 
deforestation affects the revenues of the TFS itself. Monetary 
benefits  for  the  TFS  from  managing  forests  can  include 
receipts, licences and other miscellaneous payments such 
as  forestry  royalties  and  fees.  The  costs  are  expenditures 
for  forest  management.  At  current  prices,  the  present 
value of net losses for the TFS from deforestation between 
2013 and 2033 are estimated at TSh 2,063 million (US$ 1.3 
million). This means that, from the point of view of the TFS 
deforestation has a negative effect on its net income. 

Suggestions	 for	 the	 Ministry	 of	 Natural	 Resources	 and	
Tourism	and	the	Planning	Commission

The project also measured the effect on household income 
assuming a scenario whereby a plan would be implemented 
to increase output in the following sectors by 10 per cent 

9

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIABox  2.  Use  of  the  Computable  General  Equilibrium 
(CGE) model for the United Republic of Tanzania
CGE models are a standard tool of empirical analysis, 
and are widely used to analyse the aggregate welfare 
and  distributional  impacts  of  policies  whose  effects 
may  be  transmitted  through  multiple  markets,  or 
contain  menus  of  different  tax,  subsidy,  quota  or 
transfer instruments. 
The  social  accounting  matrix  for  the  United  Republic 
of Tanzania was developed by the International Food 
Policy  Research  Institute  following  the  framework 
presented  in  the  study  by  Lofgren  et  al.,  2002.  Both 
the single-country static and dynamic versions of the 
Partnership for Economic Policy standard CGE models 
were  designed  for  country-level  studies  adapted 
to  the  Tanzanian  national  economy.  The  model  is 
implemented 
in  the  General  Algebraic  Modelling 
System  (GAMS)  and  is  solved  using  the  continuous 
optimization solver CONOPT. 

within  five  years  due  to  increased  demand5:  first,  forests 
and  hunting;  second,  agriculture;  and  third,  wood,  paper 
and  printing.  Four  types  of  households  were  identified: 
first, rural poor; second, rural non-poor; third, urban poor; 
and  fourth,  urban  non-poor.  The  effect  of  this  simulation 
was measured both in terms of direct effects on household 
income if the Government decided to invest in the forestry, 
agriculture  or  wood,  paper  and  printing  sectors,  but  also 
the  indirect  effect.  The  indirect  impact  considers  the 
relationship with other sectors of the economy, for example, 
increasing the output of the agricultural sector will have an 
impact  on  all  sectors  that  have  an  economic  relationship 
with it (seed supply, fertilizer supply, irrigation water supply, 
transportation, etc). Increased demand will spur economic 
growth in the interdependent sectors, which will ultimately 
be reflected in the welfare of households. 

The analysis revealed that such an equal increase in output 
in these three sectors increased household welfare for both 
the  rural  poor  and  non-poor  more  in  the  forestry  sector, 
than in agriculture and wood paper printing (see table 1 and 
figure 5). 

Table 1. Effect on household income from a targeted 10 per 
cent increase in supply of the forestry, agriculture and wood 
and paper sectors over the next five years

 Forestry and

hunting

Agriculture  Wood paper

printing

Rural poor

 Rural
non-poor

Direct
Indirect
Total
Direct

Indirect
Total

19%
33%
52%
61%

126%
187%

18%
32%
50%
57%

122%
179%

6%
27%
33%
44%

106%
150%

This  provides  a  rationale  for  the  Ministry  of  Natural 
Resources  and  Tourism  (MNRT)  to  stimulate  output  of 
the  forestry  and  hunting  sector  in  the  interest  of  poverty 
alleviation. This is because investments in the forestry sector 
leads to comparatively higher income for rural populations 
than equal investments in the agricultural and wood paper 
printing sectors. 

Taking all analyses into account, this report provides motiva-
tions for the Government of Tanzania to accelerate REDD+ 
readiness and move towards implementation of the Nation-
al REDD+ Strategy (2013). In doing so, Tanzania would take 
an important step to transition to a Green Economy.

Both direct (final demand) and indirect effects (supporting 
production activities in other sectors) were taken into 
account.

5 

10

acronyms and abbreviations

CES 

CET 

CFR 

CGE 

CIFOR 

FAO 

GAMS 

GDP 

ICRAF 

MNRT 

Constant Elasticity of Substitutions

Constant Elasticity of Transformation

Catchment Forest Reserves

Computable General Equilibrium

Center for International Forestry Research

Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations

General Algebraic Modelling System

Gross Domestic Product

International Centre for Research in Agroforestry

Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism

NAFORMA 

National Forestry Resources Monitoring and Assessment of Tanzania

NBS 

National Bureau of Statistics

NORAD 

Norwegian Agency for Development Cooperation

PEP 

REDD+ 

SNA 

TFS 

TEEB 

Partnership for Economic Policy

Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and forest Degradation  
Conservation, Enhancement of Carbon Stocks and Sustainable 
Management of Forests

System of National Accounts

Tanzania Forest Services

The Economics of Ecosystems and Biodiversity

UN SEEA EEA 

United Nations System of Environmental-Economic Accounting and 
Experimental Ecosystem Accounting

UNDP 

UNEP 

UN-REDD 

United Nations Development Programme

United Nations Environment Programme

United Nations Collaborative Programme on Reducing Emissions from 
Deforestation and Forest Degradation in Developing Countries

11

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIAo1introduction 

and 
background

One  of  the  key  objectives  of  economic  research  studies 
such as this is to generate the factual evidence that policy 
requires  to  build  a  strong  business  case,  which,  in  the 
present instance, is for a transformation in forest planning, 
management  and  monitoring,  in  particular  to  navigate 
towards  a  low-carbon  development  path  and  a  green 
economy (see for example, UNEP, 2013). NAFORMA (2014: 
13)  reports  that  the  Tanzanian  mainland  is  estimated  to 
have a total of 48.1 million ha of forests, which is 51 per cent 
of the total area. Woodlands occupy 44 million hectares or 
91 per cent of the total forest area. NAFORMA categorizes 
the ownership and management of this forest estate into 
the following land ownership regimes: 

(a)   Central  government 

is  administered 
by  central  government  agencies  such  as  the  TFS  or 
parastatals such as Tanzania National Parks; 

land,  which 

(b)   Local government land, which is administered by local 
government  authorities  and  includes  forest  reserves 
decentralized  to  local  government  authorities  in  the 
1970s; 

(c)   Village land, which is held and administered collectively 
by village residents under customary law and the Village 
Land Act, chapter 114; 

(d)   Private land, a category that covers all tenure right types 
giving  individual  or collective occupancy  rights  within 
village, general or government lands (customary right 
of  occupancy,  granted  right  of  occupancy,  leasehold, 
and residential licence); 

(e)   General land, which includes land which is not reserved, 

not occupied or unused forest land; 

(f)   Unknown category. 

Villages are the main owners of forests and woodlands in 
the Tanzanian mainland with a 45.7 per cent share, leaving 

12

a huge share of the forest estate without official protection 
status  and  subject  to  open  access  exploitation  and  heavy 
pressure (Division of Environment, 2013; see also the forest 
classification  adopted  by  Ngaga  2011).  The  management 
and  development  of  this  vast  forest  estate is  guided  by  a 
recently reformulated National Forest Policy, which led to a 
new Forest Act (2002).

The  critical  socioeconomic  importance  of  forestry  to  the 
development aspirations of Tanzania has been extensively 
demonstrated in current literature. To cite a few illuminating 
examples,  the  Statistical  Abstract  (2012)  reports  that  the 
2001 GDP share of forestry and hunting was 3.10 per cent 
at 1992 prices and 2.70 per cent at 2001 prices (National 
Bureau  of  Statistics,  Ministry  of  Finance  2013).  The 
Tanzanian Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism (MNRT 
2000) reports that the countrys world famous wildlife and 
game reserves include 1.6 million ha managed as catchment 
forests.  The  Tanzanian  Ministry  of  Natural  Resources  and 
Tourism (2000) reports that about 70 per cent of the total 
forest area of the United Republic of Tanzania is suitable for 
the production of wood products, with a potential sustained 
yield of around 16.7 million cubic metres per year (0.7 m3/
ha/yr).  The  Tanzanian  Ministry  of  Natural  Resources  and 
Tourism  (2000)  demonstrates  the  substantial  provisioning 
services  of  miombo  woodlands,  and  the  forward  linkages 
associated with the primary forest industry. Independently, 
Ngaga (1998) illuminates the shortcomings of conventional 
measures  of  economic  performance  in  capturing  the  true 
contribution  of  forestry  to  social  welfare  in  the  United 
Republic of Tanzania. Kahyarara, Mbowe and Kimweri (2002) 
demonstrate the importance of forestry in sustaining rural 
livelihoods. Kaale (2001) illustrates the huge socioeconomic 
importance of mangrove forests, while the important role 
of  the  sector  in  generating  rural  and  urban  employment 
is  demonstrated  by  the  Tanzanian  Ministry  of  Natural 
Resources  and  Tourism  (1998),  Ngaga  (1998)  and  FBD 
(2000).

industrial  use, 

  Recent  studies  have,  however,  brought  into  sharp  public 
focus  the  many  critical  constraints  threatening  the 
performance, ecosystem services delivery and sustainable 
development objectives of this critically vital sector. There 
exist  enormous  proximate  threats  to  gazetted  forests 
emanating  from  a  number  of  sources,  including  shifting 
cultivation,  wildfires,  lack  of  clearly  defined  boundaries, 
illegal logging, expansion of agricultural activities, livestock 
grazing,  unsustainable  charcoal  production  for  domestic 
and 
lack  of  systematic  management, 
insufficient  revenue  collection,  inadequate  infrastructure 
development,  settlement  and  resettlement,  and  the 
introduction of alien and invasive species (see for example 
Division of Environment 2009, MNRT 2000 and FBD 2000), 
and  population  pressure.  There  is  evidence  of  declining 
capacity of inter-connected industries that depend on the 
forestry  sector  for  primary  inputs.  The  study  by  Ngaga  et 
al.  (1998)  shows  that  the  total  installed  wood  processing 
capacity of forest-based industries fell from 900,000 m3/yr 
of round wood in 1992 to 710,000 m3/yr in 1998, attributed 
to obsolete technology, low investment, poor financing and 
weak market development. In 2000, the Tanzanian Ministry 
of Natural Resources and Tourism reported that almost all 
plywood industries in the country were operating below full 

Image 1. Waterfall-Kilimanjaro

The countrys world famous wildlife and game reserves in Tanzania include 1.6 million ha managed as catchment forests

R
O
F
I
C


 

 
:
t
i
d
e
r
c
 
o
t
o
h
P

capacity and generating abundant wastes in production (with 
some sawmills operating below 35 per cent recovery rate), 
as a consequence of their very old and poorly maintained 
machinery. The cumulative effect of all these constraints is 
the increased deforestation rate currently being witnessed 
in the country (e.g. see the evidence presented in VPO 1998 
and FAO 2010) threatening future sustainability prospects.

This report is motivated by the hypothesis that the increasing 
threats  faced  by  the  forestry  sector  could  be  attributed 
to  the  economic  characteristics  of  its  outputs.  The  sector 
supplies marketable and non-marketable outputs, with the 
former being captured within the current system of national 
accounts  (SNA),  while  a  huge  proportion  of  the  latter  is 
not  captured  at  all.6  The  report  acknowledges  that  there 
are  credible  economic,  intuitional  and  historical  reasons 
explaining  why  the  sectors  non-market  benefits  typically 
have provided little incentive for investment and sustainable 
management. The marketable benefits which are visible and 

6  This issue is explored in greater detail in chapter 2 of this 

report.

captured in current GDP often present a more compelling 
case  to  policymakers.  However,  restricting  the  decision-
makers attention to the sectors benefits which are captured 
by the market and shown only by the GDP share of forestry 
presents a skewed picture of its true contribution. As will be 
shown in this report, the well-being of households and the 
performance of the rest of the economy is intricately linked 
with the performance of the forestry sector, with the result 
that losing a countrys forest sector goes well beyond losing 
the  sectors  GDP  share.  Consequently,  beyond  making  an 
attempt to demonstrate the non-market values of forestry, 
the primary goal of this report is to give more visibility to 
the important role of forestry in supporting the welfare of 
households  and  performance  of  the  rest  of  the  economy 
using data that is currently reported in the SNA.

Guided  by  these  observations  and  in  response  to  the 
demonstrated need for sustainable forest management in 
the  United  Republic  of  Tanzania,  this  study  was  designed 
to  address  three  key  objectives.  First,  the  study  used 
state-of-the-art  tools: 
input-output  analysis  and  social 
accounting matrix analysis from economics to demonstrate 
the  importance  of  the  sector  to  the  macroeconomy  of 
the  United  Republic  of  Tanzania  beyond  what  is  reported 

13

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIAis hardly feasible to account for all forest ecosystem services 
within the constraints of a single economic valuation study, 
stakeholders  were  chosen  based  on  the  importance  of 
their  forest  ecosystem  services  that  were  prioritized  for 
this  project.  In  chapter  3  the  intersectoral  linkages  were 
evaluated  using  economy-wide  models 
(input-output 
analysis  and  social  accounting  matrices)  with  a  view  to 
demonstrating the critical importance of the forestry sector 
to the macroeconomy of the United Republic of Tanzania. 
Results from chapter 3 provide the rationale for investing in 
sustainable forestry in the United Republic of Tanzania based 
on data reported in the current SNA. In chapter 4 some key 
results are used from the report Resource economic analysis 
of  catchment  forest  reserves  in  Tanzania  (MNRT  2003), 
on  a  recommendation  from  the  stakeholder  engagement 
process  reported  in  chapter  2,  arriving  at  the  conclusion 
that the value of intermediate benefits that society receives 
from  catchment  forests  is  significantly  larger  than  that  of 
their provisioning benefits. The results reported in chapter 4 
provide additional economic rationale for sustainable forest 
management in the United Republic of Tanzania based on 
data that are not currently captured in the SNA. In view of 
the key conclusions of chapters 3 and 4, and the potential 
opportunities  provided  by  internal  and  external  sources 
of  support,  chapter  5  uses  a  stakeholder  engagement 
process again to identify and prioritize investments, policy 
instruments  and  institutional  arrangements  that  could  in 
principle  be  used  to  support  a  low  carbon  development 
path and a green economy transition in the United Republic 
of Tanzania. References and appendices appear in the last 
sections of this report.

in the SNA. This analysis will provide the factual evidence 
required to demonstrate that, in the absence of sustainable 
forest  management,  many  important  welfare-generating 
upstream  and  downstream  production  sectors  will  fail  to 
perform  (i.e.  the  impacts  of  failure  in  the  forestry  sector 
goes well beyond losses in the GDP share of forestry).

The  output  from  the  first  objective  then  feeds  into  the 
second objective, which seeks to answer the question: how 
do the monetary benefits that society obtains from cutting 
down its forests (in terms of obtaining useful provisioning 
forest  ecosystem  services)  compare  to  the  monetary 
costs  of  the  loss  of  the  value  added  by  forestry  to  the 
macroeconomy in the immediate future and long term? This 
report considers the evidence to be generated in response 
to the first and second objectives as the main contribution 
(or value added) of this research to forestry in the United 
Republic of Tanzania.

In the third objective, the study seeks to answer the question: 
how  do  the  one-time  monetary  benefits  that  society 
obtains from cutting down its forests (in terms of obtaining 
useful  provisioning  forest  ecosystem  services)  compare 
to the monetary costs of the lost intermediate ecosystem 
services?  This  report  acknowledges  that  answering  this 
question  necessarily  involves  imputing  monetary  values 
to benefits from forests that are not typically reflected in 
market economics, a procedure that is not equally accepted 
across all disciplines. The objective here, however, is simply 
to  make  the  point  that,  among  many  other  advantages, 
non-market  valuation  facilitates  making  trade-offs  explicit 
(e.g. see TEEB 2010). But since the unit which the analyst 
chooses for valuation should ideally not change the nature 
of the decision, the results of the economic valuation per se 
should not detract readers of opposing views.7 

This report also acknowledges that the ideal approach to the 
third objective would have been through implementing our 
own  empirical  research  studies  (primary  data  collection).8 
Published studies were used to address the third objective. 
In  the  final  objective,  the  study  uses  a  stakeholder 
engagement  process  to  explore  how  the  United  Republic 
of  Tanzania  could  attract  internal  and  external  resources 
to  support  sustainable  forest  management  based  on  the 
acknowledged  benefits  that  forests  provide  to  the  local, 
national and global economy. Such funding could be used 
to  identify  and  prioritize  investments,  policy  instruments 
and  institutional  arrangements  to  support  a  low-carbon 
development path and the transition to a green economy.

This report is structured as follows. Chapter 2 looks at the 
stakeholder  engagement  process  followed  to  identify  the 
ecosystem services that were included in the study. Since it 

Prof. Sir Partha Dasgupta eloquently articulated this point 
during the International Conference on Valuation and 
Accounting for Natural Capital for Green Economy held in 
Nairobi, on 3 and 4 December 2013.
Best in the sense of giving the analyst the opportunity 
to assess the validity and reliability of the resulting welfare 
estimates.

7 

8 

14

Image 2. Lorry with large pieces of wood

Illegal logging a major threat to gazetted forests

R
O
F
I
C


 

 
:
t
i
d
e
r
c
 
o
t
o
h
P

15

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA	  

o2Forest 

ecosystem 
services 
included in the 
valuation study

2.1
introduction
This chapter introduces the concept of ecosystem services, 
and  identifies  and  explains  which  ecosystem  services  are 
included in the present valuation study.

2.2
ecosystem services
According  to  the  System  of  Environmental-Economic 
Accounting  2012Experimental  Ecosystem  Accounting 
(SEEA  Experimental  Ecosystem  Accounting),  ecosystem 
services  are  most  usefully  considered  in  the  context  of 
a  chain  of  flows  that  connect  ecosystems  with  human 
well-being (figure 3).

Starting with the notion of well-being at the level of both 
the individual and society, the SEEA Experimental Ecosystem 
Accounting recognizes that well-being is influenced by the 
receipt of benefits. In the context of ecosystem accounting, 
such benefits comprise:

 

 

The  products  supplied  by  economic  units  (e.g.,  food, 
water,  clothing,  shelter,  recreation,  etc.).  These  are 
referred to as SNA benefits since the measurement 
boundary is defined by the production boundary used 
to measure gross domestic product (GDP) in the System 
of National Accounts  or SNA;

The  benefits  accruing  to  individuals  that  are  not 
produced  by  economic  units  (e.g.,  clean  air).  These 
benefits are referred to as non-SNA benefits, reflecting 
the fact that the receipt of these benefits by individuals 
is  not  the  result  of  an  economic  production  process 
defined within the System of National Accounts.

Figure 3. Stylized model of flows related to ecosystem services  Source: Adapted from SEEA Experimental Ecosystem Accounting.

16

It  follows  that,  under  the  SEEA  Experimental  Ecosystem 
Accounting, ecosystem services are considered to be the 
contributions of ecosystems to benefits used in economic 
and other human activity, as defined in the SEEA glossary,9 
a definition that excludes some flows that are categorized 
as ecosystem services in other contexts. In particular, these 
include  flows  within  and  between  ecosystems  that  form 
part of continuing ecosystem processes, commonly referred 
to as supporting services (see the Millennium Ecosystem 
Services  Assessment  (2005)).  This  is  the  definition  and 
classification of ecosystem services that will be employed in 
the present report.

2.3  
provisioning and 
intermediate forest 
ecosystem services 
selected for inclusion in 
this study
The ecosystem services identified for inclusion in this study 
were selected on the basis of two stakeholder consultations. 
The  first  was  held  on  4  June  2013,  between  the  Centre 
for  Environmental  Economics  and  Policy  in  Africa  and  the 
Tanzania  Forest  Services,  the  institution  formally  tasked 
with coordinating this research project given its role as chief 
custodian  of  forests  in  the  United  Republic  of  Tanzania. 
In  the  meeting  the  Tanzania  Forest  Services  highlighted 
the  important  connection  that  exists  between  effective 
forest management and the performance of the following 
sectors in the United Republic of Tanzania: rural and urban 
households, forestry, domestic and industrial water supply, 
rain-fed  and  irrigated  agriculture,  livestock  and  inland 
fisheries,  domestic  energy  supply,  hydroelectric  power 
generation, tourism, wildlife and beekeeping.

Consensus  emerged  from  the  meeting  that  the  current 
study  should  generate  an  improved  understanding  of  the 
role  of  better-managed  forests  in  the  macro-economy  of 
the  United  Republic  of  Tanzania  by  considering  the  listed 
ecosystem services. It also emerged from the meeting that 
the Tanzanian Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism, 
through  the  Ministrys  Forestry  and  Beekeeping  Division 
and  with  assistance  from,  among  others,  the  Norwegian 
Agency  for  Development  Cooperation  (NORAD),  had 
prepared a major research study in 2003 entitled Resource 
economic analysis of catchment forest reserves in Tanzania 
(hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  2003  MNRT  study).  This 
study  estimated  monetary  values  for  the  following  forest 
ecosystem goods and services of relevance to the current 
study: timber and timber-related values, non-timber forest 
products,  water  (domestic  and  livestock  use,  irrigation, 

9 

 SEEA (2012), p. 155.

electricity and fisheries), measures for erosion protection, 
tourism,  carbon  sequestration,  biodiversity,  option  values 
and non-use values.

The  second  consultation  took  place  at  a  stakeholders 
workshop  in  Dar  es  Salaam  on  17  July  2013,  and  was 
attended  by  representatives  of  six  government  ministries 
(Natural  Resources  and  Tourism,  Agriculture,  Energy  and 
Mining,  Water,  Livestock  Development,  and  Fisheries  and 
Works), two public institutions (National Bureau of Statistics 
and the National Environmental Management Council), the 
Sokoine  University  of  Agriculture,  and  four  international 
organizations  the United Nations Environment Programme 
(UNEP),  the  United  Nations  Development  Programme 
(UNDP), the International Centre for Research in Agroforestry 
(ICRAF), and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the 
United Nations (FAO). There was consensus at the second 
stakeholders  meeting  of  the  importance  of  a  study  that 
provided  a  better  understanding  of  the  importance  of 
forests  to  the  macro-economy  of  the  United  Republic  of 
Tanzania. Stakeholders at that meeting also concluded that 
any forest valuation work to be delivered under the current 
study should add value to what is currently known from the 
2003 MNRT study.

17

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIAFigure 4. Schematic landscape illustration of ecosystem services in the United Republic of Tanzania

Schematic landscape illustration of ecosystem 
services in the United Republic of Tanzania

Kilimanjaro

wildlife    and    
beekeeping

domestic     and     
livestock    
 use    of    water

hydroelectric     
power    generation

domestic     
energy     supply

tourism

TANZANIA

livestock   
and    inland    
fisheries

rain fed    
and    irrigated     
agriculture

domestic    
and     industrial     
water    supply

forestry

erosion     
 protection      
 function

18

o3intersectoral 

linkages and 
value added 
by the forestry 
and hunting 
sector

3.1 
introduction
The forestry sector provides both use and non-use values 
for the economy, as indicated in chapter 2. The use values 
can  be  estimated  using  market  mechanisms  and  can  be 
observed  through  the  activities  of  households,  private 
enterprises  and  the  government.  In  the  present  chapter, 
we  evaluate  the  importance  of  the  forestry  sector  by 
looking  at  its  linkage  with  other  sectors  of  the  economy 
and investigate the value which it adds using input-output 
analysis  and  social  accounting  matrices.  The  input-output 
model is based on an analysis of inter-industry transactions 
and  examines  how  industries  use  the  products  of  other 
industries as inputs for their own products. One of the main 
advantages  of  the  input-output  model  is  that  its  analysis 
of inter-industry transactions can be used to estimate the 
economic impacts of any changes to the economy.

The social accounting matrices are an extension of the input-
output  tables.  In  addition  to  the  income  and  expenditure 
flows  of  industries  and  their  outputs,  as  captured  in  the 
input-output tables, the social accounting matrices contain 
detailed information on different institutions. The matrices 
thus  incorporate  institutional  and  structural  details  that 
capture  all  transfers  and  real  transactions  between 
industries and institutions in the economy. Since the social 
accounting  matrices  incorporate  the  input-output  table, 
they  provide  a  comprehensive  economy-wide  database 
with an internally consistent set of accounts for production, 
income and expenditures.

Data  were  available  for  the  input-output  table  of  the 
United  Republic  of  Tanzania  for  the  years  20002010 
and  these  were  used  in  the  computation  of  the  social 
accounting matrices, which then served as the major data 
source  for  analysing  inter-industry  linkages.  The  2001 
social  accounting  matrices  were  disaggregated  into  17 
activities  or  sectors,  with  the  following  codes:  agriculture 
(AAGRIC), forestry and hunting (AFOREST), wood, paper and 
printing(AWOODP), livestock and fisheries (ALIVES), mining 
(AMINE),  food  processing  (AFOOD),  textiles  (ACLOTH), 
other manufacturing (AOTHM), machinery and equipment 
(AEQUIP),  utilities  (AUTIL),  construction  (ACONST),  trade 
(ATRAD),  hotels  and  restaurants  (AHOTEL),  transport  and 
communications  (ATRANS),  real  estate  (AESTAT),  public 
administration  (AADMIN)  and  private  services  (APRIVS). 
Labour  was  divided  into  subsistence  labour  (FSUB),  child 
labour (LCHILD), female adult labour (LFEMALE) and male 
adult 
into 
agricultural  capital  (CAPAG)  and  non-agricultural  capital 
(CAPNAG). The matrices included one kind of land (LAND) 
and  firms  or  enterprises  (ENTR).  Households  vary  by 
location and poverty status, namely: rural poor households 
(RURPOOR),  rural  non-poor  households  (RURNPOOR), 
urban  poor  households  (URBPOOR)  and  urban  non-poor 
households  (URBNPOOR).  Government  activities  were 
divided 
into  government  expenditure  (GOV)  and  five 
different kinds of taxes direct tax on domestic institutions 
(DIRTAX), import tariffs (IMPTAX), value added tax (VATAX), 
indirect or sales taxes (INDTAX) and factor taxes (FACTAX). 
Lastly,  savings  and  investment  (S-I)  represent  the  capital 
account, while the rest of the world (ROW) is modelled as a 
single sector. The framework set out below is based on that 
prepared by Parra and Wodon (2009).

labour  (LMALE).  Capital  was  differentiated 

3.2
contribution of forestry 
and hunting, and the 
wood, paper and printing 
sectors to value addition
 

  Key	messages	for	analysts	and	policymakers

Using the data on intersectoral transactions captured in 
the social accounting matrices for the United Republic 
of Tanzania, chapter 3 demonstrates the following:

 

Each  hectare  of  forest  that  is  left  standing  boosts 
the  contribution  to  the  GDP  of  the  forestry  and 
hunting sector. Thus, in 2001, forestry and hunting 
contributed TSh 296.7 billion to the GDP in 2001of 
the  United  Republic  of  Tanzania,  which  translates 
into TSh. 6,168 per ha per year (2001) equivalent to 
TSh 29,233.84 per ha per year (2013).

19

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA 

For each hectare of forest that is cut down, there 
are  two  consequences:  first,  the  cleared  hectare 
will no longer contribute to the current GDP, which 
is estimated at TSh 6,168 per ha per year (2001); 
and, second, the potential value added by forestry 
to  other  sectors  of  the  Tanzanian  economy    in 
terms  of  income  and  valued  added  taxes    to  a 
total  quantity  estimated  in  the  present  study  at 
TSh  10,599  per  ha  per  year  (2001)  will  be  lost. 
Accordingly, clearing a hectare of forest translates 
into a total loss of TSh 16,767 per ha per year (2001) 
in  terms  of  direct  losses  and  losses  incurred  by 
other sectors, which is equivalent to TSh 83,771.70 
per ha per year (2013).

  An  increase  in  the  consumption  of  the  forestry 
sector  by  households  resulted  in  an  increase  in 
GDP, household income, wage rates and composite 
commodity prices.

These predictions are clearly of importance in informing 
forest policy: in the interests of improving the welfare 
of  rural  poor,  rural  non-poor,  urban  poor  and  urban 
non-poor households, forest policies should encourage 
growth in sectors that make use of forestry as an input 
in their production.

Side  box:  REDD+10  and  the  green  economy  share 
an  agenda  of  promoting  economic  growth  and 
development, with an eye to investing in natural capital 
and  ecosystem  services,  and  a  focus  on  alleviating 
poverty  and  social  inequities.  REDD+  planning  spurs 
the  transformative  changes  in  governance,  ways  of 
thinking  and  approaches  needed  to  switch  from  an 
unsustainable course of business-as-usual to one that 
leads to economic growth and social equity11.

Value added is defined as the sum of factor incomes and 
value added taxes. In this section we consider the question: 
What is the contribution of the 17 industries modelled in 
the social accounting matrices to aggregate GDP? Table 2 
presents the contribution to GDP by sector (in descending 
order),  highlighting  the  value  added  by  the  sectors  of 
forestry and hunting, and that of wood, paper and printing.

10 

REDD+ refers to an enhanced version of the mechanism 
called Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest 
degradation in developing countries, or REDD, which 
emerged in 2008, building in the ideas of conserving 
and sustainably managing forests, forest restoration and 
reforestation.

11  Newsletter of the UN-REDD Programme, issue No. 39, June

July 2013

20

Agriculture  (AAGRIC)  is  the  major  contributor  (TSh  3,224 
billion),  while forestry and hunting (AFOREST), and wood, 
paper  and  printing  (WOODP)  contribute  TSh  296  billion 
(eighth  overall)  and  Tsh.  72  billion  (sixteenth  overall), 
respectively.  These  sectors,  which  are  the  two  sectors  of 
central interest to this study, make up 3.5 per cent of the GDP 
of the United Republic of Tanzania. This result is based on 
current measures of economic performance; other sectors 
contribute more to the national income by several orders of 
magnitude (for example, the contribution of agriculture is 
more than ten times that of forestry and hunting).

The remaining sections of the present chapter will explore 
the critical role played by the forestry and hunting sector in 
the macro-economy of the United Republic of Tanzania by 
carrying out the following analyses: multiplier (section 3.3), 
forward and backward linkages (section 3.4), structural path 
(section 3.5), sectoral growth and price impacts (section 3.6), 
exogenous  demand  shocks  (section  3.7),  exogenous  price 
shocks (section 3.8), simulating data to capture household 
demand for forestry output that is not presently captured in 
the system of national accounts (section 3.9), and finally the 
cost-benefit  of  deforestation  based  on  the  representation 
of forestry in the system of national accounts of the United 
Republic of Tanzania (section 3.10).

3.3 
multiplier analysis, 
sectoral growth and price 
impacts
We  begin  here  by  assuming  that  the  Tanzanian  Planning 
Commission proposes a policy that would result in increased 
activity (or an increased supply of goods and services) from 
the forestry and hunting (AFOREST), agriculture (AAGRIC), 
and  wood,  paper  and  (AWOODP)  sectors  by  the  same 
proportional  amount  (e.g.,  a  targeted  10  per  cent  supply 
increase in each sector within the next five years).  12Many 
factors  could  potentially  drive  such  an  increase  in  supply, 
including  increased  exogenous  demand,13 and  options  for 
making  each  of  these  policies  operational  could  include 
increasing the annual budgetary allocation for each sector.

12  The mean exchange rate in 2001 was 876.71 Tanzanian 

shillings to the dollar.

13  Technically, an increase is exogenous if it comes from 
outside the system being modelled. To give a practical 
example, increased demand by the rest of the world for 
carbon sequestration services (or habitat protection services) 
provided byTanzanian forests would present an exogenous 
increase for output from the forestry and hunting sector. 
Another way to think about it is that theTanzanian Planning 
Commission could aim to increase the output from forestry 
and hunting by 10 per cent over the next five years as a policy 
target (presumably to increase availability of goods and 
services to consumers from the sector).

Table 2. Value added (in billions of Tanzanian shillings and United States dollars)12

Activity

Agriculture (AAGRIC)

Real estate (AESTAT)

Food processing (APFOOD)

Public administration (AADMIN)

Livestock and fishery (ALIVES)

Construction (ACONST)

Textiles (ACLOTH)

Forestry and hunting (AFOREST)

Other manufacturing (AOTHM)

Hotels and restaurants (AHOTEL)

Trade (ATRADE)

Transport and communications (ATRANS)

Private services (APRIVS)

Utilities (AUTILI)

Machinery and equipment (AEQUIP)

Wood, paper and printing (AWOODP)

Mining (AMININ)

Aggregate

Source: Authors computation

Value added in TSh billion

Value added in US$ billion12

3 224.0

1 879.3

1 347.7

653.3

622.2

582.0

305.8

296.7

263.4

259.6

253.6

238.9

224.8

112.0

75.7

72.0

21.1

3.68

2.14

1.54

0.75

0.71

0.66

0.35

0.34

0.30

0.30

0.29

0.27

0.26

0.13

0.09

0.08

0.02

TSh 10 432 billion

US$ 11.90 billion

In  this  section  multiplier  analysis14  is  employed  to  assess 
whether household incomes would increase or decrease as 
a result of these proposals; thus, it considers the question: 
Would  households  benefit  from  or  be  hindered  by  the 
individual proposals?

14  A multiplier in economics is a factor of proportionality 

that measures how much an endogenous variable changes 
in response to an exogenous variable. The multiplier will 
not only provide information on whether the endogenous 
variable in question relatively increases or decreases (i.e., 
the direction of change), it will also provide information on 
the relative magnitude of the change (the size of the increase 
or decrease). This section will demonstrate the value of the 
multiplier analysis to policies affecting forestry and hunting 
sector in the United Republic of Tanzania.

As  noted  above 
in  this  chapter:  the  present  report 
distinguishes between four types of households: first, rural 
poor  (RURPOOR);  second,  rural  non-poor  (RURNPOOR); 
third,  urban  poor  (URBPOOR);  and,  fourth,  urban  non-
poor (URBNPOOR). It follows that, by answering the above 
question, the analysis will make it easier to predict how the 
proposed policies would affect welfare distribution across 
households.  In  the  present  report,  the  multipliers  are 
presented in absolute values and in what might be termed 
elasticity  values.15  The  report  will  further  deconstruct 
the  multipliers  into  transfer,  open-loop  and  closed-loop 
effects  to  facilitate  a  better  understanding  of  their  policy 

15  The economic notion of elasticity, as used in the present 

report, refers to the degree of responsiveness of a sector to a 
change in other determinants and variables.

21

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIAsignificance.16 Transfer effects are designed to capture the 
impact of the proposed policies, based on transfers within 
the  group  of  accounts.  Open  and  closed-loop  effects  are 
also  called  direct  and  indirect  effects,  respectively.  The 
direct effect of the forestry and hunting sector, for example, 
focuses  on  the  sectors  impact  on  final  demand,  i.e.,  the 
goods  and  services  supplied  by  the  sector  and  directly 
consumed  as  final  products,  such  as  the  direct  gathering 
of firewood by households for domestic energy supply. The 
indirect effect of  the  forestry and  hunting  sector  includes 
output that helps support the production activities of other 
sectors in the economy. The forestry and hunting sector, for 
example,  indirectly  contributes  to  the  value  added  in  the 
electricity generation sector.

3.3.1
impacts of exogenous increases on 
households

Using  the  constructed  model,  an  analyst  can  sequentially 
assess the impact of a unit increase in each of the activities 
or sectors on the rest of the economy. The full analysis for 
all activities is presented in annex I. Table 3 abstracts data 
from annex I to highlight the key results which are relevant 
to forest policy analysis.

Based on the multiplier analysis (table 3), it may be predicted 
that  a  one-unit  exogenous  increase  in  the  demand  for 
forestry and hunting will lead to increases of 0.5 units in the 
income for the rural poor, 1.9 in income for the rural non-
poor, 0.1 in the income for the urban poor and 0.7 in the 
income for the urban non-poor. By comparison, the impacts 
of a similar increase on the exogenous demand for output 
in agriculture on the one hand, and the wood, paper and 
printing industries on the other, are given in columns 3 and 
4. To give a more practical interpretation to the multipliers 
reported in table 1, let us assume an annual income of the 
rural poor in the United Republic of Tanzania of TSh 250,000, 
of the rural non-poor of TSh 600,000, of the urban poor of 
TSh 300,000 and of the urban non-poor of TSh 900,000. We 
can use the multipliers of table 3 to derive the predictions 
of table 4.

Thus, if the Planning Commission were to increase output 
from the forestry and hunting sector by a small percentage 
within the next five years as postulated, the model predicts 
that  the  annual  income  of  the  rural  poor  would  increase 
from  TSh  250,000  to  TSh  380,825,  of  the  rural  non-poor 
from TSh 600,000 to TSh 1,721,640, of the urban poor from 
TSh  300,000  to  TSh  326,040  and  of  the  urban  non-poor 
from TSh 900,000 to TSh 1,540,890. The analyst can use the 
predictions from table 4 to address two questions of policy 
interest.  First,  which  of  the  three  sectors  of  investment 

Table 3. Predicted impacts of exogenous increases on changes in household welfare (multipliers)

Impact of exogenous demand on incomes of:

Exogenous increase in demand for output from:

Forestry and hunting*

Agriculture*

Wood, paper and printing*

Rural poor households

Rural non-poor households

Urban poor households

Urban non-poor households

Source: Authors computation
Values have been rounded off*

0.52

1.87

0.09

0.71

0.50

1.79

0.09

0.72

0.33

1.50

0.11

0.78

Table 4. Predicted impacts of exogenous increases on household welfare (Tanzanian shillings)

Household sector

 Hypothesized current
annual income (TSh)

 Estimated total income (TSh) after an exogenous increase in the demand

for output from:

Rural poor

Rural non-poor

Urban poor

Urban non-poor

Source: Authors computation

250 000

60 000

300 000

900 000

Forestry and hunting

Agriculture

Wood, paper and printing

380 825

1 721 460

326 040

1 540 890

373 775

1 074 060

326 640

1 548 990

333 675

1 498 200

334 170

1 597 770

16  The issue of deconstruction, and its value to the formulation 

of policy, is explored further in section 3.3.2 below.

22

would bring the greatest benefit to the poor? Second, what 
would be the likely impact of the chosen investment on the 
welfare of the rural poor, rural non-poor, urban poor and 
urban non-poor before and after the policy is implemented? 
According to the predictions of table 4:

 

If  the  government  target  is  growth  in  rural  incomes, 
implementing  policies  that  increase  the  output  from 
the  forestry  and  hunting  sector  appears  to  be  most 
promising (of all sectors).

 

 

 

Increasing the exogenous demand for output from the 
forestry and hunting sector has a larger impact on the 
incomes of the rural poor and non-poor compared to 
similar  increases  in  the  demand  for  output  from  the 
agriculture  and  wood,  paper  and  printing  sectors.  It 
follows that adopting such a policy would benefit the 
rural  poor  and  non-poor  much  more  than  adopting 
similar policies in the agriculture or wood, paper and 
printing sectors.

The model predicts that such a policy would enhance 
the  welfare  of  the  rural  poor  and  non-poor.  The 
Ministry  of  Natural  Resources  and  Tourism  could 
potentially use these predictions to argue for additional 
funding support to the sector in the interests of poverty 
alleviation. The ministry could also use this prediction 
to seek pro-poor donor funding for rural development 
and forest conservation.

investments  designed 

In  all  cases,  the  model  predicts  that  the  rural  non-
poor consistently gain much more than the rural poor. 
The  Government  should  thus  consider  supporting 
complementary 
to  reduce 
incidences  of  overall  rural  poverty,  such  as  the 
provision of safer drinking water to save time and effort 
spent collecting water, the improvement of sanitation 
to  reduce  vulnerability  to  diseases,  educational 
programmes to facilitate more efficient use of resources 
through environmental awareness, etc. It is clear from 
the  predictions  that  investments  in  forestry  should 
be  viewed  as  a  single  ingredient  in  an  overall  rural 
development strategy.

Lastly, it may be seen from the data in annex I that:

3.3.2  
deconstructing the multiplier

The preceding analysis derived quantitative estimates of the 
total impact (referred to as multipliers) of a unit increase in 
the sectors of forestry and hunting, agriculture, and wood, 
paper and printing on the welfare of rural poor, rural non-
poor,  urban  poor  and  urban  non-poor  households.  The 
objective of this section is to deconstruct these multipliers 
into three kinds of effects: transfer, open-loop (or direct), 
and closed-loop (or indirect). It was stated earlier that the 
transfer  effect  is  designed  to  capture  the  impact  of  the 
exogenous  increases  based  on  transfers  within  the  group 
of  accounts.  Since  the  results  presented  in  annex  II  show 
very minimal transfer effects on most activities in the United 
Republic of Tanzania, the rest of the analysis will concentrate 
on  the  open  and  closed-loop  effects.  A  logical  question 
would then be: What is the value added by deconstructing 
the multipliers into open and closed-loop effects? Value is 
added because an understanding of the relative strengths 
of  the  two  sources  of  impact  helps  answer  the  following 
policy-relevant question: Which particular activities  both 
direct and indirect  will help uplift the welfare of the rural 
poor, and should forest policy encourage investments that 
enhance the operation of the direct effect or the indirect 
effect?

The full results for the open-loop (direct) effect are presented 
in annex III. The summary provided in table 5 shows that a 
one-unit exogenous increase in the demand for output from 
forestry  and  hunting  directly  benefits  the  rural  non-poor 
disproportionately more than the other household sectors 
(rural poor, urban poor and urban non-poor).

  Of  all  the  production  sectors  in  the  United  Republic 
of  Tanzania  captured  in  the  analysis,  an  exogenous 
increase  in  demand  for  forestry  and  hunting  has  had 
the  largest  impact  on  household  incomes  (rural  poor 
and non-poor, urban poor and non-poor).

This  result  reinforces  our  earlier  conclusion  that  the 
rural  non-poor  are  more  likely  to  benefit  from  increased 
investments  in  the  forestry  and  hunting  sector  than  the 
rural poor (see tables 3 and 4). A similar pattern emerges 
with an exogenous increase in the demand for output from 

Table 5. Open-loop (direct) effect (multipliers)

Impacts on incomes of:

Rural poor

Rural non-poor

Urban poor

Urban non-poor

Source: Authors computation

*Values have been rounded off

Exogenous increase in the demand for output from:

Forestry and hunting*

Agriculture*

Wood, paper and printing*

0.29

0.61

0.02

0.16

0.18

0.57

0.02

0.19

0.06

0.44

0.05

0.31

23

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIAthe agriculture (column 3) and the wood, paper and printing 
sectors (column 4). Table 5 further shows that exogenous 
increases  in  the  demand  for  output  from  forestry  and 
hunting  have  much  larger  direct  impacts  on  the  welfare 
of  rural  areas  (rural  poor  and  rural  non-poor)  compared 
to  similar  increases  in  the  demand  for  output  from  the 
agriculture  or  the  wood-paper  printing  sectors.  To  give  a 
more practical interpretation to the multipliers reported in 
table 5, table 6 uses the approach of table 4 to demonstrate 
the magnitude of the direct effect.

With the exception of the rural non-poor, the model predicts 
that, for the direct impacts studied, the absolute increases 
in  income  might  not  amount  to  much  (table  6).  Thus  for 
example, by increasing demand for output from forestry and 
hunting, the annual income of the rural poor increases by 
TSh 48,700 (equivalent to TSh 4,058 or US$ 2.4 per month). 
A  similar  exogenous  increase  in  demand  for  output  from 
agriculture translates into an annual increase of TSh 44,325 
(TSh 3,694 or US$ 2.2 per month) in the income of the rural 
poor, while a similar exogenous increase in the demand for 
output  from  wood,  paper  and  printing  translates  into  an 
annual  increase  of  TSh  14,950  (TSh  1,246  or  US$  0.8  per 
month) in the income of the rural poor.

The  full  results  for  the  closed-loop  (indirect)  effect  are 
presented  in  annex  IV.  As  the  indirect  impact  of  a  sector 
takes into consideration its relationship with, for example, 
other sectors of the economy, an exogenous increase in the 
demand  for  output  from  agriculture  will  have  an  impact 
on  all  sectors  with  which  it  has  an  economic  relationship 

Table 6. Open-loop (direct) effect (Tanzanian shillings)

(seed  supply,  fertilizer  supply,  irrigation  water  supply, 
fruit  processing  and  packaging,  transportation,  energy 
supply, water supply, labour supply, etc.). This means that 
the  increased  demand  will  spur  economic  growth  in  the 
interdependent sectors, which will ultimately be reflected 
in the welfare of households. This section seeks to answer 
the question: how will this sectoral input affect the annual 
incomes  of  the  household  sectors  (rural  poor,  rural  non-
poor,  urban  poor  and  urban  non-poor)?  The  answer  to 
this question is presented in table 7 in terms of multipliers 
and in table 8 in terms of Tanzanian shillings (following the 
approach of table 4).

A comparison of tables 6 and 8 will show that the indirect 
impact is much stronger than the direct. Thus, by increasing 
demand for output from the forestry and hunting sector as 
postulated, the annual income of the rural poor increases 
by TSh 82,150 (TSh 6,846 or US$ 4 per month), an increase 
of almost 70 per cent over the outcome predicted by the 
direct effect. A similar exogenous increase in the demand 
for  output  supplied  by  the  agriculture  sector  translates 
into an annual increase of TSh 79,450 (TSh 6,621 or US$ 4 
per month) in the income of the rural poor, an increase of 
almost 80 per cent over the outcome predicted by the direct 
effect. Finally a similar exogenous increase in the demand 
for output supplied by the wood, paper and printing sector 
translates into an annual increase of TSh 68,725 (TSh 5,727 
or US$ 3.4 per month) in the income of the rural poor, an 
increase of almost 360 per cent over the outcome predicted 
by the direct effect.

Household sector

 Hypothesized current
annual income (TSh)

Total income (TSh) after an exogenous increase in the demand for output from:

Forestry and hunting

Agriculture

Wood-paper printing

Rural poor

Rural non-poor

Urban poor

Urban non-poor

Source: Authors computation

250 000

600 000

300 000

900 000

Table 7. Closed-loop (indirect) effect (multipliers)

298 700

966 120

304 500

1 045 080

294 325

942 720

305 730

1 068 390

264 950

861 900

315 750

1 176 120

Impacts on incomes of:

Exogenous increase in the demand of output from:

Forestry and hunting*

Agriculture*

Wood, paper and printing*

0.33

1.26

0.07

0.55

0.32

1.22

0.07

0.53

0.27

1.06

0.06

0.47

Rural poor

Rural non-poor

Urban poor

Urban non-poor

Source: Authors computation

Values have been rounded off*

24

E(cid:31)ect on household income from a targeted 10 per cent increase in supply 

Figure 5. Effect on household income from a targeted 10 per cent increase in supply of the forestry, agriculture and 
wood paper sectors over the next 5 years

of the forestry, agriculture and wood paper printing sectors over the next 5 years"

100%

Urban              
non - poor

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P
 
t
c
a
p
m

I

0%

47%

55% 53%

16 % 19 % 31 %

F

A

W

100%

Urban    poor

7  %
2  %

7  %
2  % 6 %
5  %

F

A

W

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P
 
t
c
a
p
m

I

0%

100%

Rural     POOR

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P
 
t
c
a
p
m

I

0%

33 %

32 %

29  %
F

18 %
A

27  % 6%

W

F - Forestry & Hunting

A - Agriculture

W - World Paper Printing

INDIRECT

DIRECT

100%

Rural 
non - poor

e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P
 
t
c
a
p
m

I

0%

126%

122%

106%

61  %

57 %

F

A

44%
W

25

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIATable 8. Closed-loop (indirect) effect (Tanzanian shillings)

Household sector

Rural poor

Rural non-poor

Urban poor

Urban non-poor

Source: Authors computation

 Hypothesized current
annual income (TSh)

Total income (TSh) after an exogenous increase in demand for output from:

Forestry and hunting

Agriculture

Wood, paper and printing

250 000

600 000

300 000

900 000

332 150

1 355 340

321 540

1 395 810

329 450

1 331 340

320 910

318 725

1 236 360

318 420

1 380 690

1 321 650

Table 9. Percentage deconstruction of the multiplier effect of increases in the forestry and hunting sector on households in 
the United Republic of Tanzania

Household sector

Impacts on incomes of the rural poor

Impacts on incomes of the rural non-poor

Impacts on incomes of the urban poor

Impacts on incomes of the urban non-poor

Source: Authors computation

 Deconstruction of the multiplier effect from a unit increase in the forestry and hunting

sector

Open-loop effect (%)

Closed-loop effect (%)

37.22

32.65

17.27

22.64

62.78

67.35

82.73

77.36

The  value  of  these  predictions  in  informing  forest  policy 
could be summarized as follows: in the interests of improving 
the welfare of rural poor, rural non-poor, urban poor and 
urban non-poor households, forest policy should encourage 
growth in sectors that make use of forestry as an input in 
their  production.  The  analyses  in  section  3.4  (on  forward 
and  backward  linkages)  and  section  3.7  (on  exogenous 
demand  shocks)  will  shed  more  light  on  how  this  policy 
recommendation  could  be  operationalized.  Lastly,  table  9 
shows the percentage of the total multiplier resulting from 
the direct and indirect effects in the forestry and hunting 
sector.  The  full  total  multiplier  for  the  wood,  paper  and 
printing sector is presented in annex V.

3.3.3. 
multipliers in terms of elasticity

In  the  first  part  of  the  multiplier  analysis  the  report 
answered the question: What is the total predicted impact 
on household welfare of a unit exogenous increase in the 
demand for output from the sectors forestry and hunting, 
agriculture,  and  wood-paper  printing?  In  the  next  step 
the total impact in terms of open and closed-loop effects 
was  deconstructed  to  ascertain  which  of  the  two  effects 
was stronger. In the present analysis, the study continues 

to  suggest  the  same  exogenous  increases  from  the  same 
sectors.

In addition to the questions already addressed, the Tanzanian 
Planning  Commission  may  need  to  know  the  degree  of 
responsiveness of income of a particular household category 
to  a  percentage  increase  in  the  demand  of  a  sector    in 
other words, to answer the question: What will a targeted 
1  percentage point  change in  forestry lead  to  in  terms of 
household income? An analysis of multipliers in terms of 
elasticity provides the answer. The elasticity formula takes 
into consideration the current size of the sectors as captured 
by their incomes. As it is based on forestry output accounting, 
this may not give the full picture, in view of the size of other 
sectors such as agriculture. It is nonetheless a useful tool 
and  it  addresses  an  interesting  question.  In  economics, 
elasticity measures how responsive an economic variable is 
to a change in another variable. An elasticity value greater 
than 1 implies that household income is elastic (i.e., more 
responsive). If the elasticity lies between 0 and 1, it means 
that household income is inelastic (i.e., not responsive). The 
full results of the elasticity analysis are presented in annex V 
and summarized below, in table 10.

The summary presented in table 10 predicts that household 
incomes are most responsive to exogenous increases in the 
demand for output from the agriculture sector (it is the only 

26

Table 10. Multipliers as elasticity values

Exogenous increase in the demand of output from:

Forestry and hunting*

Agriculture*

Wood, paper and printing*

0.16

0.13

0.09

0.09

1.65

1.33

1

1

0.05

0.05

0.06

0.05

Impacts on incomes of:

Rural poor

Rural non-poor

Urban poor

Urban non-poor

Source: Authors computation

*Values have been rounded off

sector with elasticity values greater than 1 and one of the 
largest based on income size), which leads to the conclusion 
that,  although  increased  investments  in  the  forestry  and 
hunting sector have a greater relative impact on household 
welfare (rural poor, rural non-poor, urban poor and urban 
non-poor),  household  incomes  are  more  responsive  to 
investments  in  the  agriculture  sector  given  its  current 
size. Given the same income levels (output) as agriculture, 
however,  household  incomes  will  be  more  responsive  to 
investments in forestry and hunting than agriculture.

3.4 
Forward and backward 
linkages
This  section 
the  economic 
relationships  that  exist  between  the  forestry  and  hunting 
sector  and  other  productive  sectors  in  the  economy,  by 
studying forward and backward linkages. Forward linkages 

focuses  specifically  on 

Figure 6. Classification of activities, according to the size of their forward and backward linkages

Backward	  and	  Forward	  Linkages,	  Tanzania	  

2001	  

Forward	  
Oriented	  

Weak	  
Sectors	  

	  
s
e
g
a
k
n
i
L
	  
d
r
a
w
r
o
F

3.01	  

2.51	  

2.01	  

1.51	  

1.01	  

0.51	  

0.01	  

0.63	  

9	  
0.73	  

K
e
y

15	  

1	  

5	  

7	  

11	  

10	  

2	  
12	  
13	  
6	  
17	  
14	  
8	  

4	  

3	  

16	  

Backward	  
Oriented	  

0.83	  

0.93	  

1.03	  

1.13	  

Backward	  Linkages	  

1.23	  

1.33	  

1 = AAGRIC (agriculture), 2 = ALIVES (livestock and fisheries), 3 = AFOREST (forestry and hunting), 4 = AMININ (mining),  
5 = AFOOD (food processing), 6 = ACLOTH (textiles), 7 = AOTHM (other manufacturing), 8 = AWOODP (wood, paper and 
printing), 9 = AEQUIP (machinery and equipment), 10 = AUTILI (utilities), 11 = ACONST (construction), 12 = ATRADE (trade), 
13 = AHOTEL (hotels and restaurants), 14 = ATRANS (transport and communications), 15 = AESTAT (real estate), 16 = AADMIN 
(public administration) and 17 = APRIVS (private services).

 

27

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIAFigure 7. Economic landscape of the United Republic of Tanzania

	  

classifies activities according to the size of their forward and 
backward linkages.18

Figure 6 shows that certain sectors  forestry and hunting 
(sector  3),  and  wood,  paper  and  processing  (sector  8)   
exhibit backward linkages,19 implying that growth in these 
sectors  leads  to  growth  in  the  sectors  supplying  their 
inputs. This prediction could be attributed to the fact that 
the majority of inputs into forestry and hunting are at the 
household level based on labour supply, consistent with the 
growth in household incomes that we observed in section 
3.3. It follows that growth in the forestry and hunting sector 
is  in  the  interests  of  the  household  sector,  an  argument 
which  the  forestry  ministry  could  use  in  soliciting  the 
support of the household sector in forest conservation. The 
ministry could potentially use these predictions to argue for 
additional funding support for the sector in the interests of 
promoting objectives of poverty alleviation.

One  of  the  major  challenges  posed  by  the  forestry  and 
hunting  sector  is  the  poor  availability  of  data  in  terms  of 
the use of the output of this sector in downstream sectors, 

18  The number assigned to each point on the graph corresponds 

to the order in which activities appear in the input matrix 
sheet.
In a similar forestry evaluation study carried out by UNEP 
in Panama, the forestry sector was observed to exhibit strong 
forward linkages.

are said to exist when the growth of one sector leads to the 
growth of other sectors that use its output as their input. 
Consider the case of forestry: forward linkages would exist 
if the growth of forestry led to growth in the pulp and paper 
manufacturing sector, which uses the output from forestry 
as its input. To assess forward linkages, we ask the question: 
suppose we exogenously increased demand for output from 
the forestry and hunting sector by one unit. What impact 
will such an increase have on production and value added in 
downstream (or input-receiving) sectors17

Backward linkages, by contrast, are said to exist when the 
growth of one sector leads to the growth of other sectors 
that  supply  its  inputs.  Consider  the  case  of  the  maize 
industry:  an  increase  in  maize  flour  consumption  may 
support  the  growth  of  maize  milling  businesses,  which 
will lead to higher incomes for maize farmers and create a 
greater demand for goods and services in the rural areas. To 
assess backward linkages, we ask the question: Suppose we 
exogenously increase demand for output from the forestry 
and hunting sector by one unit. What impact will such an 
increase have on production and value added in upstream 
(input-supplying)  sectors?  Figure  6  displays  in  graphic 
form  the  complex  information  potentially  available  from 
the analysis of forward and backward linkages. The figure 

17  Downstream sectors are those which use output from forestry 
and hunting in their own production, thereby adding value in 
the forestry and hunting sector.

19 

28

which may explain  the observed lack of forward linkages. 
It is worth noting that the following sectors are considered 
key on account of simultaneously exhibiting strong forward 
and  backward 
linkages:  agriculture  (AAGRIC,  activity 
1),  food  processing  (AFOOD,  activity  5),  and  real  estate 
(AESTAT, activity 15). The following sectors are considered 
weak on account of simultaneously exhibiting weak forward 
and  backward  linkages:  other  manufacturing  (AOTHM, 
activity 7), equipment (AEQUIP, activity 9) and construction 
(ACONST, activity 11).

For  an  even  better  picture  of  the  economic  interlinkages, 
we  now  present  the  economic  landscape  of  the  United 
Republic  of  Tanzania  in  figure  7.  Economic  landscapes 
enable us to visualize, in a simple picture, complex relations 
in the economy, and also those between individual sectors 
and  the  economy  as  a  whole.  The  axes  of  the  economic 
landscapes  are  the  sectors  or  agents  involved  in  the 
productive  processes,  while  the  heights  are  the  values 
resulting  from  the  transactions  and  interactions,  either 
directly or indirectly. The heights could include, for example, 
values of production, value added, imports and number of 
people  employed.  In  presenting  the  economic  landscape 
of  the  United  Republic  of  Tanzania,  the  report  identifies 
sectors based on the first order change in the sum of all cells 
of  the  inverse  matrix  caused  by  changes  in  the  technical 
coefficients.20

Our  results  show  that  the  forestry  and  hunting  sector 
(AFOREST,  activity  3)  ranks  fourth  of  all  the  countrys 
industries,  based  on  the  backward  linkage  hierarchy,  and 
behind  those  of  food  processing  (AFOOD,  activity  5), 
public administration (AADMIN, activity 16) and real estate 
(AESTAT, activity 15), which supports our interpretation of 
the results based on our analysis of figure 6.

3.5
structural path analysis
It is important for policymakers to know the path through 
which the value of increased activity in a sector passes to 
households  and  other  agents  in  the  economy.  This  helps 
them see in detail how the effect of a change in a sector 
unfolds  before  getting  to  the  final  household  type.  The 
objective of this section is to apply structural path analysis 
to  the  social  accounting  matrices  framework,  to  identify 
the path through which influence of a particular sector is 
transmitted.21 In section 3.3, we highlighted the fact that a 
one-unit exogenous increase in the demand for forestry and 
hunting leads to increases of 0.5 units in the income of the 

21 

20  This is similar to the multiplier product matrix  also known 

as first order intensity field of influence.
In a framework of the social accounting matrices type, 
one production activity can influence another through the 
intermediate effects on factors and institutions (households) 
which are considered exogenous in the input-output 
framework (Defourny and Thorbecke, 1984).

rural poor; 1.9 units in the income of the rural non-poor; 0.1 
units in the income of the urban poor; and 0.7 units in the 
income of the urban non-poor.

This impact, however, has a channel through which it passes 
before  reaching  these  agents.  Structural  analysis  seeks  to 
evaluate  which  other  agents  are  affected  before  the  final 
increase  of  0.5  units  for  the  rural  poor.  That  is,  while  we 
know that a shock in the forestry sector has a final impact 
on the rural poor, we need to ascertain which other sectors 
or  accounts  were  affected  before  the  final  impact  on  the 
rural poor. Thus, we consider how an exogenous increase in 
forestry and hunting (AFOREST) affects different household 
agents.  In  other  words,  we  endeavour  to  answer  the 
question: Does the increase of 0.5 units for the rural poor 
affect only this group or does it first have an impact on the 
urban rich before trickling down to the rural poor?

Starting with the influence of forestry on the rural poor, we 
find that 54.5 per cent of the multiplier travels through the 
path connecting forestry to the rural poor directly. At the 
same  time,  5.1  per  cent  of  the  multiplier  travels  through 
the rural non-poor, onward to subsistence labour, then to 
agriculture,  before  influencing  the  rural  poor.  This  makes 
sense, given the level of communal living and dependence 
in many African countries. In the case of the rural non-poor, 
the majority (74.5 per cent) of the multiplier travels directly 
to  the  rural  non-poor,  while  a  mere  2.1  per  cent  travels 
through livestock consumption to the rural non-poor.

3.6 
sectoral growth and price 
impacts
Let us suppose that we exogenously increased the demand 
for output from each of the sectors sequentially by an equal 
amount (say, an equal increase of 1 per cent). Policymakers 
might be interested in the answer to the following question: 
What  would  be  the  impact  of  such  sequential  increases 
on  aggregate  GDP  in  absolute  terms  and  in  terms  of 
elasticity  values?  As  expected,  some  sectors  would  have 
a huge impact on GDP in absolute value while the impact 
of others would be relatively small. In addition, GDP might 
be elastic in response to the growth of some sectors and 
inelastic in response to the growth of others. Figure 8 shows 
the productivity of each sector by evaluating each sectors 
impact on aggregate GDP based on an equal level of shock 
on all the sectors.

Figure  8  gives  a  powerful  message:  increasing  the  output 
of  the  forestry  and  hunting  sector  by  1  percentage  point 
has the second highest impact on aggregate GDP, after that 
of the real estate sector. The importance of this prediction 
for macroeconomic policy planning in the United Republic 
of  Tanzania  should  be  self-evident:  the  performance  of 
aggregate GDP in that country is intimately linked with the 
well-being  of  the  forestry  and  hunting  sector.  The  model 
predicts  that  it  is  in  the  interests  of  GDP  growth  in  the 
United Republic of Tanzania that adequate investments are 

29

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIAFigure 8. Sectoral growth impact and GDP elasticity: shock of 1 per cent on aggregate GDP

	  

P
D
G

	  

	  
f
o
e
g
n
a
h
c
	  
e
g
a
t
n
e
c
r
e
P

7.00	  
6.00	  
5.00	  
4.00	  
3.00	  
2.00	  
1.00	  
0.00	  

	  

T
A
T
S
E
C

	  

T
S
E
R
O
F
C

	  

2
S
E
V
I
L
C

	  

I

N
M
D
A
C

	  

I

C
R
G
A
C

	  

D
O
O
F
C

	  
L
E
T
O
H
C

	  
I
L
I
T
U
C

	  

T
S
N
O
C
C

	  

E
D
A
R
T
C

	  

I

S
V
R
P
C

	  

H
T
O
L
C
C

	  

I

N
N
M
C

I

0.60	  

0.50	  

0.40	  

0.30	  

0.20	  

0.10	  

0.00	  

	  

P
D
O
O
W
C

	  

S
N
A
R
T
C

	  

2
M
H
T
O
C

	  

I

P
U
Q
E
C

Percentage	  change	  of	  GDP	  

GDP	  elasKcity	  

	  

y
t
i
c
)
s
a
e
P
D
G

l

	  

	  

made to sustain a healthy and vibrant forestry and hunting 
sector.  In  terms  of  elasticity,  (defined  as  the  percentage 
change in  aggregate GDP caused  by a  1 percentage point 
change  in  the  sectors  production  (i.e.,  in  its  supply),  the 
forestry and hunting sector has one of the lowest elasticity 
values. In conclusion, the model predicts that increases in 
output from the forestry and hunting sector would have a 
huge impact on the GDP of the United Republic of Tanzania. 
To reiterate, and as noted in figure 8, the following sectors 
have  a  comparatively  large  impact  on  GDP:  real  estate, 
agriculture and food processing, and they are identified as 
key sectors in figure 6.

3.7
exogenous demand 
shocks
Section  3.3  considered  the  impact  on  the  incomes  of  the 
rural poor, rural non-poor, urban poor and urban non-poor 
households of an exogenous demand shock on the forestry 
and hunting sector. This section considers the impact of a 
similar exogenous demand shock on all the other production 
sectors  in  the  economy.  Policymakers  may  wish  to  know 
by how much the GDP of other production sectors in the 
economy would increase or decrease as a result of a 10 per 

cent exogenous demand shock on the forestry and hunting 
sector. Table 11 provides the answer to this question.

Table  11  predicts  that  the  incomes  of  all  sectors  respond 
positively to an exogenous increase in the demand for output 
from  the  forestry  and  hunting  sector.  It  follows  from  this 
prediction that a vibrant and healthy forestry and hunting 
sector is in the business interests of all production sectors 
that  have  an  economic  relationship  with  the  forestry  and 
hunting sectors. Table 11 further predicts that the forestry 
input is more important to the performance of some sectors 
than to that of others. Thus, the model predicts that, as a 
result of this shock, there would be an increase in GDP in 
absolute value by at least TSh 1 billion (US$ 600,000) in the 
following sectors: agriculture, real estate, food processing, 
livestock,  trade,  textiles,  hotels  and  restaurants,  other 
manufacturing and public administration. In fact, the GDP 
of agriculture increases by a staggering TSh 11 billion (US$ 7 
million) as a result of the shock. These are sectors that must 
have a direct interest in the performance of the forestry and 
hunting sector because, if it underperforms, it will directly 
affect their bottom lines. The minister responsible for forest 
resources and their sustainable management can use this 
evidence to argue for the support of these interdependent 
sectors in sustainable forestry. The most compelling aspect 
of this prediction is that it is not based on some contentious 
economic  valuation  methodology,  but  on  actual  data 
on  intersectoral  transactions,  as  collected  in  the  social 
accounting matrices for the United Republic of Tanzania.

30

Table 13. Effects on the forestry and hunting, and wood, paper and printing sectors of a 10 per cent price shock

 GDP before price

 shock

(TSh billion)

Forestry and hunting sector

Wood, paper and printing sector

 Absolute change
 in GDP after price
shock (TSh billion)

 Percentage change
 in GDP after price

shock*

 Absolute change
 in GDP after price
shock (TSh billion)

 Percentage change
 in GDP after price

shock*

144.86

300.53

629.72

769.60

1 585.08

401.92

381.80

2 032.60

216.43

1 570.49

453.81

684.59

412.33

1 013.36

3 223.96

128.2

115.04

257.59

94.91

107.05

94.35

189.42

47.75

35.20

186.19

17.03

123.44

35.49

52.99

30.59

72.66

228.90

8.49

5.37

1.78

0.32

0.17

0.12

0.12

0.12

0.09

0.09

0.08

0.08

0.08

0.08

0.07

0.07

0.07

0.07

0.05

332.66

79.91

164.99

701.41

1 300.08

334.92

174.41

1 061.02

93.91

483.87

155.29

279.45

144.44

339.88

880.14

34.81

24.86

2.30

0.27

0.26

0.91

0.82

0.83

0.46

0.52

0.43

0.31

0.34

0.41

0.35

0.34

0.27

0.27

0.22

Activity

Wood, paper and printing
(AWOODP)
Forestry and hunting
(AFOREST)
Livestock and fisheries
(ALIVES)
Construction
(ACONST)
Public administration
(AADMIN)
Private services
(APRIVS)
Other manufacturing
(AOTHM)
Real estate
(AESTAT)
Utilities
(AUTILI)
Food processing
(AFOOD)
Hotels and restaurants
(AHOTEL)
Transport and communications
(ATRANS)
Textiles
(ACLOTH)
Trade
(ATRADE)
Agriculture
(AAGRIC)
Mining
(AMININ)
Machinery and equipment
(AEQUIP)

Source: Authors computation

*Values have been rounded off

3.8
exogenous price shocks
Suppose there is a 10 per cent exogenous price shock on 
the  sectors  of  forestry  and  hunting,  and  of  wood,  paper 
and printing. Policymakers may wish to know the impact of 
the price shocks on the welfare of households (i.e., on the 
incomes of the rural poor, rural non-poor, urban poor and 
urban non-poor households). The answer to this question 
is provided in table 12, which predicts that households fare 
better  with  an  exogenous  increase  in  the  price  of  output 
from  the  wood,  paper  and  printing  sector,  compared  to 
the forestry and hunting sector, a result consistent with the 

conclusions drawn from the comparison of the impacts of 
the direct and indirect multiplier on households.

Policymakers may further wish to know whether the GDP 
of other production sectors in the economy would increase 
or decrease as a result of the price shocks. The results of 
this analysis are summarized in table 13, which predicts that 
a price shock on the forestry and hunting sector generally 
leads to increases in income in all the sectors, and this echoes 
our earlier conclusion that increased activity in the forestry 
and hunting sector is in the business interests of most, if not 
all  sectors.  The  sectors  that would  benefit  the most from 
such  a  policy  are:  wood,  paper  and  printing;  agriculture; 
public  administration;  real  estate;  food  processing;  and 
livestock and fisheries. Since these sectors benefit the most 

31

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIAk
c
o
t
s
r
e
t
t
u
h
S
/
a
i
d
e
M
p
e
e
h
S
k
c
a
l
B


 

 

 

 
:
t
i
d
e
r
c
 
o
t
o
h
P

Image 3. A Fabric/Textile shop in Arusha

 GDP in industries such as textiles, agriculture, real estate, food processing, livestock trade, hotels/restaurants and manufacturing  would increase in absolute value,
in the simulation with a 10% increase in the forestry and hunting sectors

Table 12. Impact on households of a 10 per cent exogenous price shock (increase)

Household sector

 Income before price

shock (TSh)

Forestry and hunting sector

Wood-paper printing sector

 Absolute change in
 income after price

shock (TSh)

 Percentage change
 in income after price

shock

 Absolute change in
 income after price

shock (TSh)

 Percentage change
 in income after price

shock

Rural poor

Rural non-poor

Urban poor

Urban non-poor

250 000

600 000

300 000

900 000

Source: Authors computation

19 150

43 140

21 060

56 610

0.0766

0.0719

0.0702

0.0629

65 875

154 560

78 240

225 720

0.2623

0.2576

0.2608

0.2508

from such a policy, it is in their business interests to invest 
in reducing the rate of deforestation. Table 13 also predicts 

a greater impact with a price shock on the wood, paper and 
printing sector at the same rate.

32

Table 13. Effects on the forestry and hunting, and wood, paper and printing sectors of a 10 per cent price shock

 GDP before price

 shock

(TSh billion)

Forestry and hunting sector

Wood, paper and printing sector

 Absolute change
 in GDP after price
shock (TSh billion)

 Percentage change
 in GDP after price

shock*

 Absolute change
 in GDP after price
shock (TSh billion)

 Percentage change
 in GDP after price

shock*

144.86

300.53

629.72

769.60

1 585.08

401.92

381.80

2 032.60

216.43

1 570.49

453.81

684.59

412.33

1 013.36

3 223.96

128.2

115.04

257.59

94.91

107.05

94.35

189.42

47.75

35.20

186.19

17.03

123.44

35.49

52.99

30.59

72.66

228.90

8.49

5.37

1.78

0.32

0.17

0.12

0.12

0.12

0.09

0.09

0.08

0.08

0.08

0.08

0.07

0.07

0.07

0.07

0.05

332.66

79.91

164.99

701.41

1 300.08

334.92

174.41

1 061.02

93.91

483.87

155.29

279.45

144.44

339.88

880.14

34.81

24.86

2.30

0.27

0.26

0.91

0.82

0.83

0.46

0.52

0.43

0.31

0.34

0.41

0.35

0.34

0.27

0.27

0.22

Activity

Wood, paper and printing
(AWOODP)
Forestry and hunting
(AFOREST)
Livestock and fisheries
(ALIVES)
Construction
(ACONST)
Public administration
(AADMIN)
Private services
(APRIVS)
Other manufacturing
(AOTHM)
Real estate
(AESTAT)
Utilities
(AUTILI)
Food processing
(AFOOD)
Hotels and restaurants
(AHOTEL)
Transport and communications
(ATRANS)
Textiles
(ACLOTH)
Trade
(ATRADE)
Agriculture
(AAGRIC)
Mining
(AMININ)
Machinery and equipment
(AEQUIP)

Source: Authors computation

*Values have been rounded off

3.9
simulating data to 
capture higher household 
demand for forestry 
output
The use of forests in many developing countries is usually 
undervalued  by  the  relevant  ministries  and  managed 
sustainably  in  a  pluralist  and  intersectoral  manner  (see, 
for example, Roe and Elliot (2010); Hassan and Mungatana 
(2013), chapter 5). In the United Republic  of Tanzania  for 
example, forests are a source of income for some households 

or consumed as a supplement to other goods. For instance, 
in many communities, wood is the source of fuel for cooking 
food.  Data  on  these  activities,  however,  are  typically  not 
available at the national level. As a result, the contribution 
of  the  forestry  sector  to  the  economy  is  undervalued,  an 
issue that was briefly highlighted in section 3.4.

The  study  by  Agrawal  et  al.  (2012)  observes  that  in 
many  developing  countries  the  non-industrial  economic 
contributions  of  forests  are  typically  unrecorded  and  in 
many  cases  between  three  and  ten  times  higher  than 
the  revenues  collected  in  national  accounts.  One  way  of 
dealing  with  this  issue  and  analysing  the  situation  as  it 
would  have  appeared  if  the  data  had  been  adequately 
captured is to use a computable general equilibrium (CGE) 
model. Consequently, in this section we use a CGE analysis 
to  model  the  contribution  of  the  forestry  and  hunting 

33

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIATable 14. Percentage change in household income

Household type

Rural (below food poverty line)

Rural (between food and basic needs poverty lines)

Rural (non-poor  head with no education)

Rural (non-poor  head not finished primary school)

Rural (non-poor  head not finished secondary school)

Rural (non-poor  head finished secondary school)

Urban (below food poverty line)

Urban (between food and basic needs poverty lines)

Urban (non-poor  head with no education)

Urban (non-poor  head not finished primary school)

Urban (non-poor  head not finished secondary school)

Urban (non-poor  head finished secondary school)

Values have been rounded off*

Source: Authors computation.

Total income*

Capital income*

Labour income*

1.09

1.07

1.16

1.03

0.58

0.21

0.30

0.17

0.30

0.39

0.29

0.32

0.94

0.94

0.94

0.94

0.94

0.94

0.94

0.94

0.94

0.94

0.94

0.94

1.22

1.24

1.39

1.14

0.94

0.22

0.67

0.63

0.99

0.74

0.57

0.23

sector, by simulating an increase in the use of the forestry 
sector greater than that currently reported in the national 
accounts. We highlight below our key findings, with the full 
analysis presented in annex XII. If household consumption 
of  the  forestry  sector  is  factored  into  the  calculations,  in 
order to capture the contribution of this sector to household 
demand, the resulting figures show a 0.6 percentage point 
increase  in  GDP  at  market  prices,  a  0.8  percentage  point 
increase in the consumer price index, and a 0.6 percentage 
point increase in the GDP deflator. As expected, total income 
increased  for  all  household  types  that  experienced  the 
shock (table 14). The impact is highest, however, on non-
poor rural households with a non-educated household head 
(a 1.16 percentage point increase in total income). This is 
followed  by  households  that  are  in  the  rural  areas  below 
the  food  poverty  line.  Capital  income  increases  by  about 
the  same  rate  for  all  the  households  but  labour  income 
varies  by  household  type.  In  practical  terms,  this  exercise 
tells us that if household consumption of the forestry sector 
were to be appropriately recorded and captured, the sector 
would show a higher contribution to GDP at market prices 
and demonstrate that it contributes more to the income of 
households in the rural area and to the less educated urban 
non-poor.

Wages increase between 0.028 and 1.53 percentage points 
in all industries that are based on this scenario (table 11). 
With  increased  consumption  by  households  of  forestry 
commodities, labour becomes significantly more expensive 

in  the  meat-processing  and  dairy-products  industry  (1.53 
percentage point increase). This is as a result of the linkage 
between this sector and that of forestry and hunting. The 
wage rate in the forestry and hunting sector also becomes 
higher with an increase of 1.27 percentage points. There is 
no significant impact on the price of labour in the utilities 
and manufacturing sectors, however.

The  value  added  by  each  industry  changes  based  on 
the  demand  from  (shock  to)  the  system  due  to  growing 
consumption in the forestry and hunting sector (table 23). 
The maize-growing sector has the highest increase in value 
added, at 1.84 percentage points, followed by that of the 
manufacturing of basic and industrial chemicals. The wood, 
paper and printing industry will also experience a reduction 
in value added by about 0.39 percentage points. Thus, an 
increase  in  the  consumption  by  households  of  forestry 
and  hunting  sector  commodities  will  affect  the  cashew 
nuts and coffee industries the most, with about 1.19 and 
1.08  percentage  point  decreases  in  their  value  added. 
There will also be an increase in many agricultural prices, 
the  highest  increase  taking  place  in  cassava  (table  25). 
Little or no change was observed in the prices of utilities, 
manufacturing  and  construction.  In  summary,  an  increase 
in  the  consumption  of  the  forestry  sector  by  households 
resulted  in  increases  in  GDP,  household  income,  wage 
rate and composite commodity price. The value added of 
the majority of the industries is negative as a result of this 
demand-driven simulation.

34

Image 4. Coffee beans drying at Gibbs Farm, Tanzania

 In a simulation for this report, an increase in the consumption by households of forestry and hunting sector commodities will affect the cashew nuts and coffee
industries the most, with about 1.19 and 1.08 percentage point decreases in their value added

k
c
o
t
s
r
e
t
t
u
h
S
/
i
n
r
E


 

 
:
t
i
d
e
r
c
 
o
t
o
h
P

3.10 
cost-benefit analysis of 
deforestation based on 
the representation of 
the forestry sector in 
the national accounts of 
the united republic of 
tanzania
Table  11  shows  that  a  10  per  cent  increase  in  demand 
activity in the forestry sector induces an increase of TSh 50 
billion (2001) in forestry GDP per year. In chapter 1 it was 
reported that the United Republic  of Tanzania has a total 

area  of  48.1  million  ha  of  its  land  surface  under  forestry. 
Thus a hypothesized 10 per cent increase in the land area 
under forestry amounts to 4,810,000 ha (i.e. 52,910,000 ha 
- 48,100,000 ha = 4,810,000 ha). It follows that the TSh 50 
billion increase in GDP following the 10 per cent increase in 
activity translates to TSh 10,599 per hectare per year (2001).

  Recent estimates of deforestation show that the United 
Republic of Tanzania loses 372,816 ha of forest annually. 
For  the  purposes  of  the  following  argumentation,  we 
assume this rate of deforestation continues for the next 
20 years (20132033). The question addressed in this 
section is: how do the one-time monetary benefits that 
the  United  Republic  of  Tanzania  obtains  from  cutting 
down its forests (in terms of useful provisioning forest 
ecosystem services) compare to the monetary benefits 
lost through the loss of the value added by forestry to 
the countrys macroeconomy? Stated otherwise, based 
on  current  national  income  accounting  conventions, 
what  does  the  United  Republic  of  Tanzania  stand  to 
gain and lose from continued deforestation in the next 
20 years?

35

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA 

 

If  a  hectare  of  forest  is  left  standing,  it  contributes 
to  current  forestry  and  hunting  GDP  whose  value  is 
captured  by  the  Tanzanian  NBS.  It  may  be  seen  from 
table 2 that forestry and hunting contributed TSh 297 
billion to the countrys GDP in 2001, which translates 
to TSh 6,168 per hectare per year (2001), equivalent to 
Tsh 29,234 per hectare per year (2013).

The  intersectoral  linkages  analysis  shows  that  cutting 
down  a  hectare  of  forest  has  two  impacts.  To  begin 
with,  the  cut  hectare  will  not  contribute  to  current 
GDP,  meaning  the  TSh  6,168  per  hectare  per  year 
(2001)  mentioned  in  the  preceding  paragraph  will  be 
lost. In addition, forestry adds value in other sectors of 
the Tanzanian economy, the magnitude of which was 
estimated in table 11. It follows that the cut hectare will 
also not match the value added, estimated at TSh 10,599 
per  hectare  per  year  (2001).  In  conclusion,  cutting  a 
hectare of forest translates to a total loss of TSh 16,767 

per hectare per year (2001). This is equivalent to Tsh 
83,772 per hectare per year (2013).

 

It should be clear from this simple calculation that, at a 
given point in time (e.g. in 2001), the cost of cutting a 
hectare of forest is at least 70 per cent more than the 
benefits  (i.e.  the  net  benefits  of  deforestation  to  the 
Tanzanian economy are negative).

For  the  purposes,  however,  of  providing  information  and 
making policy choices that have an impact on the forestry 
sector, a much more pertinent question would be: what are 
the economy-wide magnitudes of the costs and benefits if 
the current rate of deforestation continues for the next 20 
years? Are the net benefits of such a small magnitude as to 
justify their being ignored by development policy? Or are 
they  of  such  a  colossal  amount  that  they  necessitate  the 
immediate attention of policymakers?

Table 15. Cost and benefit analysis of deforestation based on the representation of forestry in the Tanzanian SNA

Year

Time  Discount

factor

 Area

 deforested
annually (ha)

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2027

2028

2029

2030

2031

2032

2033

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

1.0000

0.9524

0.9070

0.8638

0.8227

0.7835

0.7462

0.7107

0.6768

0.6446

0.6139

0.5847

0.5568

0.5303

0.5051

0.4810

0.4581

0.4363

0.4155

0.3957

0.3769

Source: Authors computation

36

Undiscounted

Discounted

Benefits

(million TSh)

 Costs

(million TSh)

Net Benefits
(million TSh)

Benefits

(million TSh)

Costs

(million TSh)

Net Benefits
(million TSh)

10 898.84

31 231.43

-20 332.59

10 898.84

31 231.43

-20 332.59

10 898.84

31 231.43

-20 332.59

10 379.85

29 744.22

-19 364.37

10 898.84

31 231.43

-20 332.59

10 898.84

31 231.43

-20 332.59

10 898.84

31 231.43

-20 332.59

10 898.84

31 231.43

-20 332.59

10 898.84

31 231.43

-20 332.59

10 898.84

31 231.43

-20 332.59

10 898.84

31 231.43

-20 332.59

10 898.84

31 231.43

-20 332.59

10 898.84

31 231.43

-20 332.59

10 898.84

31 231.43

-20 332.59

10 898.84

31 231.43

-20 332.59

10 898.84

31 231.43

-20 332.59

10 898.84

31 231.43

-20 332.59

10 898.84

31 231.43

-20 332.59

10 898.84

31 231.43

-20 332.59

10 898.84

31 231.43

-20 332.59

10 898.84

31 231.43

-20 332.59

10 898.84

31 231.43

-20 332.59

10 898.84

31 231.43

-20 332.59

9 885.57

9 414.83

8 966.50

8 539.53

8 132.88

7 745.60

7 376.77

7 025.49

6 690.94

6 372.33

6 068.88

5 779.89

5 504.66

5 242.53

4 992.89

4 755.13

4 528.69

4 313.04

4 107.66

28 327.83

-18 442.26

26 978.88

-17 564.05

25 694.17

-16 727.67

24 470.64

-15 931.11

23 305.37

-15 172.49

22 195.59

-14 449.99

21 138.66

-13 761.90

20 132.06

-13 106.57

19 173.39

-12 482.45

18 260.37

-11 888.04

17 390.83

-11 321.95

16 562.69

-10 782.81

15 773.99

-10 269.34

15 022.85

14 307.48

13 626.17

12 977.30

12 359.34

11 770.80

-9 780.32

-9 314.59

-8 871.04

-8 448.61

-8 046.30

-7 663.14

To  answer  this  question,  a  cost-benefit  analysis  was 
conducted of deforestation as presented in table 15, using 
a discount rate of 5 per cent, the rate used by the Bank of 
Tanzania in analysing long-term investments (see Sanga and 
Mungatana, forthcoming).

The analysis shows that the present	value	of	benefits	to	the	
Tanzanian	 economy	 from	 deforestation	 amounts	 to	 TSh	
147	billion	(US$	92	million)	for	the	period	2013-2033. The 
present	value	of	costs	from	deforestation	to	the	Tanzanian	
economy	 amounts	 to	 TSh	 420	 billion	 (US$	 263	 million). 
The present	value	of	net	losses	from	deforestation	to	the	
Tanzania	economy	from	this	scenario	therefore	amounts	
TSh	273	billion	(US$	171	million)	for	the	period	2013-2033. 
These are potential real (as opposed to hypothetical) losses 
to be experienced by production sectors that have economic 
linkages with the forestry sector, which according to table 
11 include both public and private production units. Such 
losses will have potential implications for their net profits. 

The  question  is  whether  net  losses  of  TSh  273  billion  for 
the period 2013-2033 are of a magnitude that warrants the 
attention of these production units. Stated otherwise, are 
the potential net losses of TSh 273 billion colossal enough 
to spur the private and public sector into action to protect 
forests in the United Republic of Tanzania? Another way to 
ask  this  question  would  be:  suppose  the  United  Republic 
of Tanzania had TSh 273 billion (US$ 171 million) today for 
investment.  What  would  be  the  economic  impact  of  this 
investment for the next 20 years? It should be noted that the 
potential net losses of TSh 273 billion are likely to represent 
a  lower  limit,  considering  that,  with  population  growth 
among  other  drivers,  the  rate  of  deforestation  is  likely  to 
increase  (and  not  remain  constant  as  we  have  assumed 
here).  These  calculations  are  based  on  statistics  that  are 
currently captured in social accounting matrix and do not 
include  the  non-marketed  values  of  forest  ecosystems. 
These values will be discussed in the next chapter.

3.11
impact of deforestation 
on projected net revenues 
for the tanzania Forest 
services agency
In this section we ask: what is the impact of the current rate 
of deforestation on the projected revenues of the TFS? In 
section 3.10, we used our constructed model to answer this 
question  from  an  economy-wide  perspective.  Considering 
the available revenue and expenditure projections, however, 
we deemed it advisable to extend the analysis to the TFS.

 

If a hectare of forest is left standing, it contributes to 
the TFS current and future revenues. According to its 
business plan, the TFS was estimated to have collected 
TSh  68,173,076,760  in  2013  and  2014  from  various 
receipts,  licenses  and  other  miscellaneous  payments 
such as forestry royalties and fees.

 

 

 

 

Chapter 1 of this report states that forests in the United 
Republic of Tanzania cover a total area of 48,100,000 
ha. For the purposes of making the case, it is assumed 
these hectares are managed by the TFS. It follows that 
the  estimated  total  revenue  of  TSh  68,173,076,760 
translates to TSh 1,417 per hectare per year (2013).

If  a  hectare  of  forest  is  cut  (e.g.  through  unlicensed 
deforestation), it will not contribute at least TSh 1,417 
per year to TFS revenues22 which allows us to conclude 
that  unlicensed  deforestation  costs  the  TFS  at  least 
TSh  1,417  per  hectare  per  year  (2013)  in  terms  of 
uncollected revenues.

The TFS business plan estimates a total budget of TSh 
48,388,792,482  for  the  2013  and  2014  financial  year. 
Following the methodology developed above, we can 
infer that TFS spends at least TSh 1,006 per ha per year 
(2013) to manage a hectare of forest.

If  a  hectare  of  forest  is  cut  (e.g.  through  unlicensed 
deforestation), it saves the TFS at least TSh 1,006 per 
year in terms of expenditure not made, which allows us 
to conclude that the benefits to the TFS of unlicensed 
deforestation amount to at least TSh 1,006 per hectare 
per year (2013) in terms of saved expenditure.

The  following  assumptions  were  additionally  made  to 
analyse  the  impact  of  deforestation  on  the  TFS  revenue 
stream:

 

 

The current rate of deforestation (372,816 hectares per 
year) will continue for the next 20 years.

The  TFS  projected  revenues  and  expenditures  will 
remain constant at the 2013 and 2014 level for the next 
20 years.

The results reported in table 16 assume a discount rate of 
5 per cent.

The analysis shows that the present value of benefits to TFS 
from deforestation amounts to TSh 5 billion (US$ 3 million). 
The  present  value  of  costs  from  deforestation  to  TFS 
amounts to TSh 7 billion (US$ 4 million). The present value of 
net losses from deforestation to TFS from this scenario thus 
amount to TSh 2 billion (US$ 1 million). Several conclusions 
can be drawn from table 16.

  At  the  given  assumptions,  deforestation  reduces 
the  revenues  of  TFS  by  at  least  TSh  355,591,007  per 
annum.  Given  the  above  projected  TFS  revenues 
and  expenditures,  this  amounts  to  a  revenue  loss  of  
0.5 per cent per annum.

 

The question however is whether the annual revenue 
losses  of  at  least  TSh  355,591,007  per  annum  are 

22  We are using at least Tshs. 1,417.32 advisedly because the 

value of a hectare of forest goes beyond the monetary returns 
captured by the TFS (see chapter 4 of this report).

37

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIATable 16. Impact of deforestation on the projected revenues of the TFS

Time  Discount
factor

 Area

 deforested
annually (ha)

Undiscounted

Discounted

Benefits

(million TSh)

Costs

(million TSh)

Net Benefits
(million TSh)

Benefits

(million TSh)

Costs

(million TSh)

Net Benefits
(million TSh)

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

1.0000

0.9524

0.9070

0.8638

0.8227

0.7835

0.7462

0.7107

0.6768

0.6446

0.6139

0.5847

0.5568

0.5303

0.5051

0.4810

0.4581

0.4363

0.4155

0.3957

0.3769

372,816

372,816

372,816

372,816

372,816

372,816

372,816

372,816

372,816

372,816

372,816

372,816

372,816

372,816

372,816

372,816

372,816

372,816

372,816

372,816

372,816

375.05

375.05

375.05

375.05

375.05

375.05

375.05

375.05

375.05

375.05

375.05

375.05

375.05

375.05

375.05

375.05

375.05

375.05

375.05

375.05

375.05

528.28

528.28

528.28

528.28

528.28

528.28

528.28

528.28

528.28

528.28

528.28

528.28

528.28

528.28

528.28

528.28

528.28

528.28

528.28

528.28

528.28

-153.23

-153.23

-153.23

-153.23

-153.23

-153.23

-153.23

-153.23

-153.23

-153.23

-153.23

-153.23

-153.23

-153.23

-153.23

-153.23

-153.23

-153.23

-153.23

-153.23

-153.23

375.05

357.19

340.18

323.98

308.56

293.86

279.87

266.54

253.85

241.76

230.25

219.29

208.84

198.90

189.43

180.41

171.82

163.63

155.84

148.42

141.35

528.28

503.12

479.17

456.35

434.62

413.92

394.21

375.44

357.56

340.53

324.32

308.87

294.17

280.16

266.82

254.11

242.01

230.49

219.51

209.06

199.10

-153.23

-145.93

-138.98

-132.36

-126.06

-120.06

-114.34

-108.90

-103.71

-98.77

-94.07

-89.59

-85.32

-81.26

-77.39

-73.70

-70.20

-66.85

-63.67

-60.64

-57.75

Year

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2027

2028

2029

2030

2031

2032

2033

Source: Authors computation

significant  enough  to  compel  the  TFS  to  take  action 
against  deforestation  in  its  private  business  interest. 
To answer this question, we refer to the summary of 
budget  estimates  for  plantations  provided  in  the  TFS 
2013  and  2014  business  plan  according  to  which  it 
costs TSh 223 million per annum to manage the West 
Kilimanjaro  plantation,  TSh  83  million  per  annum  to 
manage the Rubya plantation, TSh 22 million per annum 
to manage the Kiwira plantation, and TSh 137 million 

per  annum  to  manage  the  Kawatire  plantation.  The 
revenue TFS loses at the current rate of deforestation 
is  large  enough  to  fund  the  annual  activities  of  the 
West  Kilimanjaro  plantation.  Alternatively,  it  is  large 
enough  to  annually  fund  the  combined  activities  of 
Rubya, Kiwira and Kawatire plantations. The TFS is best 
positioned to advise on whether these losses are small 
enough to ignore taking action against the current rate 
of deforestation.

38

o4Value of the 

catchment forests of 
the united republic 
of tanzania

4.1
introduction

Key	messages	for	policy	analysts

Based on quantitative and qualitative research methods, chapter 4 reveals the following:

 

 

Every  hectare  of  catchment  forest  left  standing  and  managed  under  a  sustainable  regime  has  the  potential 
to contribute to the provision of timber forest products (table 17), non-timber forest products (table 18) and 
intermediate services (table 19) ad infinitum.

The total area of catchment forest reserves covered in the survey informing the 2003 MNRT study was 677,203 ha; 
accordingly, the benefits of managing these reserves in a sustainable manner amounts to approximately TSh 1.1 
million per ha per annum (2013).

  Based on consideration of the non-market benefits provided by CFRs, it is economically efficient for Tanzania to 

conserve its CFRs, as shown by the cost-benefit analysis in table 20.

 

There are huge potential returns from investing in sustainable forestry management at the national and global 
levels. The challenge for forest policy is to make this potential operational  converting the intangible benefits 
into tangible benefits  and to make the business case for sustainable forestry management in a more emphatic 
manner. The evidence for sustainable forestry management based on non-market values only serves to strengthen 
an already compelling case.

The increased efficiencies created by sustainable forest management for the forestry and hunting sector result in 
increased synergies for REDD+ and a green economy.

Section  3.10  shows  that  it  is  economically  efficient  for 
the  United  Republic  of  Tanzania  to  invest  in  conserving 
its  forests.  This  conclusion  was  arrived  at  in  its  entirety 
by analysing the contribution of the forestry and hunting 
sector  to  the  countrys  macroeconomy,  as  captured  in 
the current system of national accounts; the system that 
governments  the  world  over  use  for  macroeconomic 

policymaking.  Chapter  3  thus  demonstrates  that  the 
case for forest conservation  built  on  market arguments is 
compelling.  It  is  generally  known,  however,  that  forests 
provide many additional market and non-market benefits. 
The present chapter uses analysis based on the catchment 
forests of the United Republic of Tanzania to demonstrate 
that the case for forest conservation in this country can be 

39

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIAImage 5. People collecting water

R
O
F
I
C


 

 
:
t
i
d
e
r
c
 
o
t
o
h
P

Catchment forest reserves provide water for domestic and livestock consumption

made even stronger by taking into consideration the non-
market benefits that they provide.

There are a number of reasons that informed the authors 
decision  to  use  the  catchment  forests  of  the  United 
Republic  of  Tanzania  for  assessing  non-market  values. 
All  the  valuation  work  presented  in  the  present  report  is 
based  on  analysing  existing  information  (as  was  the  case 
in  chapter  3).  Much  more  compelling,  however,  was  the 
research teams realization that the Tanzanian Government, 
through its Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism, had 
commissioned a study in 2002 entitled Resource economic 
analysis of catchment forest reserves in Tanzania, whose 
primary  objective  was  to  generate  useful  information 
(facts, data and trends) about the total economic value and 
the role of catchment forests in the national economy. The 
study  the 2003 MNRT study described in section 2.3 above 
 is best suited for the purpose of market and non-market 
valuation, particularly because the primary data upon which 
it  was  based  was  collected  in  2002.  Given  that  the  cost-
benefit analysis in section 3.10 was based on a 2001 social 
accounting matrix, the dataset used in section 3.10 and that 
used for the 2003 MNRT study should be fully comparable 
unless there is evidence of structural change between 2001 
and 2002. To the best of the authors knowledge, no such 
evidence exists.

According to the 2003 MNRT study, catchment forest reserves 
make up 13 per cent of the total forest area in the United 
Republic  of  Tanzania  and  are  managed  under  the  central 
government.  The  2003  MNRT  study  focused  on  the  four 
regions where such reserves are found: Morogoro, Tanga, 
Kilimanjaro  and  Arusha.  It  estimates  that  the  catchment 
forest reserves provided monetary value in annual benefits 
through three groups of ecosystem services: timber forest 
products, non-timber forest products, and the intermediate 
inputs  that  the  reserves  provide  to  other  sectors  of  the 
economy. Timber forest products were defined to include 
the  harvest  of  timber,  poles,  firewood  and  withies23  from 
catchment forest reserves. Non-timber forest products were 
defined to include the harvest of wild fruits, wild vegetables, 
mushrooms, honey, traditional medicine, bushmeat, ropes, 
fodder  and  stimulants  from  the  reserves.  Intermediate 
inputs were defined to include the role of catchment forest 
reserves  in  providing  water  for  domestic  and  livestock 
consumption,  in  carbon  sequestration,  in  underpinning 
biodiversity  and  option  values,  and  in  generating  non-
use values, such as those of religious, cultural or symbolic 

23  Withies are strong flexible twigs that are used for making 

ropes and in some places for thatching

40

significance*.  Intermediate  inputs  were  also  defined  to 
include the role provided by catchment forest reserves in 
supporting production in the sectors of irrigation, electricity, 
fisheries and tourism. In this section, we will briefly outline 
the data and methods that were used to compile the 2003 
MNRT study and present the key results that we need from 
the study to conduct a cost-benefit analysis of deforestation 
based on the non-market benefits provided by catchment 
forest reserves.

4.2 
data and methods
The valuation reported in the 2003 MNRT study was based 
on primary and secondary data. Primary data were collected 
from  160  households  in  villages  surrounding  catchment 
forest  reserves,  using  interviews  with  key  stakeholders 
and  with  experts  (such  as  park  managers,  district  forest 
personnel  and  community  project  managers).  Checklists 
with detailed quantitative questions were used to interview 
the following key stakeholders: village elders and managers 

of  forest  reserves,  water  providers,  electricity  companies, 
national parks and agriculture. The household questionnaire 
was used to estimate the use of goods and services from 
catchment forest reserves which provide direct benefits to 
households: both the quantities collected and prices. These 
data were augmented by secondary information collected 
from the literature. The study made a host of assumptions in 
deriving total values, including those required to extrapolate 
values from the sample to the population, and to estimate 
average household sizes, proportions of goods or services 
households obtained from catchment forest reserves, and 
the quantity of intermediate services that would disappear 
per  year  if  the  reserves  were  destroyed,  and  so  on.  All 
assumptions used in the valuation are detailed in the 2003 
MNRT study.

4.3 
results
The  total  area  under  catchment  forest  reserves  covered 
in  the  survey  for  the  2003  MNRT  study  amounted  to 

Table 17. Values for timber forest products (provisioning services) taken from catchment forest reserves (2002 TSh per annum)

Product

Timber

Poles

Firewood

Withies

Morogoro

9 397 906

615 845 665

Kilimanjaro

225 200 000

924 944 241

3 256 836 254

2 270 944 553

89 349 442

55 334 906

Tanga

641100 000

9 764 466

991 054 008

69 179 765

Total
Source: Authors computation

Arusha

25 857 706

Total

901 555 612

2 427 376 500

3 977 930 872

2 758 230 419

9 277 065 234

337 830 750

551 694 863

14 708 246 581

Table 18. Values for non-timber forest products, provisioning services, taken from catchment forest reserves (2002 TSh per annum)

Product

Wild fruits

Wild vegetables

Mushrooms

Bushmeat

Ropes

Honey

Fodder

Morogoro

477 414 458

939 393 280

21 483 650

98 466 732

33 472 568

Kilimanjaro

Tanga

6 741 864

Arusha

45 756 573

785 637 914

145 511 898

3 064 712

13 980 940

171 885 422

43 920 434

9 731 750

Total

529 912 895

1 870 543 092

21 483 650

115 512 384

43 204 318

215 805 856

18 394 268 216

3 618 133 680

3 302 433 216

25 314 835 112

Traditional medicines

1 618 159

76 515 655

Stimulants

Total
Source: Authors computation

*  

(through community governance by elders 
which is known as Mpanga cha Kijiji)

96 633 384

292 147 440

129 334 179

304 101 377

292 147 440

28 707 546 124

41

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIAFigure 9. Overview value of ecosystem services in 4 areas in Tanzania (TSh/year)

Overview value of ecosystem services in 4 areas in Tanzania (TSh/year)

National Totals
irrigation  
Electricity 
Fisheries 
Carbon    sequestration 
Biodiversity   and   
option   values 
Non-use   values 

92,900,000
56,538,551,335
289,500,000
50,872,507,000

4,035,262,000
1,834,210,000

Kilimanjaro

Arusha

Tanga

TANZANIA

Morogoro

Other   forest   ecosystem   services
12   Billion

10  Billion

8  Billion

6   Billion

4  Billion

2   Billion

0

Morogoro

Kilimanjaro

Tanga

Arusha

Non-timber   forest    products
30   Billion

25  Billion

20   Billion

15   Billion

10  Billion

5   Billion

0
Morogoro

Kilimanjaro

Tanga Arusha

Timber    forest    products
3,5  Billion

3   Billion

2,5  Billion

2    Billion

1,5  Billion

1   Billion

0.5  Billion

0

Morogoro

Kilimanjaro

Tanga

Arusha

Timber
POLES

FIREWOOD
Withis

Soil     erosion
Tourism

Water  provisioning     for 
domestic    use   and    livestock 

Fruits, vegetables, 
mushrooms, etc

An overview of the value of forest ecosystem services in the CFRs in the United Republic of Tanzania as highlighted in figure above. It is based on household questionnaires, 
literature research, interviews with experts, and also on market prices for timber, electricity generated for each plant and information about other products and services (based 
on MNRT, 2003).

42

Table 19. Values for intermediate services (all ecosystem service excluding timber and non-timber forest products) provided 
by catchment forest reserves (2002 TSh per annum)

Service

Morogoro

Kilimanjaro

Tanga

Arusha

Total

Providing water for
domestic use and livestock

139 764 000

434 688 000

290 250 000

1 310 000 000

2 174 702 000

Irrigation

Electricity

Fisheries

Soil erosion

Tourism

Carbon sequestration

Biodiversity and option values

Non-use values

Total

498 168 000

535 951 763

590 969 250

245 038 500

1 870 127 513

92 900 000

56 538 551 335

289 500 000

100 000

25 326 000

1 162 407 000

1 187 833 000

50 872 507 000

4 035 262 000

1 834 210 000

118 895 592 848

677,203  ha,  distributed  as  follows:  Morogoro    385,352 
ha,  Kilimanjaro    115,203  ha,  Tanga    84,005  and  Arusha 
  92,643.  Tables  1719  provide  a  summary  of  the  annual 
values estimated for the three groups of goods and services.

 

4.4 
Cost benefit analysis of 
deforestation based on 
the non-market benefits 
provided by catchment 
forest reserves
As shown in section 3.10, the United Republic of Tanzania 
loses 372,816 ha of forest annually through deforestation. 
In the following arguments, it is assumed that this rate of 
deforestation  will  continue  for  the  next  20  years  (2013
2033). The question addressed in this section is: what are 
the economy-wide benefits and costs of deforestation to the 
United Republic of Tanzania based on analysing the benefits 
provided by CFRs that are not captured within the current 
SNA? To answer this question, we proceed as follows:

 

If  a  hectare  of  catchment  forest  is  left  standing  and 
managed  under  a  sustainable  regime,  it  has  the 
potential to provide timber forest products (table 17), 
non-timber forest products (table 18) and intermediate 
services  (table  19)  ad  infinitum.  For  arguments  sake, 
we assume the annual values reported in tables 1719, 
whose sum of TSh 162 billion (2002) represent annual 
sustainable values. The total area of CFRs is 677,202 ha 
(MNRT 2003). This leads us to conclude that the benefits 

of managing CFRs on a sustainable basis amount to TSh 
239,679 per ha per annum (2002), which translates	to	
TSh	1,135,909	per	ha	per	annum	(2013).

The  decision  to  cut  down  a  hectare  of  catchment 
forest has costs and benefits. Benefits are defined by 
the value of timber forest products that would accrue 
to  the  economy  at  the  date  of  cutting  the  forest  (t  = 
0).  Table  17  shows  that  this  value  would  amount  to 
TSh  14.71  billion,  which  translates  to  TSh  21,719  per 
ha  (2002)  or	 TSh	 102,933	 per	 ha	 per	 annum	 (2013). 
This is a one-off benefit enjoyed at t = 0. The cost of 
this decision is computed as follows. At t = 0 when the 
forest is cut, society will lose the value of non-timber 
forest products (table 17) and the value of intermediate 
services (table 19), which amounts to TSh 217,960 per 
ha (2002) or TSh	1,032,976	per	ha	per	annum	(2013). 
Beginning with t = 1, the cost will amount to the value 
of lost timber forest products (table 17), the value of 
lost non-timber forest products (table 18) and the value 
of  lost  intermediate  services  (table  19)  ad  infinitum, 
which translates to TSh 239,679 per ha (2002) or	TSh	
1,135,909	per	ha	per	annum	(2013).

Following the assumptions and procedures of section 3.10, 
table  20  presents  the  costs  and  benefits  analysis  of  the 
decision to deforest.

The analysis shows that the present value of the	benefits	
from	 deforestation	 to	 the	 macroeconomy	 amount	 to	
approximately	 TSh	 38	 billion	 (about	 US$	 24	 million)	 for	
the	period	2013-2033. The present value of the costs	from	
deforestation	to	the	macroeconomy	amounts	to	TSh	5,627	
billion	 (about	 US$	 3.5	 billion)	 for	 the	 period	 2013-2033. 
The present value of the net	losses	from	deforestation	from	
this	scenario	therefore	amounts	TShs	5,588	billion	(about	
US$	3.5	billion)	for	the	period	2013-2033. The results from 
this analysis are also clear: based	on	consideration	of	the	

43

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIATable 20. Cost and benefit analysis of deforestation based on the non-market benefits provided by CFRs

Time  Discount
factor

 Area

 deforested
annually (ha)

0

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

18

19

20

1.0000

0.9524

0.9070

0.8638

0.8227

0.7835

0.7462

0.7107

0.6768

0.6446

0.6139

0.5847

0.5568

0.5303

0.5051

0.4810

0.4581

0.4363

0.4155

0.3957

0.3769

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

372 816

Year

2013

2014

2015

2016

2017

2018

2019

2020

2021

2022

2023

2024

2025

2026

2027

2028

2029

2030

2031

2032

2033

Undiscounted

Discounted

Benefits

(million TSh)

Costs

(million TSh)

Net Benefits
(million TSh)

Benefits

(million TSh)

Costs

(million TSh)

Net Benefits
(million TSh)

38 375.15

349 145.41

-310 770.27

38 375.15

349 145.41

-310 770.27

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

423 485.10

-423 485.10

423 485.10

-423 485.10

423 485.10

-423 485.10

423 485.10

-423 485.10

423 485.10

-423 485.10

 423 485.10

- 423 485.10

423 485.10

-423 485.10

423 485.10

-423 485.10

423 485.10

-423 485.10

423 485.10

-423 485.10

423 485.10

-423 485.10

423 485.10

-423 485.10

423 485.10

-423 485.10

423 485.10

-423 485.10

423 485.10

-423 485.10

423 485.10

-423 485.10

423 485.10

-423 485.10

423 485.10

-423 485.10

423 485.10

-423 485.10

423 485.10

-423 485.10

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

403 319.14

-403 319.14

384 113.47

-384 113.47

365 822.35

-365 822.35

348 402.24

-348 402.24

331 811.66

-331 811.66

316 011.10

-316 011.10

300 962.96

-300 962.96

286 631.39

-286 631.39

272 982.27

-272 982.27

259 983.12

-259 983.12

247 602.97

-247 602.97

235 812.35

-235 812.35

224 583.19

-224 583.19

213 888.95

-213 888.95

203 703.57

-203 703.57

194 003.40

-194 003.40

184 765.15

-184 765.15

175 966.81

-175 966.81

167 587.43

-167 587.43

159 607.08

-159 607.08

Source: Authors computation

non-market	benefits	provided	by	CFRs,	it	is	economically	
efficient	for	the	United	Republic	of	Tanzania	to	conserve	
its	CFRs.

There  are  a  number  of  caveats  that  accompany  the 
interpretation  of  the  net  losses  of  TShs	 5,588	 billion	 for 
the  period  2013-2033.  To  begin  with,  as  opposed  to  the 
cost and benefit analysis of section 3.10, where costs and 
benefits were computed based on real or actual or tangible 
transactions  captured  by  the  Tanzanian  social  accounting 
matrix,  the  analysis  in  this  section  is  not  reflected  in  the 
SNA.  The  costs  and  benefits  considered  in  this  section 
are  not  tangible;  they  were  computed  after  making 
assumptions  about  the  behaviour  of  private  enterprises 
and  individuals  using  the  goods  and  services  supplied  by 
CRS  in  consumption  and  production,  and  after  applying 
specialized  economic  valuation  techniques.  We  can  only 
argue that given the model assumptions and if one accepts 
the economic approach to non-market valuation, then the 
net  losses  from  deforestation  amounts  to  approximately 
TShs	5,588	billion	for the period 2013-2033.

44

4.5 
Key insights provided 
by the valuation of forest 
ecosystem services in 
the united republic of 
tanzania
The  following  conclusions  can  be  drawn  based  on  the 
analysis set out in this report:

 

Investing in sustainable forestry in the United Republic 
of Tanzania has important positive implications for rural 
poverty alleviation.

 

 

The  costs  and  benefits  analysis  based  on  the 
representation of forestry in the SNA (table 15) makes 
the case for sustainable forestry in the United Republic 
of Tanzania. If it is indeed true that the countrys market 
economy stands to lose at least TSh 420 billion in the 
next 20 years at the current rates of deforestation under 
the business-as-usual scenario, then there necessarily 
exists evidence for investing in forest conservation. The 
Tanzanian	 minister	 responsible	 for	 forest	 resources	
can	use	this	quantitative	evidence	to	argue	for	more	
budgetary	support	to	forestry	from	public	and	private	
sources.

The  cost  and  benefit  analysis  based  on  the  benefits 
supplied by CFRs which are mostly non-market (table 
20)  makes  the  case  for  sustainable  forestry  in  the 
United  Republic  of  Tanzania  even  more  robust.  This 
report  acknowledges 
in  chapter  1,  however,  the 
weaknesses of the non-market valuation argument for 
sustainable  forestry,  including  some  disciplines  which 
are  averse  to  the  monetary  valuation  of  non-market 
benefits, and the fact that non-market monetary values 
are not recognized by the SNA (and do not count for 

measures  of  economic  performance).  In  responding 
to the first weakness, we find it very unlikely that the 
social desirability for sustainable forestry would change 
because  of  a  preference  for  an  alternative  metric  for 
the valuation of non-market forest goods and services 
(e.g.  religion,  culture,  aesthetics,  etc.).  Our  response 
to  the  second  weakness  is  that  non-market  values 
make the case for sustainable forestry stronger. There 
exists  compelling  evidence  to  build  a  necessary  case 
for sustainable forestry based on the market benefits 
argument. The evidence for sustainable forestry based 
on  non-market  values  only  serves  to  strengthen  an 
already compelling case.	In	our	view,	what	has	been	
missing	is	an	effort	to	package	and	present	the	case	for	
sustainable	forestry	based	on	intersectoral	linkages	in	
a	 way	 that	 decision-makers	 (especially	 from	 outside	
economics)	would	find	useful	for	policy	analysis.

Tables 1720- suggest that huge potential may be reaped 
from  investing  in  sustainable  forestry  at  the  national  and 
global levels. The challenge for forest policy is to make this 
potential  operational  (converting  the  intangible  benefits 
into tangible benefits), an issue addressed in chapter 5.

45

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIAo5towards a 

sustainable 
forestry 
management 
in the united 
republic of 
tanzania

As shown in chapter 3, the forestry and hunting sector 
has emerged as that with the greatest predicted impact 
on  increasing  the  levels  of  household  incomes  (rural 
poor  and  non-poor,  and  urban  poor  and  non-poor). 
Investing  in  and  expanding  this  sector  could  be  an 
important component of a poverty alleviation strategy. 
It was further predicted that the GDP of all production 
sectors  responded  positively  to 
increased  activity 
in  the  forestry  and  hunting  sector,  leading  to  the 
conclusion that keeping this sector healthy and vibrant 
is  in  the  business  interests  of  all  production  sectors 
sharing  an  economic  relationship  with  it,  including 
those  of  agriculture,  real  estate,  food  processing, 
livestock, trade, textiles, hotels and restaurants, other 
manufacturing sectors and public administration.

It was further shown that the levels of monetary losses 
attributed to the current rate of deforestation are large 
enough to compel the Tanzania Forest Services to take 
action to avert deforestation, not only in the interests 
of  business  but  also  in  view  of  the  socioeconomic 
role  that  this  sector  plays  in  the  countrys  economy. 
For  example,  it  was  shown  that  the  revenue  lost  to 
the  Tanzania  Forest  Services  through  deforestation 
would be sufficient for it to fund the annual budget of 
the West Kilimanjaro plantation, or equivalent to the 
combined annual budgets of the plantations of Rubya, 
Kiwira and Kawatire.

Figure 10. Sustainable forestry management in the United Republic of Tanzania

46

Lastly, chapter 4 showed that, beyond providing local and 
national  benefits,  the  Tanzanian  forests  provide  global 
benefits.  It  is  against  the  backdrop  described  in  that 
chapter that a second stakeholder workshop was organized 
to  identify:  first,  policy  options  for  sustainable  forest 
management  in  the  United  Republic  of  Tanzania;  second, 
potential  roles  of  the  household  sector  in  supporting 
sustainable  forestry  in  the  United  Republic  of  Tanzania; 
third,  potential  roles  of  the  private  sector  in  supporting 
sustainable  forestry  in  the  United  Republic  of  Tanzania; 
and, fourth, the potential role of REDD+ investments in the 
transition  to  a  green  economy  in  the  United  Republic  of 
Tanzania.

5.1 
policy options for 
sustainable forest 
management in the 
united republic of 
tanzania
The  workshop  observed  that  a  critical  constraint  on 
sustainable  forest  management  was  the  lack  of  effective 
implementation  and  enforcement  of  existing  forest  policy 
and laws, a situation that must be addressed forthwith. It 
was  earlier  observed  that  the  agricultural  expansion  and 
demand  for  rural  energy  fuelled  by  population  growth 

Image 6. Raking over coals

in 

the 

interests  of  sustainable 

are  major  proximate  driving  forces  behind  deforestation. 
Accordingly, 
forest 
management  there  is  a  need  to  integrate  forestry  with 
agricultural development, within multiple land-use models, 
and  to  provide  affordable  alternatives  to  firewood  and 
charcoal  as  sources  of  household  energy,  in  particular  in 
the  rural  areas.  Other  aspects  considered  important  in  a 
strategy for sustainable forest management include:

 

 

 

 

 

Investment  in  an  effective  forest  extension  education 
programme,  which  should 
ideally  be  targeted  at 
informing  household  and  production  sectors  of  the 
important roles that forestry plays in social welfare and 
in supporting economy-wide income generation;

Investment  in  providing  improved  and  alternative 
sources of livelihood for communities that depend on 
forest resources, for a greater share of their sustenance;

Investment in the establishment of plantations to meet 
current  and  future  demand  for  forest  products,  in 
particular fuelwood and timber construction materials;

Involvement of local communities in forest management 
and conservation;

Collaboration  between  the  forestry  department  and 
other production sectors in the economy to expand the 
current acreage of forests;

  Development of a strong policy on the legal protection 
of forests, in combination with the proper demarcation 
of  forest  boundaries  to  prevent  encroachment  into 
existing forest areas;

R
O
F
I
C


 

 
:
t
i
d
e
r
C
o
t
o
h
P

 

Need to provide affordable alternatives to charcoal as sources of household energy

47

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA  Regulation  and  control  of  trade  in  forest  products  to 

ensure that such trade is sustainable;

Services  by  encouraging  their  participation  in  the 
implementation of forest policy;

  Appropriate  sharing  between  different  stakeholders 
of  the  benefits  and  proceeds  of  sustainable  forest 
management;

  Assisting  households  to 

identify  alternative  and 
diversified income generating activities to divert them 
from the extraction of forest resources;

  Assisting households to use improved and alternative 
domestic  energy  sources  to  reduce  the  impact  of 
fuelwood extraction and charcoal burning.

5.3
potential roles of 
the private sector in 
supporting sustainable 
forestry in the united 
republic of tanzania
  Given  the  demonstrated  importance  of  the  forestry 
and  hunting  sector  to  supporting  economy-wide 
production,  the  following  strategies  were  suggested 
to  motivate  increased  private  sector  involvement  in 
sustainable forestry:

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

Providing necessary facilities and incentives to support 
the  establishment  of  plantations,  afforestation,  and 
tree-planting  programmes  at  household  and  national 
levels;

Supporting  investments  in  campaigns  to  raise  public 
awareness of the values of forests and what households 
and production sectors stand to lose if forests disappear;

Supporting  advocacy  and 
lobbying  toward  policy 
formulation  and  the  implementation  of  the  national 
forest policy;

Supporting capacity-building at a local level by investing 
in research, education and training;

Investing in improved energy technology;

Investing 
in  empowering  rural  communities  on 
alternative  livelihoods  to  those  which  are  forest-
dependent;

Investing in efficient wood-processing technology and 
machinery  to  reduce  wastage  in  the  processing  of 
forest products.

 

Provision  of  adequate  funding  in  the  annual  national 
budget for forest management, taking into consideration 
the  need  for  strengthened  and  integrated  land-use 
planning;

  Recruitment of adequate personnel as forest guards to 

patrol and to safeguard best practices;

  Awareness-raising to forge a strong linkage between the 
private and public sectors to ensure a robust approach 
to sustainable forest management and protection;

 

Sharing  of  experience  and  knowledge  from  different 
countries, 
science-policy 
workshops;

example 

for 

though 

  Development  of  a  framework  for  understanding  the 
consequences of land-use decisions for biodiversity and 
ecosystem services related to hunting and forestry;

 

Improvement  of  data  quality  through  continuous 
monitoring, a requisite for REDD+ readiness.

5.2 
potential roles of the 
household sector in 
supporting sustainable 
forestry in the united 
republic of tanzania
importance  of  the  forestry 
Given  the  demonstrated 
and  hunting  sector  to  household  welfare,  the  following 
strategies were suggested to motivate increased household 
involvement in sustainable forestry:

Providing  incentives  for  households  to  plant  trees, 
especially on farms and in villages, through the adoption 
of  conservation  agriculture  and  other  agroforestry 
practices;

Involving households in the protection and management 
of  forests  under  the  control  of  the  Tanzania  Forest 

 

 

48

5.4
potential roles of redd+ 
investments in a green 
economy transformation 
in the united republic of 
tanzania
The  REDD+  scheme  was  designed  to  provide  countries 
with  incentives  to  reduce  emissions  from  deforestation 
and  forest  degradation  and  encourage  them  to  adopt  a 
sustainable forest management approach-and by so doing 
enhance  their  stocks  of  forest  carbon.  This  report  has 
already  shown  that,  even  without  REDD+  results-based 
payments or finance, it makes economic and financial sense 
for the United Republic of Tanzania to expand the current 
forest estate in the interests of maximising national welfare. 
In recognition of the global values of the countrys forests, 

however,  international  resources  such  as  REDD+  could 
augment forest management and conservation at a national 
level through:

 

 

 

 

 

 

Providing  financial  support  through  results-based 
payments or finance;

Providing technical assistance and training;

Supporting 
in-country  efforts  designed  to  create 
awareness  of  international  agreements  and  treaties 
that encourage sustainable forestry management;

Supporting  in-country  advocacy  efforts  and  efforts 
designed to motivate better forest policy formulation;

Support  the  dissemination  of  research  findings  from 
the United Republic of Tanzania that demonstrate the 
global values of Tanzanian forests;

Convincing  developed  countries  to  support  efforts 
towards sustainable forest management in developing 
countries like the United Republic of Tanzania;

Image 7. Market place in East Africa

k
c
o
t
s
r
e
t
t
u
h
S
/
c
i
v
o
r
o
d
o
T
 
r
a
d
n
a
s
k
e
l
A


 

 
:
t
i
d
e
r
c
 
o
t
o
h
P

Lifting the poor out of poverty with a vibrant green economy  agroforestry products for sale

49

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA 

Supporting  poverty  alleviation  programmes  in  the 
overall  rural  development  strategy  of  the  United 
Republic of Tanzania.

It  can  be  concluded  that  REDD+ 
investments  would 
make  an  important  contribution  to  a  green  economy 
transformation  in  the  United  Republic  of  Tanzania.  They 
would achieve this by supporting investments that reduce 
household dependence on forests and increase household 
participation  in  forest  management  and  conservation,  by 
encouraging  strategies  that  increase  the  contribution  of 
the  private  and  public  sectors  in  forest  conservation  and 
management  and  by  conducting  activities  that  promote 
greater  participation  of  the  international  community  in 
supporting forest conservation and management efforts in 
the United Republic of Tanzania.

Let us leave the last word on this topic with Achim Steiner, 
Executive  Director  of  the  United  Nations  Environment 
Programme: The ecosystem services provided by tropical 
forests are estimated at around US$ 6,120 per hectare per 
year. Despite this clear macroeconomic case, the total yearly 
forest loss averages 13 million ha per year  equivalent to 
the surface of a football field being destroyed every three 
seconds.  ...  The  true  value  of  forests  comes  to  life  when 
national  and local decision-making  processes are directed 
towards natural capital investment, supporting livelihoods 
and achieving sustainable economic growth.24

24  Foreword to: Building Natural Capital: How REDD+ Can 

Support a Green Economy, Report of the International 
Resource Panel, United Nations Environment Programme, 
Nairobi, 2014. 

50

o6references

Agrawal,  A.A.,  A.P.  Hastings,  M.T.J.  Johnson,  J.L.  Maron, 
and  J.  Salminen  (2012).  Insect  herbivores  drive  real-time 
ecological  and  evolutionary  change  in  plant  populations. 
Science 338, 113116.

Agrawal, Aun, Ben Cashore, Rebecca Hardin, Gill Shepherd, 
Catherin  Benson  and  Daniel  Miller  (2013).  Economic 
Contributions  of  Forests.  Background  Paper  1,  United 
Nations Forum on Forests, tenth session, Istanbul, Turkey, 
http://www.un.org/esa/forests/pdf/.session_documents/
unff10/EcoContrForests.pdf.

Arrow, K. J.; Debreu, G. (1954). Existence of an equilibrium 
for a competitive economy. Econometrica 22 (3): 265290.

Banerjee,  O.,  and  J.  Alavalapati  (2009).  A  computable 
general equilibrium analysis of forest concessions in Brazil, 
Forest Policy and Economics, 11, pp. 244252.

Cattaneo,  A.,  2002.  Balancing  agricultural  development 
and  deforestation  in  the  Brazilian  Amazon.  International 
Food Policy Research Institute Research Report 129. IFPRI, 
Washington, D.C. 

Dee, Philippa S. (1991). Modeling Steady-State Forestry in 
a Computable General Equilibrium Context. National Centre 
for Development Studies, The Australian National University, 
Working paper No. 91/8.

Defourny,  Jacques,  and  Erik  Thorbecke  (1984).  Structural 
path analysis and multiplier decomposition within a social 
accounting  matrix  framework,  The  Economic  Journal,  94, 
pp. 111136.

Division of Environment (2009). Fourth national report on 
implementation  of  the  Convention  on  Biological  Diversity. 
Division of Environment, United Republic of Tanzania, Dar 
es Salaam, 2009, 80 pp.

equilibrium assessment from Vietnam. Land Economics 76 
(1), 1527.

FAO  (2010).  Global  Forest  Resources  Assessment  2010. 
Country  Report,  United  Republic  of  Tanzania.  Food  and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome, 2010, 
56 pp.

FBD  (2000).  Forestry  for  Poverty  Reduction  and  Economic 
Growth:  National  Forest  Programme  Formulation 
in 
Tanzania (draft). Forestry and Beekeeping Division, United 
Republic of Tanzania, Dar es Salaam, 2000.

FRA (2010). Global Forest Resources Assessments. Food and 
Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome.

Implementing 
Hassan  and  Mungatana 
Environmental  Accounts.  Case  Studies  from  Eastern  and 
Southern Africa. Springer. 

(2013). 

(eds.) 

Kaale,  B.K.  (2001).  Forest  Landscape  Restoration.  United 
Republic of Tanzania Country Report, IUCN/WWF, 2001, 53 
pp.

Kahyarara, G., W. Mbowe and O. Kimweri (2002). Poverty 
and  Deforestation  around  the  Gazetted  Forests  of  the 
Coastal  Belt  of  Tanzania,  Research  on  Poverty  Alleviation, 
Research Report.

Lofgren,  H.,  R.  Harris,  S.  Robinson  (2002).  A  standard 
computable  general  equilibrium  (CGE)  model  in  GAMS, 
Microcomputers  in  Policy  Research  5,  International  Food 
Policy Research Institute, Washington, D.C.

Millennium  Ecosystem  Services  Assessment 
(2005). 
Ecosystem  and  Human  Well-being.  World  Health 
Organization, Geneva, 2005.

MNRT  (1998).  National  Forest  Policy.  Ministry  of  Natural 
Resources and Tourism, United Republic of Tanzania, Dar es 
Salaam, 1990, 59 pp.

MNRT  (2000).  Forestry  Outlook  Studies  in  Africa  (FOSA). 
Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism, United Republic 
of Tanzania, Dar es Salaam, 2000, 36 pp.

NAFROMA (2014). The National Forest Resources Monitoring 
and Assessment 20092014. Tanzania Forest Service Agency, 
United Republic of Tanzania, Dar es Salaam, 2014.

National  Bureau  of  Statistics,  Ministry  of  Finance  (2013). 
National Accounts of Tanzania Mainland 20012012. United 
Republic of Tanzania, Dar es Salaam.

Division  of  Environment  (2013).  National  Strategy  for 
Reduced  Emissions 
from  Deforestation  and  Forest 
Degradation  (REDD+).  Division  of  Environment,  Vice-
Presidents  Office,  United  Republic  of  Tanzania,  Dar  es 
Salaam, 2013, 73 pp

National  Forest  Programme  in  Tanzania  (2001).  National 
Forest  Programme  in  Tanzania  20012010.  Forestry  and 
Beekeeping  Division,  Ministry  of  Natural  Resources  and 
Tourism, United Republic of Tanzania, Dar es Salaam, 2001, 
111 pp.

Dufournaud,  C.M.,  M.  Jerrett,  J.T.  Quinn,  V.  Maclaren, 
2000.  Economy-wide  effects  of  forest  policies:  a  general 

NBS (National Bureau of Statistics) (2002) Household Budget 
Survey 2000/01. NBS: Dar es Salaam

51

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIA(2010).  Mainstreaming 

TEEB 
of 
nature    a  synthesis  of  the  approach,  conclusions  and 
recommendations of TEEB.

economics 

the 

Thompson,  W.A.,  Van  Kooten,  G.C.,  Vertinsky,  I.,1997. 
Assessing  timber  and  non-timber  values  in  forestry  using 
a  general  equilibrium  framework.  Critical  Reviews 
in 
Environmental Science and Technology 27, 351364.

Thurlow,  J.,  and  P.  Wobst  (2003)  Poverty  focused  social 
accounting  matrices  for  Tanzania,  IFPRI  Discussion  Paper 
No.  112,  International  Food  Policy  Research  Institute, 
Washington, D.C.

United  Nations  Environment  Programme  (UNEP)  (2013). 
Annual  Report  Spotlights  Action  on  Key  Environmental 
Issues.

United  Nations  Environment  Programme  (UNEP)  (2014). 
Year Book  Emerging Issues in our Global Environment. 

VPO (1998). Tanzania Country Study on Biological Diversity. 
Vice-Presidents Office, United Republic of Tanzania, Dar es 
Salaam, 1998, 163 pp.

Ngaga,  Y.M.  (1998).  Analysis  of  production  and  trade  in 
forestry products of Tanzania, 

Ngaga,  Y.M.,  (2011).  Forest  plantations  and  woodlots  in 
Tanzania. African Forest Forum, Nairobi, 2011, 80 pp.

Parra, Juan Carlos, and Quentin Wodon (2009). SimSIP SAM: 
A  Tool  for  the  Analysis  of  Input-Output  Tables  and  Social 
Accounting Matrices, version 1.1. World Bank, Washington, 
D.C., 2009. 

Resource Economic Analysis of Catchment Forest Reserves 
in  Tanzania  (2003).  Ministry  of  Natural  Resources  and 
Tourism, Forestry and Beekeeping Division, United Republic 
of Tanzania, Dar es Salaam, 2003

Roe and Elliot (2010).The Earthscan Reader in Poverty and 
Biodiversity Conservation, Earthscan, London. 

SEEA 
of 
Accounting: Central Framework.

(2012): 

System 

Environmental-Economic 

SEEA EEA (2013). SEEA Experimental Ecosystem Accounting. 
<https://unstats.un.org/unsd/envaccounting/eea_white_
cover.pdf>

52

annex i

multiplier analysis, sectoral growth and price impact

Receipts/Payments

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

AAGRIC

ALIVES

AFOREST

AMININ

AFOOD

ACLOTH

AOTHM

AWOODP

Commodities

Labour

Capital

Land

Enterprises

Households

16

17

1

2

3

4

1

2

1

1

1

2

3

4

CADMIN

0.1063

0.1064

0.1096

0.1030

0.1041

0.1065

0.0819

0.1018

CPRIVS

0.0993

0.0987

0.1174

0.1114

0.1040

0.1175

0.0939

0.1125

FSUB

1.0692

0.8093

1.2736

0.6225

0.9453

0.6911

0.4603

0.6882

LCHILD

0.0128

0.0246

0.0092

0.0089

0.0114

0.0098

0.0061

0.0079

FEMLAB

0.3954

0.3700

0.3634

0.2295

0.3251

0.3747

0.1744

0.2410

MALELAB

0.4673

0.6248

0.4551

0.3482

0.4489

0.5525

0.3895

0.4742

CAPAG

0.4409

0.5438

0.4077

0.2423

0.3486

0.2726

0.1768

0.2519

CAPNAG

0.5587

0.5467

0.5446

1.3897

0.7035

0.8927

0.8500

1.0090

LAND

ENTR

0.1889

0.2329

0.1747

0.1038

0.1493

0.1168

0.0757

0.1079

0.5538

0.5419

0.5398

1.3775

0.6973

0.8849

0.8426

1.0002

RURPOOR

0.4951

0.4917

0.5233

0.3123

0.4274

0.3577

0.2385

0.3347

RURNPOOR

1.7901

1.7730

1.8691

1.5548

1.6469

1.5623

1.1300

1.4970

URBPOOR

0.0888

0.0919

0.0868

0.1412

0.0950

0.1114

0.0931

0.1139

URBNPOOR

0.7211

0.7558

0.7121

0.8596

0.7184

0.8243

0.6219

0.7753

53

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIAannex ii

transfer effect

Transfer effects

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

AAGRIC

ALIVES

AFOREST

AMININ

AFOOD

ACLOTH

AOTHM

AWOODP

AEQUIP

AUTILI

ACONST

ATRADE

AHOTEL

ATRANS

AESTAT

AADMIN

APRIVS

CAGRIC

CLIVES

CFOREST

CMININ

CFOOD

CCLOTH

COTHM

CWOODP

CEQUIP

CUTILI

CCONST

CTRADE

CHOTEL

CTRANS

CESTAT

CADMIN

CPRIVS

Activities

Commodities

54

1

AAGRIC
0.0733

2

ALIVES
0.0431

0.0034

0.0003

0.0012

0.0001

0.0054

0.0104

0.0018

0.0004

0.0058

0.0031

0.0496

0.0021

0.0137

0.0087

0.0033

0.0039

0.0855

0.0035

0.0003

0.0014

0.0002

0.0079

0.0283

0.0027

0.0023

0.0058

0.0031

0.0496

0.0021

0.0216

0.0087

0.0033

0.0048

0.0021

0.0098

0.0029

0.0030

0.0065

0.0048

0.0009

0.0015

0.0035

0.0033

0.0343

0.0018

0.0067

0.0062

0.0023

0.0025

0.0502

0.0022

0.0102

0.0035

0.0035

0.0094

0.0131

0.0014

0.0090

0.0035

0.0033

0.0343

0.0018

0.0106

0.0062

0.0023

0.0031

3

AFOREST

0.0012

0.0002

0.0236

0.0003

0.0002

0.0000

0.0014

0.0008

0.0002

0.0007

0.0011

0.0158

0.0019

0.0105

0.0082

0.0039

0.0167

0.0014

0.0002

0.0246

0.0003

0.0002

0.0000

0.0037

0.0013

0.0012

0.0007

0.0011

0.0158

0.0019

0.0166

0.0082

0.0040

0.0206

Activities

4

AMININ
0.0018

5

AFOOD
0.4948

6

ACLOTH
0.1845

7

AOTHM
0.0018

0.0017

0.0004

0.0149

0.0009

0.0006

0.0104

0.0026

0.0022

0.0389

0.0090

0.0220

0.0027

0.0126

0.0279

0.0039

0.0160

0.0021

0.0018

0.0004

0.0181

0.0010

0.0008

0.0285

0.0040

0.0136

0.0389

0.0090

0.0220

0.0027

0.0198

0.0279

0.0040

0.0197

0.0779

0.0015

0.0039

0.0220

0.0035

0.0093

0.0050

0.0015

0.0148

0.0258

0.1065

0.0042

0.0171

0.0242

0.0071

0.0120

0.5768

0.0804

0.0016

0.0047

0.0263

0.0051

0.0255

0.0078

0.0094

0.0148

0.0259

0.1065

0.0042

0.0269

0.0242

0.0071

0.0148

0.0034

0.0012

0.0036

0.0004

0.0299

0.0104

0.0078

0.0011

0.0841

0.0322

0.0996

0.0056

0.0207

0.0369

0.0085

0.0219

0.2151

0.0035

0.0012

0.0043

0.0005

0.0437

0.0284

0.0121

0.0068

0.0841

0.0323

0.0996

0.0056

0.0325

0.0369

0.0086

0.0271

0.0008

0.0045

0.0960

0.0005

0.0043

0.1449

0.0187

0.0016

0.1294

0.0324

0.0984

0.0067

0.0297

0.0478

0.0099

0.0222

0.0021

0.0008

0.0047

0.1169

0.0006

0.0063

0.3950

0.0289

0.0098

0.1294

0.0325

0.0984

0.0067

0.0467

0.0478

0.0100

0.0274

8

AWOODP

0.0009

0.0005

0.1650

0.0030

0.0004

0.0003

0.0057

0.1346

0.0010

0.0764

0.0285

0.0829

0.0053

0.0212

0.0447

0.0085

0.0214

0.0010

0.0005

0.1719

0.0036

0.0005

0.0005

0.0156

0.2078

0.0063

0.0764

0.0286

0.0829

0.0053

0.0333

0.0447

0.0086

0.0264

annex iii

open-loop effect

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

AAGRIC

ALIVES

AFOREST

AMININ

AFOOD

ACLOTH

AOTHM

AWOODP

Labour

Capital

Land

Enterprises

Households

1

2

3

4

1

2

1

1

1

2

3

4

FSUB

LCHILD

FEMLAB

MALELAB

CAPAG

CAPNAG

LAND

ENTR

RURPOOR

RURNPOOR

URBPOOR

URBNPOOR

0.3875

0.0039

0.1476

0.1192

0.1734

0.0546

0.0743

0.0542

0.1773

0.5712

0.0191

0.1871

0.1257

0.0158

0.1213

0.2750

0.2755

0.0388

0.1180

0.0385

0.1729

0.5492

0.0218

0.2189

0.5685

0.0000

0.1073

0.0960

0.1309

0.0260

0.0561

0.0258

0.1948

0.6102

0.0150

0.1612

0.0063

0.0008

0.0046

0.0275

0.0008

0.9139

0.0003

0.9059

0.0241

0.4407

0.0764

0.3661

0.3129

0.0031

0.0950

0.1246

0.1004

0.2312

0.0430

0.2291

0.1324

0.5133

0.0299

0.2205

0.0741

0.0017

0.1497

0.2327

0.0307

0.4211

0.0131

0.4174

0.0693

0.4496

0.0469

0.3327

0.0121

0.0002

0.0108

0.1564

0.0011

0.5047

0.0005

0.5003

0.0288

0.3200

0.0460

0.2634

0.0999

0.0002

0.0264

0.1695

0.0213

0.5597

0.0091

0.5548

0.0598

0.4365

0.0525

0.3068

55

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIAannex iV

closed-loop effect

Activity

AAGRIC

ALIVES

AFOREST

AMININ

AFOOD

ACLOTH

AOTHM

AWOODP

1

0.6817

0.0088

0.2478

0.3480

0.2676

0.5041

0.1146

0.4996

0.3178

1.2189

0.0697

0.5341

2

0.6836

0.0089

0.2486

0.3498

0.2683

0.5079

0.1149

0.5034

0.3188

1.2238

0.0701

0.5369

3

0.7051

0.0091

0.2561

0.3591

0.2768

0.5185

0.1186

0.5140

0.3286

1.2589

0.0718

0.5509

4

0.6162

0.0081

0.2250

0.3208

0.2415

0.4758

0.1034

0.4717

0.2882

1.1141

0.0648

0.4935

5

0.6324

0.0082

0.2301

0.3243

0.2481

0.4723

0.1063

0.4682

0.2950

1.1336

0.0651

0.4980

6

0.6170

0.0081

0.2251

0.3197

0.2419

0.4717

0.1036

0.4675

0.2884

1.1127

0.0645

0.4916

7

0.4483

0.0059

0.1636

0.2331

0.1757

0.3453

0.0753

0.3422

0.2096

0.8100

0.0471

0.3585

8

0.5882

0.0077

0.2145

0.3047

0.2306

0.4494

0.0988

0.4454

0.2749

1.0606

0.0614

0.4685

Labour

Capital

Land
Enterprises
Households

1

2

3

FSUB

LCHILD

FEMLAB

4 MALELAB

1

2

1

1

1

2

3

4

CAPAG

CAPNAG

LAND

ENTR

RURPOOR

RURNPOOR

URBPOOR

URBNPOOR

56

annex V

multiplier table for the united republic of tanzania
Receipts /Payments

Activities

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

AAGRIC

ALIVES

AFOREST

AMININ

AFOOD

ACLOTH

AOTHM

AWOODP

Activities

Commodities

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

9

AAGRIC

ALIVES

2.2285

1.2001

1.1976

1.0343

1.5637

1.2213

0.7535

0.2805

1.2809

0.2857

0.2600

0.3368

0.2599

0.1883

AFOREST

0.0637

0.0728

1.0897

0.0532

0.0592

0.0552

0.0432

AMININ

AFOOD

0.0260

0.0278

0.0258

1.0380

0.0270

0.0265

0.1127

0.5980

0.6053

0.6153

0.5665

1.5824

0.5600

0.4105

ACLOTH

0.1614

0.1632

0.1611

0.1436

0.1487

1.1728

0.1083

AOTHM

0.1304

0.1256

0.1250

0.1229

0.1216

0.1220

1.2265

AWOODP

0.0177

0.0170

0.0172

0.0176

0.0200

0.0227

0.0296

AEQUIP

0.0084

0.0095

0.0085

0.0099

0.0091

0.0086

0.0071

AUTILI

0.0759

0.0741

0.0728

0.1052

0.0805

0.1497

0.1775

ACONST

0.0820

0.0827

0.0825

0.0826

0.0995

0.1053

0.0858

ATRADE

AHOTEL

ATRANS

AESTAT

0.2656

0.2516

0.2383

0.2236

0.3083

0.2999

0.2447

0.1322

0.1335

0.1351

0.1296

0.1270

0.1307

0.0987

0.0907

0.0846

0.0893

0.0876

0.0898

0.0946

0.0840

0.7283

0.7296

0.7504

0.6941

0.6954

0.7001

0.5317

AADMIN

0.1052

0.1052

0.1084

0.1019

0.1029

0.1054

0.0810

APRIVS

CAGRIC

CLIVES

0.0804

0.0799

0.0951

0.0902

0.0842

0.0951

0.0760

0.9051

0.8754

0.8452

0.7733

1.3442

0.9790

0.5613

0.2634

0.2639

0.2675

0.2470

0.3238

0.2463

0.1786

CFOREST

0.0071

0.0170

0.0316

0.0066

0.0079

0.0074

0.0092

CMININ

CFOOD

0.0316

0.0339

0.0315

0.0463

0.0329

0.0323

0.1373

0.6632

0.6723

0.6814

0.6355

0.6495

0.6263

0.4601

CCLOTH

0.2358

0.2384

0.2354

0.2098

0.2172

0.2524

0.1582

COTHM

0.3556

0.3424

0.3408

0.3350

0.3316

0.3327

0.6175

CWOODP

0.0273

0.0262

0.0266

0.0271

0.0308

0.0350

0.0457

CEQUIP

0.0520

0.0591

0.0524

0.0611

0.0561

0.0536

0.0441

0.9893

0.2451

0.2165

0.0249

0.5339

0.1364

0.1121

1.1488

0.0082

0.1389

0.0982

0.2737

0.1243

0.0915

0.6769

0.1007

0.0911

0.7295

0.2320

0.1778

0.0303

0.5972

0.1993

0.3056

0.2296

0.0509

57

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIAReceipts /Payments

Activities

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

AAGRIC

ALIVES

AFOREST

AMININ

AFOOD

ACLOTH

AOTHM

AWOODP

10

11

12

13

14

15

16

17

1

2

3

4

1

2

1

1

1

2

3

4

CUTILI

0.0759

0.0741

0.0728

0.1052

0.0805

0.1497

0.1775

CCONST

0.0823

0.0830

0.0828

0.0828

0.0998

0.1056

0.0861

CTRADE

0.2656

0.2516

0.2383

0.2236

0.3083

0.2999

0.2447

CHOTEL

0.1322

0.1335

0.1351

0.1296

0.1270

0.1307

0.0987

CTRANS

0.1427

0.1332

0.1405

0.1378

0.1412

0.1488

0.1322

CESTAT

0.4882

0.4884

0.5025

0.4730

0.4717

0.4798

0.3711

CADMIN

0.1063

0.1064

0.1096

0.1030

0.1041

0.1065

0.0819

CPRIVS

FSUB

LCHILD

0.0993

0.0987

0.1174

0.1114

0.1040

0.1175

0.0939

1.0692

0.8093

1.2736

0.6225

0.9453

0.6911

0.4603

0.0128

0.0246

0.0092

0.0089

0.0114

0.0098

0.0061

FEMLAB

0.3954

0.3700

0.3634

0.2295

0.3251

0.3747

0.1744

MALELAB

0.4673

0.6248

0.4551

0.3482

0.4489

0.5525

0.3895

CAPAG

0.4409

0.5438

0.4077

0.2423

0.3486

0.2726

0.1768

CAPNAG

0.5587

0.5467

0.5446

1.3897

0.7035

0.8927

0.8500

LAND

ENTR

0.1889

0.2329

0.1747

0.1038

0.1493

0.1168

0.0757

0.5538

0.5419

0.5398

1.3775

0.6973

0.8849

0.8426

RURPOOR

0.4951

0.4917

0.5233

0.3123

0.4274

0.3577

0.2385

RURNPOOR

1.7901

1.7730

1.8691

1.5548

1.6469

1.5623

1.1300

URBPOOR

0.0888

0.0919

0.0868

0.1412

0.0950

0.1114

0.0931

URBNPOOR

0.7211

0.7558

0.7121

0.8596

0.7184

0.8243

0.6219

0.1389

0.0985

0.2737

0.1243

0.1439

0.4668

0.1018

0.1125

0.6882

0.0079

0.2410

0.4742

0.2519

1.0090

0.1079

1.0002

0.3347

1.4970

0.1139

0.7753

Labour

Capital

Land

Enterprises

Households

58

annex Vi

multipliers as elasticity

Activity

AAGRIC

ALIVES

AFOREST

AMININ

AFOOD

ACLOTH

AOTHM

AWOODP

1

2

3

4

5

6

7

8

Labour

Capital

Land

Enterprises

Households

1

2

3

4

1

2

1

1

1

2

3

4

FSUB

1.7687

0.2612

0.1974

0.0409

0.7617

0.1462

0.0900

0.0520

LCHILD

1.7831

0.6706

0.1197

0.0492

0.7728

0.1747

0.1000

0.0501

FEMLAB

1.5207

0.2776

0.1309

0.0351

0.6091

0.1843

0.0793

0.0423

MALELAB

1.0393

0.2711

0.0948

0.0308

0.4864

0.1572

0.1024

0.0482

CAPAG

1.9628

0.4723

0.1700

0.0429

0.7559

0.1552

0.0930

0.0512

CAPNAG

0.7872

0.1503

0.0719

0.0779

0.4828

0.1609

0.1416

0.0649

LAND

ENTR

1.9628

0.4723

0.1700

0.0429

0.7559

0.1552

0.0930

0.0512

0.7872

0.1503

0.0719

0.0779

0.4828

0.1609

0.1416

0.0649

RURPOOR

1.6472

0.3192

0.1631

0.0413

0.6927

0.1522

0.0938

0.0509

RURNPOOR

1.3311

0.2572

0.1302

0.0460

0.5966

0.1486

0.0993

0.0508

URBPOOR

1.0046

0.2028

0.0920

0.0635

0.5235

0.1611

0.1245

0.0589

URBNPOOR

1.0030

0.2051

0.0928

0.0475

0.4867

0.1466

0.1023

0.0493

59

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIAannex Vii

structural path (fixed origin "Forest" and fixed 
destination "rurpoor"): multiplier decomposition 
and structural path analysis

Multiplier decomposition and structural path analysis

Multiplier decomposition

Origin

Destination

 Accounting
multiplier

Transfer effects

 Open-loop

effects

 Closed-loop

effects

AFOREST

RURPOOR

0.5233

0.0000

0.1948

0.3286

Structural path analysis

Origin

Destination

 Global
influence

Elementary paths

 Direct
influence

 Path

multiplier

 Total

influence

 Overall total

(in %)

AFOREST

RURPOOR

0.5233

AFOREST / FSUB / RURPOOR

AFOREST / CAPAG / RURPOOR

AFOREST / LAND / RURPOOR

0.1229

0.0354

0.0151

AFOREST / MALELAB / RURPOOR

0.0080

AFOREST / FEMLAB / RURPOOR

0.0072

1.9816

1.6423

1.5296

1.7686

1.6718

0.2435

0.0581

0.0231

0.0142

0.0120

46.5272

11.1105

4.4187

2.7177

2.2902

 AFOREST / FSUB / RURNPOOR /
AAGRIC / CAPAG / RURPOOR

0.0029

3.1518

0.0091

1.7325

60

annex Viii

structural path (fixed origin "Forest" and fixed 
destination "rurnpoor"): multiplier decomposition 
and structural path analysis
Multiplier decomposition and structural path analysis

Multiplier decomposition

Origin

Destination

 Accounting
multiplier

Transfer effects

 Open-loop

effects

 Closed-loop

effects

AFOREST

RURNPOOR

1.8691

0.0000

0.6102

1.2589

Structural path analysis

Origin

Destination

 Global
influence

Elementary paths

 Direct
influence

 Path

multiplier

 Total

influence

 Overall total

(in %)

AFOREST

RURNPOOR

1.8691

AFOREST / FSUB / RURNPOOR

AFOREST / CAPAG / RURNPOOR

AFOREST/FEMLAB / RURNPOOR

0.3741

0.0823

0.0460

AFOREST/MALELAB/RURNPOOR

0.0417

AFOREST/MALELAB/RURNPOO

0.0355

2.5993

2.4734

2.4984

2.5556

2.4148

0.9723

0.2036

0.1149

0.1066

0.0857

52.0182

10.8925

6.1485

5.7049

4.5844

61

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIAannex iX

structural path (fixed origin "Forest" and fixed 
destination "urbpoor"): multiplier decomposition 
and structural path analysis
Multiplier decomposition and structural path analysis

Multiplier decomposition

Origin

Destination

 Accounting
multiplier

Transfer effects

AFOREST

URBPOOR

0.0868

0.0000

 Open-loop

effects

0.0150

Closed-loop effects

0.0718

Structural path analysis

Origin

Destination

 Global
influence

Elementary paths

 Direct
influence

 Path

multiplier

 Total

influence

Overall total

(in %)

AFOREST

URBPOOR

0.0868

AFOREST / FSUB / URBPOOR

AFOREST / FEMLAB / URBPOOR

0.0039

0.0035

AFOREST / MALELAB / URBPOOR

0.0022

AFOREST / CAPAG / URBPOOR

0.0018

 AFOREST  /  CTRADE  /  ATRADE  /
CAPNAG / ENTR / URBPOOR

0.0008

AFOREST / LAND / URBPOOR

0.0009

 AFOREST  /  FSUB  /  RURNPOOR
/ AAGRIC / FEMLAB / URBPOOR

0.0003

1.8671

1.4045

1.5119

1.4460

1.6967

1.2863

3.1913

0.0073

0.0049

0.0033

0.0027

0.0013

0.0012

0.0009

8.4230

5.6385

3.8301

3.0624

1.5473

1.3271

1.0844

62

annex X

structural path (fixed origin "aWWodp" and 
fixed destination "urbnpoor"):  multiplier 
decomposition and structural path analysis
 Multiplier decomposition and structural
path analysis

Multiplier decomposition

Origin

Destination

 Accounting
multiplier

Transfer effects

AFOREST

URBNPOOR

0.7121

0.0000

Structural path analysis

 Open-loop

effects

 Closed-loop

effects

0.1612

0.5509

Origin

Destination

 Global
influence

Elementary paths

 Direct
influence

 Path

multiplier

 Total

influence

 Overall

total (in %)

AFOREST

URBNPOOR

0.7121

AFOREST / FSUB / URBNPOOR

AFOREST / FEMLAB / URBNPOOR

AFOREST / MALELAB / URBNPOOR

0.0526

0.0460

0.0355

2.2872

1.7653

1.8361

0.1204

0.0812

0.0652

16.9091

11.4095

9.1571

 AFOREST / FSUB / RURNPOOR / AAGRIC
/ FEMLAB / URBNPOOR

0.0039

3.4972

0.0136

1.9131

AFOREST / CAPAG / URBNPOOR

0.0072

1.8983

0.0136

1.9094

 AFOREST / FSUB / RURNPOOR / AAGRIC
/ MALELAB / URBNPOOR

 AFOREST / FSUB / RURNPOOR / CLIVES2
/ ALIVES2 / MALELAB / URBNPOOR

 AFOREST / FSUB / RURNPOOR / CAGRIC
/ AAGRIC / FEMLAB / URBNPOOR

 AFOREST / CTRADE / ATRADE / CAPNAG
/ ENTR / URBNPOOR

0.0027

3.5152

0.0093

1.3115

0.0024

3.1921

0.0076

1.0711

0.0022

3.5053

0.0076

1.0703

0.0037

1.9740

0.0073

1.0242

63

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIAannex Xi

economic case: 
simulating data to 
capture higher household 
demand for forestry 
output
As  noted  in  section  3.9  above,  there  is  a  lack  of  data  in 
developing countries on household demand for the forestry 
sector  (see  also  the  earlier  discussion,  in  section  3.4,  on 
forward  and  backward  linkages).  The  study  by  Agrawal 
et al. (2013) notes that in many developing countries the 
non-industrial  economic  contributions  of  forests  typically 
go  unrecorded,  while  in  many  cases  they  are  from  three 
to ten times higher than the revenues collected in national 
accounts. One way of dealing with this issue and recreating 
the  situation  that  would  have  emerged  had  the  data 
been adequately captured is to use a computable general 
equilibrium (CGE) model. In the present annex, we aim to 
model the economy of the United Republic of Tanzania and 
look  at  economy-wide  changes  that  would  occur  if  there 
were higher household demand for output from the hunting 
and forestry sector. We begin by giving a brief explanation 
of the CGE models and the social accounting matrix used for 
the simulation.

overview of cge models

A  CGE  model  is  an  analytical  approach  that  looks  at 
the  economy  as  a  complete  system  of  interdependent 
components and which recognizes that shocks to (demands 
on) the system in one sector have ripple effects throughout 
the  system.  CGE  models  are  rooted  in  the  input-output 
framework and are simulations that combine the abstract 
general  equilibrium  structure  formalized  by  Arrow,  K.  J.; 
Debreu, G. (1954) with realistic economic data in order to 
solve  numerically  the  levels  of  supply,  demand  and  price 
that support equilibrium across a specified set of markets. 
CGE models are a standard tool of empirical analysis, and 
are  widely  used  to  analyse  the  aggregate  welfare  and 
distributional  impacts  of  policies  whose  effects  may  be 
transmitted  through  multiple  markets,  or  contain  menus 
of  different  tax,  subsidy,  quota  or  transfer  instruments. 
Examples of their use may be found in areas as diverse as 
fiscal reform and development planning, international trade 
and increasingly, environmental regulation.

Applications  of  CGE  models  in  forestry  have  also  been 
increasing with time. Dee (1991) developed a CGE model in 
a study to evaluate the impact of increasing the minimum 
harvest  age  of  trees  and  valuations  on  stumpage  and 
discount rates in Indonesia. Thompson et al. (1997) valued 
the 
in  forest  management 
options  using  a  CGE  model.  Dufournaud  et  al.  (2000, 
p.15)  analysed  the  impact  on  economic  activities  of  the 

importance  of  non-timber 

64

increase in royalties and export taxes of the forest sector. 
Banerjee and Alavalapati (2009) also used a CGE model to 
evaluate the short-term socioeconomic and environmental 
implications  of  implementing  forest  concessions  in  Brazil. 
Some  research  has  also  been  carried  out  to  evaluate  the 
impact of deforestation. For example, Cattaneo (2002, p. 36) 
included a deforestation sector in a CGE model, linking it to 
agricultural land and the return to arable land.

social accounting matrix for the united 
republic of tanzania

The 2001 social accounting matrix for the United Republic 
of Tanzania was developed by the International Food Policy 
Research  Institute,  following  the  framework  presented  in 
Lofgren  et  al.  (2002).  With  this  structure,  activities  are 
distinguished  from  commodities,  with  flows  valued  at 
producers prices in the activity accounts and at market prices 
in  the  commodity  accounts.  The  commodities  are  activity 
outputs, either exported or sold domestically, and imports. This  
activity-commodity separation is preferred since it permits 
activities  to  produce  multiple  commodities  while  any 
commodity  may  be  produced  by  multiple  activities  (for 
example,  activities  for  small-scale  and  large-scale  maize 
production may both produce the same maize commodity). 
In the activity columns, payments are made to commodities 
(intermediate  demand), 
(the 
value  added  element  comprising  operating  surplus  and 
compensation of employees), and also producer tax accounts. 
In the commodity columns, payments are made to domestic 
activities, the rest of the world, and various tax accounts (for 
domestic and import taxes). This treatment provides the data 
needed to model imports as perfect or imperfect substitutes  
vis-a-vis domestic production.25

factors  of  production 

Marketing and trade margins are also exclusively captured 
in  light  of  transactions  (trade  and  transportation)  costs. 
The  government  is  disaggregated  into  a  core  government 
account and different tax collection accounts, one for each 
type  of  tax.  A  public  administration  sector  is  created  to 
capture payments from the government to factors (for the 
labour  services  provided  by  government  employees).  The 
domestic non-government institutions consist of households 
and enterprises, and allow for a distinction between home 
and  marketed  consumption  between  households.  The 
enterprises earn factor incomes (a reflection of ownership 
of capital or land) and may also receive transfers from other 
institutions.  Their  incomes  are  used  for  corporate  taxes, 
enterprise savings, and transfers to other institutions.

The compilation of the social accounting matrix made use 
of major data sources at both the macro and micro levels. 
Micro-based  data  include  the  results  of  the  20002001 
household budget survey (NBS, 2002) and the 20002001 
labour  force  survey  (NBS,  2002).  Furthermore,  the  2000 
social  accounting  matrix  was  compiled  solely  with  data 
from that year, except those for the intermediate demand 
structure,  for  which  the  1992  input-output  table  was 

25  This description of the social accounting matrix follows 

Thurlow and Wobst (2003).) 

used. The 2001 matrix has 43 production  sectors with 21 
in  agriculture.  The  remaining  sectors  are  split  between  1 
mining, 13 manufacturing activities, 2 activities in the rest 
of  the  secondary  sector,  and  6  in  the  tertiary  sector.  The 
same  disaggregation  applies  for  commodities.  There  are 
three  marketing  margins  accounting  for  export,  import, 
and domestic sales transaction costs. Factors are also highly 
disaggregated. The disaggregation of labour is largely based 
on  gender  and  education.  Households  are  separated  into 
rural  and  urban  and  according  to  household  income  and 
level of education of the head of the household.

model

The model used in this study is the partnership for economic 
policy (PEP) standard CGE model. We use both the static [PEP-
1-1 (SINGLE-COUNTRY, STATIC VERSION)] and dynamic [PEP-
1-t (SINGLE-COUNTRY, RECURSIVE DYNAMIC VERSION)] CGE 
to model the Tanzanian economy (Decaluwe et al. (2012)). 
Both the single-country static and dynamic versions of the 
PEP  standard  CGE  model  were  designed  for  country-level 
studies  adapted  to  the  Tanzanian  national  economy.  The 
model  is  implemented  in  the  general  algebraic  modelling 
system  (GAMS)  and  is  solved  using  the  CONOPT  solver. 
Though  details  of  this  model  can  be  found  in  Decaluwe 
et  al.  (2012),  the  basic  structure  is  presented  here.  The 
PEP-1-1 model is a single period, single country static CGE 
model  that  captures  interactions  between  households, 
producers,  government  and  the  rest  of  the  world.  The 
model also allows for each industry to produce more than 
one product and for transfers between agents. The model 
does not, however, allow for industries that rely solely on 
intermediate  consumption  or  those  with  no  value  added. 
Before we describe the model itself, the social accounting 
matrix for the United Republic of Tanzania had to be built to 
reflect the different agents and interactions as presented in 
the model. Accounts are grouped into five main categories: 
factors of production, institutions (or agents), commodities, 
industries and accumulation.

production

Firms  operate  in  a  perfectly  competitive  environment 
in  which  they  maximize  profits  subject  to  a  nested 
intermediate  consumption  aggregate  and  value  added. 
Firms produce output subject to the technology available to 
them, the prices of goods and factors with no control on the 
prices.  The  PEP-1-1  model  assumes  a  Leontief  production 
function  combining  value  added  and  total  intermediate 
consumption  in  fixed  shares.  That  is,  human  resources 
cannot  be  substituted  for  tangible  inputs  and  equipment. 
The production of value added, on the other hand, follows 
a  constant  elasticity  of  substitution  (CES)  production 
technology combining composite labour and capital, which 
are themselves combined using the CES technology. Thus, 
the model allows for different types of labour and capital up 
to the point where the value of the marginal product of each 
is equal to its price. Finally, the intermediate consumption 
aggregate is made up of various products that are assumed 
to be strictly complementary with no substitution.

income and savings

Different types of agents are modelled in the PEP-1-1. These 
agents are broadly categorized into households, businesses, 
government  and  the  rest  of  the  world.  The  model  allows 
for different types of households that receive a fixed share 
of  the  earnings  of  each  type  of  labour  and  total  capital 
income. Household savings are also a linear function of the 
disposable income of the firm, allowing for a difference in 
the marginal and average propensity to save. Businesses are 
modelled to earn income from capital and also to transfer 
from  other  agents  with  savings  deduced  as  the  residual 
from disposable income of the business when transfers to 
other agents are removed. Government income and savings 
are  derived  from  taxes  on  all  the  other  agents,  including 
household  and  businesses  and  their  production  activities. 
The  rest  of  the  world  receives  payments  for  the  goods 
supplied  (imports)  and  the  return  on  investments  in  the 
domestic economy.

demand

Demand for goods and services in the economy (imported 
or domestically produced) is made up of consumption by all 
agents in the economy, including the government. The utility 
function of the household is assumed to be of the Stone-
Geary form, with a minimum level of consumption of each 
commodity necessary for subsistence. Households maximize 
utility  subject  to  budget  constraints.  Investment  demand 
captures  gross  fixed-capital  formation  separately  from 
changes in inventories, and there is an inverse relationship 
between quantity demanded for investment purposes and 
the purchase price of the commodity. Government demand 
is also modelled similarly and intermediate demand and on 
them and their margins are also taken into consideration.

producer supplies of products and 
international trade

A  constant  elasticity  of  transformation  (CET)  function 
is  assumed  for  the  production  of  goods  and  services, 
representing  how  easily  the  product  mix  can  be  adjusted 
in response to price changes. This output is shared among 
domestic  and  international  markets  with  the  goal  of 
maximizing  total  revenue.  Thus  the  producers  supply 
behaviour is also nested by the CET functions with aggregate 
output, a function of individual output and the final supply 
distributed between domestic and exports market.

prices

Prices of domestic and exported outputs are all a function of 
the assumptions of the functional forms assumed earlier. The 
price weights are deduced from the ratio of the quantities 
in  volume  to  the  volume  in  aggregates.  For  example,  the 
unit cost of an industrys output is a weighted sum of the 
prices of value added and of the intermediate consumption 
aggregate.  Price  indices  are  also  modelled  using  the  GDP 
deflator, consumer price index, investment price index and 
the  public  expenditure  price  index.  Lastly,  the  model  also 
captures GDP both at basic prices and market prices.

65

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIAsimulation design and 
key findings

simulation design

Forest use in many developing countries is usually under-
reported.  In  many  African  countries,  including  the  United 
Republic  of  Tanzania,  forests  are  a  source  of  income  for 
some households or relied upon as a complement to other 
goods.  For  instance,  in  order  to  prepare  food  in  many 
communities,  wood  is  the  source  of  fuel.  Data  on  these 
activities, however, are typically not available at the national 
level. This often results to under-reporting the contribution 
of the forestry sector to the economy. We therefore seek to 
model the contribution of the forestry sector by simulating 
an increase in the use of the forestry sector to a level higher 
than that currently reported in the national accounts.

Key findings

If  the  contribution  of  the  forest  sector  to  household 
demand  is  captured  as  a  consequence  of  shocks  to 
household  consumption  of  the  products  of  that  sector, 
the results  show: a  0.60 percentage point increase in  the 
GDP at market prices, a 0.77 percentage point increase in 
consumer price index, and a 0.62 percentage point increase 
in  the  GDP  deflator.  As  expected,  total  income  increased 
for all household types in the United Republic of Tanzania 
as a consequence of  the shock  (table  219). The impact  is 
highest, however, on non-poor rural households with a non-
educated household head (1.16 percentage point increase 
in total income). This is followed by households that are in 
the rural areas below the food poverty line. Capital income 

increases by about the same rate for all the households but 
labour income varied by household type.

Wages  increased  between  0.028  and  1.53  percentage 
points  in  all  industries  based  on  this  scenario  (table  23). 
With  increased  consumption  by  households  of  forestry 
commodities, labour becomes significantly more expensive 
in  the  meat-processing  and  dairy-products  industry  (1.53 
percentage  point  increase).  This  is  as  a  result  of  the  links 
between this sector and that of forestry and hunting. The 
wage rate in the forestry and hunting sector also rises, by 
1.27  percentage  points.  There  is  no  significant  impact  on 
the price of labour in the utilities and manufacturing sectors 
though.

The  value  added  by  each  industry  changes  based  on  the 
shock to the system of increased consumption in the forestry 
sector (table 24). The expanded maize sector has the highest 
increase in value added, at 1.84 percentage points, followed 
by the basic and industrial chemicals manufacturing sector. 
The wood, paper and printing industry will also experience a 
reduction in value added, by about 0.39 percentage points. 
Thus, an increase in the consumption of households of the 
forestry sector will hurt the cashew nuts and coffee industry 
the  most,  with  decreases  of  approximately  1.19  and  1.08 
percentage points, respectively, in value added.

There  was  an  increase  in  many  of  the  agricultural  prices, 
with the highest increase occurring in that of cassava (table 
25). There was little or no change in the prices of utilities, 
manufacturing  and  construction.  In  summary,  an  increase 
in  the  consumption  of  the  forestry  sector  by  households 
resulted  in  an  increase  in  GDP,  household  income,  wage 
rate and composite commodity price. The value added of 
the majority of the industries is negative as a result of this 
shock.

Table 23. Detailed results from the experiment

Summary of results of the experiment

Impact on households

Before shock

After shock

Percentage change

969.08

4 335.67

285.04

2 317.93

7 907.73

970.89

4 342.10

285.34

2 320.39

7 918.72

0.19

0.15

0.10

0.11

0.14

Account

RURPOOR

RURNPOOR

URBPOOR

URBNPOOR

Total

66

Table 23. Percentage change in the wage rate

Industry

Percentage change

Industry

Percentage change

Processing of meat and dairy products

Growing of cassava

Real estate

Growing of sorghum or millets

Growing of maize

Hunting and forestry

Growing of other roots and tubes

Growing of other crops

Growing of fruits and vegetables

Growing of beans

Growing of oil seeds

Growing of paddy

Operation of poultry and livestock

Processed food

Growing of other cereals

Growing of sugar

Growing of coffee

Beverages and tobacco products

Growing of tea

Fishing and fish farms

Growing of cotton

Growing of tobacco

1.5294

1.4489

1.4398

1.3735

1.3733

1.2734

1.2713

1.1968

1.1491

1.1072

1.0421

0.9453

0.9171

0.8744

0.8642

0.6661

0.6606

0.6188

0.5564

0.5337

0.5237

0.5060

Growing of cashew nuts

Hotels and restaurants

Growing of sisal fibre

Grain milling

Textile and leather products

Wholesale and retail trade

Growing of wheat

Rubber plastic and other manufacturing

Mining and quarrying

Business and other services

Manufacture of all equipment

Construction

Wood-paper printing

Iron steel and metal products

Manufacture of basic and industrial chemicals

Manufacture of fertilizers and pesticides

Glass and cement

Utilities

Petroleum refineries

Public administration, health and education

Transport and communication

0.4884

0.4396

0.4373

0.3643

0.3131

0.2176

0.2127

0.1724

0.1594

0.1584

0.1525

0.1034

0.1003

0.0955

0.0610

0.0610

0.0564

0.0553

0.0447

0.0413

0.0285

67

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIATable 24. Percentage change in value added

Industry

Growing of maize

Manufacture of basic and industrial chemicals

Petroleum refineries

Growing of sisal fibre

Textile and leather products

Hotels and restaurants

Utilities

Beverages and tobacco products

Processed food

Rubber plastic and other manufacturing

Growing of cotton

Growing of sorghum or millet

Growing of other cereals

Public administration health and education

Business and other services

Transport and communication

Real estate

Grain milling

Growing of oil seeds

Growing of other crops

Growing of beans

Fishing and fish farms

Percentage change

Industry

Percentage change

1.8367

0.4288

0.3175

0.1778

0.1778

0.0739

0.0647

0.0417

-0.0133

-0.0188

-0.0433

-0.0595

-0.0677

-0.0812

-0.0882

-0.0925

-0.1171

-0.1408

-0.1536

-0.1624

-0.1633

-0.1690

Operation of poultry and livestock

Wholesale and retail trade

Growing of paddy

Growing of other roots and tubes

Iron steel and metal products

Processing of meat and dairy products

Growing of fruits and vegetables

Growing of cassava

Hunting and forestry

Mining and quarrying

Growing of tea

Growing of tobacco

Wood-paper printing

Manufacture of fertilizers and pesticides

Growing of wheat

Glass and cement

Growing of sugar

Manufacture of all equipment

Construction

Growing of coffee

Growing of cashew nuts

-0.1950

-0.1975

-0.2094

-0.2348

-0.2352

-0.2524

-0.2747

-0.2917

-0.3065

-0.3182

-0.3640

-0.3804

-0.3859

-0.4121

-0.4306

-0.4438

-0.4789

-0.5680

-0.6458

-1.0801

-1.1909

68

Table 25. Percentage change in composite commodity price

Industry

Growing of cassava

Growing of maize

Growing of other roots and tubes

Hunting and forestry

Growing of sorghum or millet

Growing of other crops

Processing of meat and dairy products

Growing of coffee

Growing of fruits and vegetables

Growing of beans

Growing of oil seeds

Operation of poultry and livestock

Real estate

Growing of paddy

Grain milling

Fishing and fish farms

Growing of other cereals

Growing of tobacco

Growing of tea

Growing of sugar

Growing of cotton

Growing of sisal fibre

Percentage change

Industry

Percentage change

1.3500

1.1592

1.1405

1.1214

1.0266

1.0260

1.0028

0.9994

0.9876

0.9702

0.9037

0.8609

0.7607

0.7456

0.7431

0.7102

0.6975

0.5727

0.5339

0.4731

0.4519

0.3335

Processed food

Beverages and tobacco products

Hotels and restaurants

Growing of wheat

Textile and leather products

Wood-paper printing

Public administration, health and education

Business and other services

Construction

Utilities

Wholesale and retail trade

Rubber plastic and other manufacturing

Manufacture of basic and industrial chemicals

Iron steel and metal products

Transport and communication

Glass and cement

Growing of cashew nuts

Petroleum refineries

Manufacture of all equipment

Mining and quarrying

Manufacture of fertilizers and pesticides

0.3218

0.3083

0.2660

0.2097

0.1506

0.1264

0.0960

0.0759

0.0532

0.0244

0.0200

0.0137

0.0117

0.0073

0.0067

0.0036

0.0010

0.0005

-0.0011

-0.0248

-0.2912

69

 FOREST ECOSYSTEMS IN THE TRANSITION TO A GREEN ECONOMY AND THE ROLE OF REDD+ IN THE UNITED REPUBLIC OF TANZANIAForest 
ecosystems in 
the transition 
to a green 
economy and the 
role oF redd+ 
in the united 
republic oF 
tanzania

