BIODIVERSITY FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT: 
DELIVERING RESULTS FOR ASIA AND THE PACIFIC
 
Copyright  UNDP 2014
 
The  views  expressed  in  this  publication  do  not  necessarily  represent  those  of  the  United  Nations,  including 
UNDP, or the UN Member States. The boundaries and names shown and the designations used on maps in this 
document do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by the United Nations or contributory organisations.

UNDP partners with people at all levels of society to help build nations that can withstand crisis, and drive and 
sustain the kind of growth that improves the quality of life for everyone. On the ground in more than 170 countries 
and territories, we offer global perspective and local insight to help empower lives and build resilient nations. 
www.undp.org
 
 

We would like to recognize the many development partners that have financed and contributed to the projects and 
programmes outlined in this publication. We extend special thanks to the Global Environment Facility 
(www.thegef.org).

Brand Guidelines & 
Graphic Standards

www.theGEF.org

 BIODIVERSITY

FOR SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT
DELIVERING RESULTS FOR ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

Borneo red flying frog in mushroom (Rhacophorus pardalis), Borneo

Photo: Frans Lanting

FOREWORD

FOREWORD

The  Asia-Pacific  region  is  both  dynamic  and  diverse,  covering  36 
countries and territories. Tremendous progress has been made in terms 
of human and economic development over the last couple of decades. 
However, this progress has come at the cost of the biodiversity and 
ecosystems that support millions of lives and livelihoods in the region. 
Biodiversity is in decline in all types of ecosystem existing in the region, 
particularly in forests, rivers and oceans. The rate of species loss is 
almost twice the global average, and the occurrence of natural and 
man-made disasters, exacerbated by climate change and shocks, is 
increasing at an alarming rate. In the Pacific, the very existence of 
some nations is threatened by sea level rise.

Yet, far from succumbing to these challenges, the countries of the Asia 
Pacific region are rising to the task of harnessing the positive opportu-
nities provided by biodiversity and natural ecosystems, as catalysts for 
sustainable development. In recognizing the real value of biodiversity 
and ecosystems  in relation to secure livelihoods, food, water and 
health, enhanced resilience, conservation of threatened species and 
their habitats, and increased carbon storage and sequestration  they, 
together with the Global Environment Facility (GEF) and the United 
Nations Development Programme (UNDP), are drawing on the potential 
of nature to achieve multiple development dividends.

UNDP  and  GEF  are  thus  delighted  to  present  this  publication    
Biodiversity for Sustainable Development: Delivering Results for Asia 
and the Pacific  which showcases the ground-breaking work that has 
taken place in recent years in this vast and disparate region to conserve 
land, water and ocean resources while adapting to climate change, 
enhancing local capacity, and generating sustainable livelihoods.

The  publication  highlights  case  studies  and  examples  of  initiatives, 
from the eastern tip of Asia to the far reaches of the Pacific Ocean, 
which have expanded and strengthened protected areas, integrated 
biodiversity and ecosystem management into key economic sectors 
including tourism, agriculture and fisheries, and supported ecosystem-
based adaptation to, and mitigation of, climate change. This work has 
been reinforced by initiatives focusing on access to clean and afford-
able energy and improved energy efficiency, empowering women, and 
ensuring effective risk management and resilience building.

In total, since 2000, UNDP and GEF have carried out work over 10 
million  hectares  in  13  countries  to  improve  production  practices  in 
agriculture,  fisheries,  forestry,  tourism  and  extractive  industries,  to  

conserve biodiversity while driving economic growth and generating 
jobs. A total of 459 marine and terrestrial protected areas and 
indigenous and community conservation areascovering 64 million 
hectares  in  19  countrieshas  benefited  from  UNDP-managed 
GEF investment in governance, management effectiveness and 
livelihood generation. 

Going forward, as the international community identifies the priorities 
and Sustainable Development Goals for the post-2015 development 
agenda, as well as a new climate change regime for the post-2020 
period, UNDP and GEF commit to further support countries in the 
Asia Pacific region in responding to the challenge of sustainable  
development by intensifying actions for the effective maintenance 
and protection of natural capital.

In particular, the Ridge to Reef programme will constitute a major 
area of work, promoting integrated natural resource management to 
deliver multiple development benefits in a number of Pacific Island 
countries. Tiger landscape management will be supported in tiger 
range states to support the Global Tiger Recovery Programme, 
and we will address trade in endangered species by supporting 
efforts to create sustainable livelihoods for communities; strengthen 

governance  and  law  enforcement;  and  reduce  the  demand  for  
illegal wildlife products. We will work with Small Island Developing 
States in the region to reduce threats from invasive species and 
their negative impacts on island ecosystems and their development. 
We  will  also  work  with  countries  to  integrate  biodiversity  and 
ecosystem  values  in  national  and  local  fiscal  and  development 
planning  processes  through  UNDPs  Biodiversity  Financing  
(BIOFIN) programme.

Our focus is on strengthening the human resources of partner 
countries  and  their  people,  while  promoting  inclusive  economic 
growth that takes the real value of biodiversity and ecosystems 
into account in decision-making and works to influence markets 
to reflect that value. We will continue to build genuine and durable 
partnerships  at  the  local,  national  and  regional  levels,  through 
greater South-South cooperation, more effective coordination, and 
engagement with new partners on shared priorities.

UNDP and GEF look forward to continuing to work closely with 
our Asia-Pacific partners to deliver solutions to biodiversity and 
ecosystem  loss  to  help  them  chart  a  path  towards  sustainable 
development.

2

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

3

Haoliang Xu, 
Director, Regional Bureau 
for Asia and the Pacific, 
UNDP

Adriana Dinu, 
Executive Coordinator,
UNDP-GEF, UNDP

Gustavo A. B. Fonseca, 
Head of Natural Resources, 
GEF

CONTENTS

Crimson sunbird (Aethopyga siparaja) 
Khao Kitchakut National Park, Thailand
Photo: kajornyot/Shutterstock.com

Little owl (Athene noctua)
Photo: Marc Foggin

A farmer ploughs his field, 
near Aungpan Myanmar
Photo: Sarah Valenti

S
T
N
E
T
N
O
C

Himalayan goral 
(Naemorhedus goral), Bhutan
Photo: Midori Paxton

Olive ridley turtle (Lepidochelys olivacea)
Photo: Prashanth Vishwanathan/UNDP India

       16-55
18
20
22
23
24
25
26
28
29

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

THE FUTURE WE WANT  BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEMS 
DRIVING SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT  
INTRODUCTION 
MUST SEE WILD PLACES IN ASIA AND THE PACIFIC 
HOME 
Protected Areas: Managing Biodiversity for Sustainable Development   
 
Expanding and Strengthening Protected Areas to Meet Global Goals 
 
New Ways to Manage Protected Areas  Innovation in Thailand 
 
What's Out There? Using Camera Traps to Monitor Protected Areas 
Wildlife Crime  Preventing the Trade of Endangered Species  
 
 
 
Tigers! in Short Supply 
 
 
 
Tiger Tiger Burning Bright or Heading into Darkness 
 
Conserving the Asiatic Cheetah in Iran 
 
 
Conserving the Last Refuge of Endangered Primates in Viet Nam 
 
Empowered Indigenous Communities Conserve their Ancestral 
Homes in the Philippines: The Rise of ICCAs 
Community Development and Education Supports Wildlife 
Management in Papua New Guinea 
 
Looking Across the Landscape: Managing Biodiversity 
and Ecosystems within and beyond Protected Areas  
Nepals Western Terai: Integrated Planning at the Landscape Level 
Mongolias Altai: The Landscape Approach in the Largest of Landscapes 
Connecting Landscapes in Bhutan and Malaysia: 
Creating and Strengthening Biodiversity Corridors and Networks 
CALM in Cambodia: Generating Sustainable Livelihoods through 
 
Biodiversity Conservation  
Why Buy Ibis Rice? 
 
 
Partnerships for Paradise: The Tioman Tourism Story 
Managing the Impacts of Climate Change: Embedding Climate Resilience
in Protected Area Planning - the Case of Papua New Guinea   
UNDPs Legacy  Institutional Capacity Building for Biodiversity 
and Ecosystems Management 
 
Building Individual and Institutional Capacities for Ecosystems 
 
and Biodiversity Management in Asia and the Pacific  
How Healthy is your Home? 
 
 
FOOD & WATER 
Securing the Future of Agriculture in Asia Pacific 
How They Have Done It: Embedding Wild Relative Crop 
 
Conservation into Rural Development 
 
A Big Bang for your Buck  Conserving Traditional Crops in Bhutan 
 
 
Recipe for Putta  Local Bhutanese Buckwheat Noodles 
 
Managing and Restoring Precious Wetlands in Iran and Nepal  
Sustainable Agriculture Can Solve Problems Facing Wetlands  
 
Conserving Ecologically Critical Areas in Bangladeshs Vast Wetlands   
The Conservation and Rehabilitation of Lake Inle in Myanmar  
 
International Waters  Sharing and Sustaining Marine, Coastal 
and Freshwater Resources across Borders   
 
How Locally Managed Marines Areas are Making a Difference  
 
What is a Locally Managed Area (LMMA)? 
Sustaining Forest and Watersheds in Indonesia 
 

 
 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 6
 8

10

30

32

34
35
37

39

42
45
46

48

50

53
54

60
61
63
64
66
67
68

69
70
71
72

       56-79
58
 

90
92
94

95
96
98
99

100

102

104

A diver descends in a large underwater 
crevice, Solomon Islands.
Photo: Ethan Daniels/Shutterstock.com

74

76
78

     80-105
82
 
83
84
86
89

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 

 
 
 

The Power of Women: Integrating Gender into Ecosystem 
and Biodiversity Management 
Combining Sustainable Forest Management and Energy 
Efficient Cookstoves in Cambodia   
Go Local! In Micronesia  Promoting the CHEEF Benefits of Local Foods 
WORK & MONEY 
 
Reconnecting People with the Natural World 
Why Biodiversity and Ecosystems Are Crucial for Sustainable Development 
Natural Capital  Insurance for our Future 
The Price of Parks  Financing Protected Areas 
Growing a Socially Responsible Biodiversity-based Economy in Thailand 
The Importance of National Biodiversity Strategies and Action Plans 
(NBSAPS) and Biodiversity Financing 
 
Biodiversity is the Bedrock of the Maldivian Economy 
Poverty Environment Initiative: Greening Investments in Lao PDR 
UN-REDD Programme: Calculating the Real Economic Value 
of Forests in Mongolia 
Fair and Equitable Frameworks for Access and Benefit Sharing 
Supporting Sustainable Alternative and Biodiversity-Friendly Livelihoods 
From Timer to Tourists: Community Transformation on Samar Island 
Microcredit for Self Help Groups Leads to Sustainable Livelihoods 
and Greater Security in Tonle Sap Lake, Cambodia 
Protecting the Markhor: Conservation and Sustainable Livelihoods 
in Pakistans Northern Highlands 
 
Profiting from Wild Apricots  Entrepreneurial Women 
Capitalize on Small Grants 
 
HEALTH & SECURITY 
Ecosystem Health and Human Security Go Hand in Hand 
Managing and Restoring Ecosystems for Climate Change 
Mitigation and Adaptation in Asia and the Pacific 
Great Steppes Forward in Mongolia through Ecosystem-based Adaptation 
Integrating Biodiversity into REDD+ 
Community Cooperation Helps Herders to Combat Environmental Change 
Emergency Biodiversity Conservation Measures Support 
Reconstruction in Earthquake-hit Areas of Sichuan Province, China 
Conserving Mother Natures Medicine Cabinet in India 
A National Framework for Safe Use of Biotechnology in Malaysia 
Global Warning  Invasive Alien Species Are Coming  
Reducing Conflict between Wildlife and Communities 
HAPPINESS & LOVE 
Culture, Livelihoods, and Nature (CLAN): Tibets Jewels of the Land    
Biodiversity and Ecosystems: Essential Ingredients for Happiness 
 
 
Tiger Man of Malaysia! 
Community-led Conservation of Forest Biodiversity in Fiji 
 
ECOSYSTEMS QUIZ 
 
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS   

 
 
 
 
 

 
 

 
 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

    106-127
 
108

110
115
116
118

120
122
124
125
126

138

139

                  128-137
130
132
134
135

 
 

Photo: Midori Paxton

Sunset, Tioman Island, Malaysia
Photo: Doungjun Roongruang

Tree in Khao Yai National Park, Thailand
Photo: Midori Paxton

THE FUTURE WE WANT

THE FUTURE WE WANT 
 BIODIVERSITY AND 
ECOSYSTEMS DRIVING 
SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT

UNDPS GLOBAL ECOSYSTEMS AND BIODIVERSITY FRAMEWORK 
2012-2020 SEEKS TO HARNESS THE POSITIVE POTENTIAL OF ECOSYSTEMS 
AND BIODIVERSITY TO CONTRIBUTE TO SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Nomads with their yak herds roam across 

the very themes of this publication. As the Malaysian govern-
ment also put it so aptly in its official biodiversity conserva-
tion logo: My Biodiversity - Life, Heritage and Future.

the snow-carpeted hills of the Tibetan plateau that are their 
home. On the other side of the world, I am pouring a glass 
of cool water in between meetings in my packed day in New 
York City, indulging myself for 10 seconds reflecting on the 
sight of an orang-utan I saw in the Borneo rainforest two 
years ago. More than 12,000 kilometres (km) to the east in 
Lao Peoples Democratic Republic (PDR), a young boy sits 
down to savour a bowl of rice. In the Western Ghats where I 
grew up, an aspiring tour guide studies a book on the birds 
of India, anxious to impress her first tour group the follow-
ing day. Some 13,000 km to the south east, a fisherman in 
the tiny Pacific island nation of Kiribati heads home with 
his days catch of fish, enough to feed his family and a few 
neighbours. 7,500 km northeast a Bhutanese monk medi-
tates backed by the sacred peak of the mountain, Gangkhar 
Puensum.

Though we may not realize it, each of these people shares a 
common bond in a very real, tangible and vital way  each 
depends on ecosystems and biodiversity. The nomadic herd-
ers have lived in the high mountain landscapes of Central 
and North Asia for millennia, relying on pasture to graze their 
livestock for their main livelihood. Rice farmers in Lao PDR 
rely on agro-biodiversity to secure their crops from threats 
from climate change and disease. In New York, all 8 million 
residents, along with the 47 million annual visitors, rely on 
protected areas in upstate New York to supply their drinking 
water day in and day out. The tour guide in the Western 
Ghats is soon to become part of her countrys nature-based 
tourism industry, which contributes to the local and national 
economy. 

The fisherman in Kiribati relies on the Phoenix Islands 
Marine Protected Area to supply his family with daily protein. 
In Bhutan, nature contributes to spiritual fulfilment and the 
concept of protected areas has existed for thousands of 
years, as sacred sites.

As these examples illustrate, ecosystems and biodiversity 
provide us with a home, food, water, medicine, livelihoods 
and jobs, money, knowledge, and inspiration and equip us to 
cope with disasters and climate change impacts. These are 

While biodiversity provides the foundation on which all life 
depends, including human societies, it is particularly impor-
tant to the 2.7 billion people  more than a quarter of the 
worlds population  who survive on less than US$2 a day. 
As much as 70 percent of the worlds poorest people de-
pend critically on biodiversity to provide them with lifes most 
basic necessities, including food, water, shelter, medicine 
and their livelihoods. UNDPs core mission is to contribute 
to the eradication of extreme poverty and the reduction of 
inequality and exclusion: if this is to be achieved, the integra-
tion of biodiversity and ecosystems management into the 
development and poverty reduction agenda is vital.

And this is exactly the reason why UNDP works on ecosys-
tem and biodiversity, managing an ever-increasing US$1.2 
billion portfolio. 

In 2012, at the 11th Conference of Parties of the Conven-
tion on Biological Diversity in India, we launched the UNDP 
Biodiversity and Ecosystems Global Framework 2012-2020.

As illustrated in the diagram on the right, the framework 
comprises three signature programmes, to respond to coun-
tries demand for support on Policy, Finance and Capacity:

1. Integrating biodiversity and ecosystem management into 
development planning and production sector activities to 
safeguard biodiversity and maintain ecosystem services that 
sustain human wellbeing.

2. Unlocking the potential of protected areas, including 
indigenous and community conserved areas, to conserve 
biodiversity while contributing towards sustainable 
development.

Nik  Sekhran,  Chief  of 
3. Managing and rehabilitating 
Profession,  Sustainable 
ecosystems for adaptation to, 
Development
and mitigation of, climate change.

by Nik Sekhran, Chief of Profession, 
Sustainable Development Cluster

UNDPS BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEMS GLOBAL FRAMEWORK
FOR THE WHOLE DOCUMENT 
PLEASE VISIT: WWW.UNDP.ORG/BIODIVERSITY 

Strategic Objective

Signature Programmes

Two key approaches that 
underpin each signature 

programme

L
A
N
O

I

T

A

N

     L O CAL

Maintain and enhance the

goods and services provided by
biodiversity and ecosystems in
order to secure livelihoods, food,

water and health, enhance

resilience, conserve threatened
species and their habitats, and
increase carbon storage and

sequestration

   GLOBA L

SP1Integrating
Biodiversity into

Development

SP2Unlocking
the Potential of
Protected Areas

SP3Mitigating,
and Adapting to,

the E ffects of

Climate Change

All of our programmes and projects in 140 countries around the world, including 
Asia and the Pacific, fall under this framework. Ultimately, it all comes down to 
securing the essential natural capital of the nations and the world. Natural capital 
represents 25 percent of total wealth in developing countries. 

Therefore attenuating biodiversity loss is a critical strategy for mitigating poverty 
and  achieving  sustainable  development.  Biodiversity  can  provide  an  important 
safety net for the poor. 

I believe there are two key factors that determine success or failure of human 
societies to manage biodiversity and reduce poverty:

1.  Strength  of  environmental  governance  systems:  putting  in  place  policies,  
regulations  and  effective  institutions  to  support  accountable  decision-making 
systems and protect property rights.

2. Ability to address market failure: changing the trajectory of markets to account 
for and correctly value ecosystem goods and services in financial transactions.

UNDPs ecosystem and biodiversity programme is designed to address these 
factors  by  removing  barriers  to  country  action  to  address  the  root  causes  of  
biodiversity loss and improve the state of biodiversity over the long-term.

I was trained as an economist. But you dont have to be an economist to realise 
that it simply does not make sense to grow the economy  accumulate financial 
wealth, increase physical assets  if this growth depletes your natural capital beyond 
the threshold of being able to support our life. It is a housekeeping fundamental; 
all accounts must be healthy. If the biodiversity and ecosystem account is in the 
red, how can we justify calling the growth progress? How can it be development?

Developing capacity at the
individual, institutional and
systemic levels to identify and
implement new options for
e ffective democratic
governance for biodiversity
and ecosystem management
and
Assisting countries to identify,
access, combine and
sequence environmental
finance for biodiversity and
ecosystem management,
mobilize pro-poor markets for
ecosystem goods and
services, and generate
sustainable livelihoods

Globally, through management of 
512 projects on ecosystems and 
biodiversity with US$1.5 billion  
infunding from the GEF and other 
sources, and co-finance of US$3.5 
billion, UNDPs ecosystems and 
biodiversity programme has been 
successful in: impacting over 2,000 
protected areas in 85 countries, 
covering 272 million hectares; 
undertaking interventions in pro-
duction sectors and development 
planning in 38 countries, covering 
244 million hectares; and promoting 
ecosystem-based adaptation to or 
mitigation of climate change in 71 
countries. In addition to this portfolio 
of projects, UNDP also implements 
two programmes focused at the 
local levelthe GEF Small Grants 
Programme and the Equator Initia-
tive partnershipthat are working 
with indigenous peoples and local 
communities on ground-breaking 
work in biodiversity conservation and 
sustainable development.

Photo: Kim Briers/Shutterstock

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

7

INTRODUCTION

Drying fish, Raja Ampat, Indonesia
Photo: Zafer Kizilkaya

INTRODUCTION

The Asia Pacific region teems with 

life. The region encompasses some of the worlds largest and 
most diverse ecosystems and is home to more than half of 
the worlds population. From the rivers flowing from the high 
Himalayas to the waters of the Coral Triangle, the web of eco-
systems in this region and the biodiversity that enriches them 
support the lives and livelihoods of millions of people.

However, despite much progress in environmental protection, 
the region is losing the integrity and productivity of its lands 
and seas. The Living Planet Index, published biennially by the 
World Wildlife Fund (WWF) and its partners, reports that biodi-
versity is in decline in all types of ecosystem examined in the 
Asia Pacific region, including forests, rivers and oceans. The 
rate of species loss is about twice the global average. Data 
have shown that the region is depleting natural assets at an 
unsustainable rate: water scarcity is increasing; tropical forests 
are shrinking; and climate change is worsening these threats. 
The risk of natural disasters  exacerbated by climate change 
and economic shocks  magnifies existing vulnerabilities.

Since 2000, UNDPs Ecosystems and Biodiversity (EBD) pro-
gramme has achieved substantial results through its manage-
ment of more than 160 GEF-financed projects in Asia Pacific. 
Work has been carried out over more than 10 million hectares 
in 13 countries to improve production practices in agriculture, 
fisheries, forestry, tourism and extractive industries, to conserve 
biodiversity while driving economic growth and generating 
jobs. A total of 459 marine and terrestrial protected areas and 
indigenous and community conservation areascovering 64 
million hectares in 19 countrieshave been impacted through 
UNDP-supported GEF-financed projects. Sustainable forest 
management measures and ecosystem-based adaptation and 
mitigation interventions supported by UNDP with GEF finance 
are also under way in the Asia Pacific region. 

UNDP-GEF currently supports a portfolio of 104 ecosystems 
and biodiversity projects in Asia Pacific, which are at various 
stages of the project cycle. In addition to this portfolio of pro-
jects, UNDP also implements two programmes focused at the 
local levelthe GEF Small Grants Programme and the Equator 
Initiative.

In the Asia Pacific region as of 2013, 29 UNDP supported 
GEF financed projects are working to integrate biodiversity 
and ecosystem management into development planning and 
production sector activities that target the agriculture, extrac-
tives, fisheries, forestry and tourism sectors, directly impacting 
an area of over 8 million hectares. UNDP is currently working 
in more than 300 protected areas in the region, impacting 
a total of more than 45 million hectares. This work primarily 
supports strengthening of protected areas so that they are 

better managed and sustainably financed, but it also supports 
strategic expansion of existing protected area networks. A 
total area of more than 167,000 hectares is directly impacted 
by ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA) interventions in the 
region, in ecosystems ranging from the mountainous to the 
marine, bringing benefits, such as water security, to the nearby 
communities.

UNDP country offices, jointly with national governments and 
partners in the region, manage and monitor implementation of 
these projects. The UNDP Regional Bureau for Asia and the 
Pacific has 24 Country Offices as well as Regional Service 
Centres in Bangkok and Suva, covering 37 countries and  
territories. These Regional Service Centres support project  
formulation, implementation, monitoring and reporting and 
provide policy advice.

This publication presents results and success stories from 
UNDPs work with ecosystems and biodiversity outcomes 
in the Asia Pacific region. The majority of work presented is 
supported with grant financing from the Global Environment 
Facility Trust Fund (GEF). Apart from the GEF, major funding 
sources include the Adaptation Fund, Least Developed Coun-
tries Trust Fund and Nagoya Protocol Implementation Fund, 
also administered by the GEF; the European Union, German 
Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature Conservation, 
Building and Nuclear Safety, Government of Norway, Govern-
ment of the Netherlands, SNV Netherlands Development 
Organisation, Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation 
SDC, World Wildlife Fund.

The projects presented represent a range of approaches being 
adopted to implement UNDPs Global Ecosystems and Biodi-
versity Framework 20122020. In addition, achievements are 
also presented from other core and bilaterally funded regional 
work and UNDP environment programmes that also contribute 
to biodiversity management, including the UNDP-UNEP 
Poverty Environment Initiative (PEI) and the UN Reducing 
Emissions from Deforestation and Degradation (UN-REDD 
Programme), a collaborative initiative of UN FAO, UNEP and 
UNDP.

The results and stories are structured in five themes that aim 
to reflect some of the positive contributions of ecosystems 
and biodiversity to sustainable human development and 
wellbeing: Home, Food and Water, Work and Money, Health 
and Security, and Happiness and Love. Each article highlights 
selected achievements of various projects within a particular 
theme or topic, but all of the projects are characterised by the 
use of multiple approaches to achieving their objectives in the 
specific contexts of the countries and locations where they are 
implemented.

MUST SEE WILD PLACES IN ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

Forests of the Annamite mountains are home to 
the douc langur (Pygtharix nemaeus)
Photo: Subin Pumsom/Shutterstock.com

Myanmars Northern Mountains Forest Complex harbour 
rufous-necked hornbill (Aceros nipalensis)
Photo: Kim Briers/Shutterstock.com

MUST SEE 
WILD PLACES 
IN ASIA AND 
THE PACIFIC

THOUGH BY NO MEANS 
COMPREHENSIVE, THIS LIST 
GIVES A SAMPLE OF SOME 
OF THE AMAZING ECOSYSTEMS 
AND BIODIVERSITY THAT ASIA 
AND THE PACIFIC HAVE TO OFFER

Natural lakes in Band-e-Amir National Park
Photo: Rodrigo Guim/Shutterstock.com

1.ALTAI  TAVAN  BOGD  KHAN 

NATIONAL  PARK,  MONGOLIA. 
The vast, stunning mountains of this national park 
are considered sacred to local Mongolian herders 
and are home to spectacular species, such as the 
snow leopard, listed as Endangered by IUCN, and 
the worlds largest wild sheep  the argali.

2.ANNAMITE  MOUNTAINS 

OF SOUTHEAST  ASIA AND THE 
CARDAMOM  MOUNTAINS  OF 
CAMBODIA.  The  mysterious  rich  rainfor-
ests that cover these mountains are still relatively 
unexplored  three new species of mammal were 
recently discovered here. The park is also home to 
the striking and Endangered douc langur monkey, 
tiger and Asian elephant.

3. BAA ATOLL, MALDIVES. This 

heart-shaped  group  of  75  islands  is  renowned 
for its extensive coral reefs and marine life, which 
includes  rare  corals  unique  to  the  atoll,  and  the 
famous  Hanifaru  Bay,  a  significant  aggregation 
site for manta rays and whale sharks.

10

4. BAND-E-AMIR  NATIONAL 

PARK, AFGHANISTAN. Afghanistans 
first national park, Band-e-Amir is one of few places 
in the world where natural lakes created by traver-
tine mineral deposits can be found. Six deep, almost 
impossibly brilliant blue lakes separated by these 
natural dams nestle among stark limestone cliffs 
in the Hindu Kush Mountains, where the Persian 
leopard still roams.

5.CASPIAN HYRCANIAN 

FOREST LANDSCAPE, IRAN. This 
ancient landscape of lowland and montane forests 
is a storehouse of endemic and threatened species. 
Named after the ancient region of Hyrcania (Wolf 
Land), the landscape is also home to wolves and 
bown bears.

6.CHITRAL VALLEY, PAKISTAN. Snow-fed rivers run through 

lush  green  meadows,  terraced  fields  and  forest  against  a  backdrop  of  rocky 
glacier-topped mountains in the spectacular Chitral Valley. Chitrals mountains 
harbour snow leopards and the worlds largest species of wild goat  the majestic 
and Endangered markhor.

Forest in Jigme Dorji National Park, Bhutan
Photo: Midori Paxton

Sunrise in Danum Valley, Borneo
Photo: Kim Briers/Shutterstock.com

Baa Atoll in the Maldives is an aggregation site for manta rays 
(Manta spp.). Photo: nitrogenic.com/Shutterstock.com

7.  DANUM  VALLEY  CONSERVATION 

AREA, BORNEO. This large tract of relatively undisturbed 
ancient lowland tropical rainforest is home to a number of rare 
and  enigmatic  species,  including  the  tarsier,  Bornean  pygmy 
elephant, and the recently discovered spectacled flowerpecker 
bird. It includes the Maliau Basin Conservation Area established 
to conserve the Maliau river catchment and the Yayasan Sabah 
Concession Area.

8. EASTERN STEPPE, MONGOLIA. Great 

migratory herds of Mongolian gazelle roam the open plains, rolling 
hills and pristine wetlands of the eastern steppe, one of Asias last 
grassland wildernesses. More than twice the size of New York 
State, 200,000 nomadic herders depend directly on this vast and 
fragile landscape for their livelihoods.

9. LANGU GORGE, NEPAL. Accessible only by 

foot, the Langu Gorge lies in Nepals largest national park  Shey 
Phoksudo  famous for its spectacular Himalayan landscapes. With 
cliffs, ridges and gullies, this is prime snow leopard habitat and 
the first place that the species was ever studied by radio collar.

10. LAYA  VILLAGE  OF  JIGME  DORJI 

NATIONAL PARK, BHUTAN. Laya village, home to 
the Layap indigenous people, lies at an altitude of 3,850 metres in 
the Tibetan peaks of Bhutans second largest national park. Blue 
sheep,  musk  deer,  tigers,  snow  leopards  and  Bhutans  national 
animal, the takin (a type of goat-antelope), all share this landscape.

11. NINO KONIS SANTANA NATIONAL 

PARK, TIMOR-LESTE. Timor-Lestes first national park 
encompasses primary rainforest, more than 200 cultural sites and 
a large tract of the Coral Triangle, an underwater paradise with the 
worlds greatest coral and reef fish diversity. On land, the park links 
Important  Bird  Areas,  which  harbour  the  Critically  Endangered 
endemic Timor green-pigeon and yellow crested cockatoo.

12. NORTHERN MOUNTAINS FOREST 

COMPLEX, MYANMAR.  This vast landscape at the 
crossroads of India, Myanmar and China encompasses four pro-
tected areas and is one of the regions largest remaining expanses 
of natural forest, harbouring tiger, red panda and the rufous-necked 
hornbill. Myanmars highest mountain and the headwaters of its 
most important rivers, the Ayerwaddy and Chindwin are also found 
here. 

13. NORTHERN PLAINS OF CAMBODIA. 

Once referred to as the Serengeti of Southeast Asia, Cambodias 
Northern Plains are famous for both their rich abundance of wildlife 
and their cultural heritage, as the site of Angkor Wat. This landscape 
is home to some of the worlds rarest large waterbirds, including 
the Critically Endangered giant ibis, and large threatened mammals 
such as the Asian elephant and banteng, a species of wild cattle.

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

11

MUST SEE WILD PLACES IN ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

Celebes crested macaque (Macaca nigra), 
Tangkoko Nature Reserve
Photo: Midori Paxton

Papua New Guineas forests harbour 
several species of tree kangaroo
Photo: Susan Flashman/Shutterstock.com

24. POHNPEI, FEDERATED STATES OF 

MICRONESIA. Formed from an extinct volcano, the high island 
of Pohnpei contains some of the last remaining montane cloud forest 
in Micronesia, and marine reserves conserve many of its mangroves, 
freshwaters swamps and coral reefs. The islands isolation and great 
age mean that unique species such as the Pohnpei fantail bird can 

be seen here. 25. TETEPARE ISLAND, SOLOMON 

ISLANDS. Known as the last wild island, Tetepare Island and its 
reefs, lagoons and coastal waters area all protected, forming the largest 
MPA in the country. The island and its waters are home to an amazing 
array of life, from the worlds largest skink, the Solomon Islands skink, 
to sharks, saltwater crocodiles, dugongs and turtles. 

Tetapare, Solomon Islands 
Photo: Joel Scriven

18. ROYAL BELUM/ TEMENGOR FOREST 

COMPLEX, PENINSULAR MALAYSIA. Believed to 
be one of the worlds oldest rainforests, at 130 million years old, it is 
home to 3,000 species of flowering plants including the worlds largest 
flower  the giant and stinky Rafflesia  over 100 mammal species, 
including the Malayan tiger, tapir, sun bear, Sumatran rhinoceros and 
all 10 of Malaysias magnificent hornbill bird species.

19. SANJIANGYUAN NATIONAL NATURE 

RESERVE  AND  QINGHAI  LAKE,  QINGHAI, 
CHINA. Also called the Three Rivers Nature Reserve because it 
was established to protect the headwaters of three great rivers  the 
Yellow, Yangtze, and Mekong  on the Tibetan Plateau. Qinghai Lake, 
translated  as  Blue  Lake  or  Teal  Sea,  is  one  of  the  largest  inland 
saltwater lakes in the world and sits at 3,205 metres high.

20. TANGKOKO NATURE RESERVE, 

INDONESIA. Bright orange sea putat flowers scatter the black 
volcanic sand beaches like stars as they meet the rainforest in this 
unique nature reserve, overshadowed by a large volcano. Several threat-
ened and enigmatic creatures live here, including the Celebes crested 
macaque, spectral tarsier, Sulawesi bear cuscus and mimic octopus, 
which is capable of impersonating other animals to trick predators.

The giant Rafflesia cantleyi flower, 
Royal Belum/Temengor Forest 
Complex. Photo: Midori Paxton

Palawan, Philippines 
Photo: walterericsy/Shutterstock.com

21. COOK ISLANDS. The Cook Islands has pledged 

to establish a vast marine protected area covering just over one million 
km2, making it one of the largest marine areas ever committed for 
conservation. In addition to many oceanic and reef species, mother 
humpback whales and their calves rest in the waters off these islands, 
on their migration route back to colder southern waters. On land, catch 
a glimpse of the Rarotonga flycatcher, an endemic bird.

22. PAPUA NEW GUINEA.  Papua New Guinea 

is a paradise for nature lovers above and below the water, contain-
ing the worlds third largest intact rainforest and a large chunk of the 
Coral Triangles teeming waters. From the Endangered Matschies tree 
kangaroo living in its montane forests and beautifully-plumed birds of 
paradise to the giant Bosavi woolly rat recently discovered living in 
an extinct volcanic crater, PNG is home to a stunning array of unique 
species, with more being discovered all the time.

23.  PHOENIX  ISLANDS  PROTECTED 

AREA, KIRIBATI. One of the largest marine protected areas 
in  the  world,  at  408,250  km2,  PIPA  encompasses  two  submerged 
reefs, eight islands and up to 30 seamounts. A known breeding site for 
numerous migratory and oceanic species; tuna, billfish, sharks, manta 
rays and giant humphead wrasse can all be seen in abundance here. 
It is also a seabird haven, with hundreds of thousands of terns, petrels, 
boobies and shearwaters nesting on the islands. 

Pokhara Valley
Photo: Det-anan/Shutterstock.com

14.PALAWAN ISLAND, PHILIPPINES. With 

its  rain-forested  hills,  powder-fine  beaches,  sparkling  azure  waters 
and abundant wildlife, Palawan Island is a true nature lovers paradise 
with  amazing  seascape  views.  Majestic  karst  limestone  formations, 
lagoons, marble cliffs, prehistoric caves and waterfalls are all off the 
coast waiting to be explored, and the endemic Philippine pangolin can 
be glimpsed in the islands forests. 

15. PARAMBIKULAM WILDLIFE 

SANCTUARY,  KERALA,  INDIA.  Forests,  gentle  hills 
and valleys, meandering streams and waterfalls make up the stunning 
landscape of Parambikulam National Park in the Western Ghats. Tigers 
and the worlds oldest teak tree, the Kannimara Teak, at 450 years old 
and 49.5 metres tall, can be found here.

16.POKHARA VALLEY, NEPAL. Pristine air, a 

spectacular backdrop of snowy peaks of the Annapurna mountain range 
and serene lakes surrounded by lush greenery, make the Pokhara Valley 
a place of remarkable natural beauty. Landraces of aromatic rice origi-
nating in this valley make it important for national agricultural diversity.

17. R HODOD E N D RON  GAR D E N  I N 

THRUMSHINGLA NATIONAL PARK, BHUTAN.
 Wild rhododendrons can be seen in colourful bursts of pink and white 
across this beautiful garden established in Thrumshingla National Park. 
The garden boasts 29 species of rhododendrons, traditionally used to 
make incense and medicines in Bhutan.

12

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

13

MUST SEE WILD PLACES IN ASIA AND THE PACIFIC

1

8

5

4

6

16

9

10

17

19

12

25 MUST SEE 
WILD PLACES

IN COUNTRIES WITH UNDP SUPPORTED 
ECOSYSTEMS AND BIODIVERSITY WORK

15

3

24

2
13

18

14

7

20

22

11

25

23

21

Source: UNDP. 2013. Leveraging Change for Better Lives: UNDP in Asia and the Pacific (2008-2012). United Nations Development 
Programme. (Produced using: UN Office of the High Representative for the Least Developed Countries, Landlocked Developing  
Countries and Small Island Developing States (UN-OHRLLS), 2012. Boundaries from FAO GAUL 2009. Map projection: Winkel Tripel).
Disclaimer: The depiction and use of national boundaries and geographic names on this map are for illustrative purposes only and do not 
necessarily imply official endorsement or acceptance by the United Nations nor by the United Nations Development Programme.

14

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

15

HOME

Photo: Kieran Dodds

The Asia Pacific region is home to more 
than half of the planets population. 
This home is crowded and extraordinarily 
diverse. From the snows of the high 
Himalayas and the inky depths of the 
Mariana Trench to tropical rainforest 
to tundra, alpine meadows and 
mangroves... This intriguing home, 
like every home, faces familiar challenges. 
Is there room for all the family? Who pays 
the bills? Where do the food and water 
come from? And are some inhabitants 
neglecting room maintenance and 
stealing the milk from the proverbial 
shared fridge? UNDPs ecosystems and 
biodiversity work  which seeks to expand 
and strengthen protected areas, integrate 
biodiversity and ecosystem management 
into key economic sectors, and support 
ecosystem-based adaptation to, and 
mitigation of, climate change  is about 
maintaining this shared home and 
resolving household issues. 

HOME

64 MILLION HECTARES OF MARINE AND 
TERRESTRIAL PROTECTED AREAS IN 
THE REGION HAVE BEEN IMPACTED THROUGH 
UNDP SUPPORTED GEF FINANCED PROJECTS
SINCE 2000

PROTECTED AREAS: 
MANAGING 
BIODIVERSITY
FOR SUSTAINABLE 
DEVELOPMENT

Protected areas are part of the worlds life support 
system. They protect intact ecosystems from being 
destroyed and degraded by over-exploitation, pollu-
tion, and conversion to agriculture and urbanization. 
They provide critically important homes for fauna and 
flora, and act as storehouses of biodiversity. They 
also secure benefits that humanity depends on by 
conserving water supplies, combating soil erosion, 
buffering people from the impacts of climate change 
and bolstering economies through tourism and sus-
tainable supply of resources. 

A comprehensive, effectively governed and eco-
logically representative network of protected areas 
is crucial to maintain the health of Asia Pacifics 
landscape and contribute to the sustainable hu-
man development of the people that share it. Since 
2000, UNDP supported GEF financed projects have 
impacted 64 million hectares of marine and terrestrial 
protected areas in the region.

Sanjiangyuan National Nature Reserve, Qinghai Province, China. UNDP, with GEF financing, is working with 
the Government of Qinghai Province to improve the management of the protected area system that harbours 
the important headwaters of the Tibetan Plateau
Photo: Marc Foggin

MANAGING 
THE THREE RIVERS 
RESERVE  CHINAS 
LARGEST WETLAND 
PROTECTED AREA

Green pasture surrounds craggy ridges and snowy 

peaks rising high above deep meandering valleys, where three great 
rivers    the  Yellow,  Yangtze  and  Mekong    wind  away  from  one 
another in the centre of the Tibetan plateau. This is Sanjiangyuan 
National Nature Reserve, known as the Three Rivers Reserve, in 
Chinas Qinghai province. Larger than England and Wales combined, 
this is the Earths highest and most extensive wetland protected 
area. It is home to the snow leopard, Tibetan antelope, wild yak and  
black-necked crane; all threatened with extinction. It is also home 
to 200,000 people. These people, and the nearly 600 million more 
living  downstream,  rely  on  this  fragile  environment  to  meet  their 
basic needs and generate local livelihoods.

The United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), with finance 
from  the  Global  Environment  Facility  (GEF),  is  working  with  the 
government of Qinghai to improve management of the Sanjiangyuan 
region. The protected area system in the province is at significant risk 
from illegal mining, poaching, overgrazing, infrastructure development 
and climate change. The project is addressing these challenges by 
building institutional and staff capacity to strengthen environment-
related policies and enforcement, and working collaboratively with 
local Tibetan herding communities to strengthen conservation and 
sustainable use of local natural resources.

While only in its first year of implementation, the Qinghai Biodiversity 
Conservation  Project  has  already  begun  to  engage  actively  with 
multiple high level and grassroots stakeholders through targeted 
workshops, meetings and field trips. This is consolidating the ex-
tensive groundwork that has been laid over the past decade for a 
people-friendly approach to biodiversity conservation in the regions 
high altitude grasslands and wetlands.

The Qinghai Forestry Department is developing management plans 
to  tackle  identified  threats  in  the  region.  Appropriate  guidelines 
for  management  and  business  planning,  effective  enforcement, 
monitoring  and  reporting,  and  collaborative  management  with  
local communities are also being developed. The project is training 
staff  at  the  prefecture  and  county  levels  to  promote  the  further 
development of Qinghais protected area system and strengthen 
its effectiveness.

18

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

19

HOME

EXPANDING AND 
STRENGTHENING 
PROTECTED AREAS 
TO MEET GLOBAL 
GOALS
World leaders recognise that the current global protected 

area network is not enough to meet our needs. In 2010, they 
agreed on targets to expand protected areas to cover at least 17 
percent of land and inland areas and 10 percent of oceans by 
2020.

As part of this effort, UNDP works with governments to expand 
and strengthen protected areas across a wide range of ecosys-
tems that harbour globally significant biodiversity. These include 
currently under-represented marine, freshwater and grassland 
habitats, and areas that are important for providing ecosystem 
services. 

For example:
 In the Maldives, a UNDP GEF project surpassed its original 
aim to create three marine protected areas in Baa Atoll, by 
establishing six marine parks that together cover over 3,700 
hectares of ocean and under-represented coral reefs. These 
coral reefs play an important role in distributing and maintaining 
biodiversity throughout the Indian Ocean.

 The advocacy efforts of a UNDP GEF project in Mongolias 
Altai Sayan Mountains have led the government to designate 
12 new protected areas, which harbour globally significant 
biodiversity and under-represented steppe grasslands.
 
 In the Philippines, which harbours some of the most unique 
and threatened biodiversity in the world, UNDP is supporting the 
government to expand coverage of Key Biodiversity Areas in the 
national protected area network. 

Altai Sayan grassland, Mongolia
Photo: Maxim Petrichuk/Shutterstock.com

ENHANCING THE MANAGEMENT 
EFFECTIVENESS OF PROTECTED AREAS
All  GEF  financed,  UNDP 

supported  protected  area  projects  aim  to 
strengthen management effectiveness (ME).  
What is management effectiveness and what 
must we do to improve it? The items on the 
wish lists opposite are typical of the types of 
action needed!

tory  issues  to  the  existence  of  management 
plans,  adequacy  of  budget  and  staffing  and 
skill levels, equipment, relationships between 
park residents and neighbours, and the state 
of  the  natural  and  heritage  values  of  parks. 
METT  works  as  a  checklist  to  enable  park 
authorities  to  tackle  ME  in  a  comprehensive 
and practical way.

UNDP gauges quantitative progress towards 
achieving  ME  using  the  Management  Ef-
fectiveness Tracking Tool (METT), which was 
developed by the World Bank and World Wildlife 
Fund (WWF) in 2003. It comprises a set of 30 
questions  that  are  key  for  ME  improvement. 
These questions range from legal and regula-

Experience has taught us that efforts to im-
prove ME on the ground cannot be completed 
without improvements at the systemic and insti-
tutional levels. Without change at these levels, 
good work done at the local level is likely to be 
short-lived, says Yoko Watanabe, GEF Senior 

20

Biodiversity Specialist for Asia. This is why GEF 
increasingly  invests  in  catalysing  sustainabil-
ity of protected areas through transformative  
institutional strengthening.

GEFs work in Mongolia on successive biodiver-
sity projects, in collaboration with UNDP and 
other partners, has provided long-term strategic 
support over the last 15 years. Earlier projects 
contributed to strengthening parks, such as the 
4.4 million hectare Great Gobi Strictly Protected 
Area (SPA) in the south, the half million hectare 
Dornod  Mongol  SPA  in  the  Eastern  Steppe, 
and  the  600,000  hectare  Altai  Tavan  Bogd 
National Park in the far west. These projects 

HERE ARE TWO WISH LISTS 
FROM PARK MANAGERS 
IN BHUTAN AND MONGOLIA

WISH LIST OF SONAM WANGCHUK, 
HEAD OF PARKS IN BHUTAN:
 
1.Increased budget for him to be able to ensure adequate 
park management;
2. More skilled staff with relevant qualifications and 
experience to handle assigned tasks;
3. Stronger laws to enable his staff to perform effec-
tive park management and law enforcement;
4. Development of an information and data depository 
combined with a real time reporting system from the 
field to Headquarters, so that he can brief the Minister 
with accurate and timely information; and
5. A decrease in human wildlife incidents, which he has 
to deal with on a daily basis.

MONGOLIAN RANGER ANKHBAYER BS 
WISH LIST:
 
1. A dozen more staff to be able to patrol the Naiman 
Nuur (Eight Lakes) area, covering 39,670 hectares, un-
der his jurisdiction in the Orkhon Valley National Park;
2. More motor cycles and equipment, such as GPS 
and a camera; 
3. Some funding for a modest visitor centre and infor-
mation materials;
4. Opportunities for training to gain new professional 
knowledge and skills; and
5. More cooperative park resident herders.

have collectively supported the strengthening 
of 12 magnificent parks and the establishment 
of 18 new protected areas covering a stagger-
ing 8.7 million hectares.

The  on-going  Strengthening  the  Protected 
Area  Network  (SPAN)  project  consolidates 
these  efforts  by  catalysing  the  management 
effectiveness  and  financial  sustainability  of 
Mongolias  national  protected  areas  system. 
The  project  is  strengthening  the  policy,  legal 
and  institutional  frameworks  for  sustainable 
financing  and  co-management  of  protected 
areas at the national level.

SPAN has managed to secure the engagement 
of an impressive range of stakeholders at the 
national level to work towards strengthening 
the protected area system. The cross-sectoral 
National Protected Area Forum was established 
to meet annually to promote the protected area 
agenda to ensure support and investment from 
the government and stakeholders. The project 
has also developed a road map towards achiev-

ing the financial sustainability of the protected 
area system. In order to implement the actions 
suggested in this road map, the project has es-
tablished, by Ministerial Decree, an inter-agency 
Working Group on Sustainable Financing for 
protected areas with 19 members drawn from 
key Ministries and other stakeholders.

boats and given the authority to arrest people 
that violate marine park regulations. These new 
credentials have given our officers a sense of 
pride. They now have the skills and equipment 
with which to enforce measures to protect this 
fragile environment, says Mohamad Bin Ishak, 
Parks Assistant at Redang Island Marine Park.

In addition, the project is supporting two pro-
tected  areas  to  increase  their  ME    Orkhon 
Valley National Pak and Ikh Nart National Park. 
At  mid-term,  the  METT  scores  for  the  two 
target sites are on the rise: from 60 to 75 for 
Ikh Nart and from 37 to 55 in Orkhon Valley 
National Park.

Further south in tropical Malaysia, the recently 
completed  Conserving  Marine  Biodiversity 
through Enhanced Marine Park Management 
and Inclusive Island Development project has 
increased the capacity of the Department of 
Marine Parks Management to enforce regula-
tions  within  the  parks  waters  five-fold.  156 
DMPM field officers were trained to man patrol 

Park management plans for the three target 
marine parks  Redang, Sibu Tinggi and Tio-
man islands  have significantly contributed to 
increasing ME, and the number of community 
participation  mechanisms  has  increased.  By 
the  end  of  the  project,  the  METT  scores  for 
the three marine parks had increased signifi-
cantly. For example, the score for Redang Island 
Marine Park more than doubled from 41 to 89 
during the project period.

The METT, complemented by robust biodiversity 
and ecosystem monitoring indicators, remains 
a  vigorous  and  reliable  tool  for  gauging  the 
progress of protected areas towards effective 
management. 

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

21

HOME

NEW WAYS TO 
MANAGE PROTECTED 
AREAS  INNOVATION 
IN THAILAND

The National Parks  and Protected Areas Innova-
tion Institute was established in 2012 in the Department of National 
Parks, Plants, and Wildlife Conservation in Thailand through the UNDP 
supported  and  GEF  financed  Catalyzing  Sustainability  of  Thailands 
Protected Areas System project, which was active from 2010-2014.

Evolved from the Research and Development Unit within the National 
Parks Division, the Institute is mandated to work on: (i) Innovation for 
sustainable financing including payments for ecosystem services and 
other revenue raising mechanisms; (ii) development of an information 
system  for  protected  areas  management;  (iii)  strategic  planning  for 
protected areas; (iv) research and development; and (v) innovation to 
help meet national obligations to international environment conventions. 
It has a central unit in Bangkok with eight centres in the regions, with 
over 30 staff. 

We would like the institute to become a think tank that supports effec-
tive protected area management. We hope it will serve as a coordinating 
mechanism to help Thailand meet our obligations to the international 
conventions on Biodiversity and Climate Change, specifically in relation 
to protected areas, explains Dr. Songtam Suksawang, Director of the 
Institute. In light of the Association of South East Asian Nations (ASEAN) 
Economic Community initiative to be launched in 2015, we would like 
to position the institute as a leading hub for knowledge sharing and 
capacity building among ASEAN countries. The institute has already 
started to gain traction and recognition on this front, providing training 
for visiting park managers from neighbouring countries and supporting 
cross-boundary protected areas projects with Myanmar and Cambodia.

The institute has recently drafted a master plan for the management 
of Thailands national parks, which has just gone through an extensive 
round of consultations with stakeholders. An information and database 
for protected areas management plans is also under development us-
ing the Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool as a main source of 
data, and the institute is working on the economic valuation of select 
protected areas to develop Payment for Ecosystem Services schemes 
and other revenue-generating mechanisms.

White-handed gibbon (Hylobates lar) in Khao Yai National Park, Thailand
Photo: Annabel Paxton
 

WHATS OUT THERE? 
USING 
CAMERA TRAPS 
TO MONITOR 
PROTECTED 
AREAS

LEFT: Camera trap set by the salt lick in Belum 
Temenggor Forest Reserve, Malaysia
Photo: Midori Paxton

two months before staff returns to recover the data. Image 
analysis enables staff to monitor the proportion of different 
species living in the forest, how they use different areas, 
and their activity patterns. They are also able to identify 
and patrol hotspots where tigers often roam to prevent 
poaching more effectively. A poacher, when photographed, 
looks just as recognizable as his prey.

In the Belum-Temengor Forest Reserve, DWNPs camera 
traps monitor the effectiveness of road safety efforts. For-
est habitat here is split by a road. How can an elephant 
cross a highway? The Malaysian government plans to build 
a viaduct to encourage animals to cross it safely. Camera 
traps  are  used  to  survey  forest  surrounding  the  site  to 
assess and monitor how large mammals use the site and 
viaduct before, during and after its construction. The camera 
traps have already detected some threatened and illusive 
mammals at the study site, including Malayan tiger, Asiatic 
golden cat and black leopard.

Whats out there? A question asked 

since the beginning of human history. Sabre tooth cats, life 
on distant planets? Usually nobody is sure and answers 
are  vague.  But  as  far  as  protected  area  managers  are 
concerned,  the  question  is  key.  Whats  out  there  in  the 
protected areas? And the answer needs to be accurate.

You need to know whats what and whats where to protect 
anything effectively. Many PAs are not foot friendly. Crags, 
limestone karst ups and downs, thick forest, lots of leeches! 
And the wildlife is shy. Solution? Bring on the camera traps! 
These simple devices are made from a point and shoot 
camera fitted with a motion or infrared sensor to trigger a 
photograph when they detect warmth or movement nearby. 
Many camera traps can be set in a grid across a piece 
of forest, or other key habitat, to continuously record the 
animals present at each site, and how they use the area.

UNDPs partners use camera traps to collect information 
on wild animals and how they use their habitat to inform 
conservation decisions. For example, the Malaysian Depart-
ment of Wildlife and National Parks (DWNP) uses camera 
traps to survey protected forest within two national parks 
in Peninsular Malaysia. In the Taman Negara National Park, 
200 camera traps monitor three different areas and have re-
corded 70 different species, as well as ten individual tigers. 
Once the traps are set up, they operate continuously for 

RIGHT : Male Asian elephant (Elephas maximus) 
photographed by camera trap in Belum Temenggor Forest Reserve, 
Malaysia, UNDPs project site
Photo: Malaysian Department of Wildlife and National Parks

22

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

23

HOME

Snow leopard (Panthera uncia) photographed by camera trap in Sanjiangyuan 
National Nature Reserve in Qinghai Province, China, UNDPs project site
Photo: Plateau Perspectives

Asiatic cheetahs (Acinonyx jubatus) photographed by camera trap in Iran
Photo: Conservation of the Asiatic Cheetah Project/UNDP

24

Blue sheep (Pseudois nayaur) 
photographed by camera trap in 
Sanjiangyuan National Nature Reserve in Qing-
hai Province, China, UNDPs project site
Photo: Plateau Perspectives

WILDLIFE CRIME  
PREVENTING THE TRADE 
OF ENDANGERED SPECIES

Illicit wildlife trafficking is said to be worth US$7.8 to 10 

billion a year. Asian countries are both major consumer and transit countries of 
illegal wildlife products and derivatives, including ivory and rhino horn from Af-
rica. Many Asian species are also under heavy poaching pressure  tigers, snow 
leopards, pangolin, tortoises, orchids, to name a few. 

Strengthening the anti-poaching capacity within protected areas and nations as 
a whole is critical for securing the magnificent and globally significant biodiversity 
in Asia. Even if we secure natural habitats, we know from experience, whether it 
is the dodo or the giant Stellers sea cow in the Bering Sea, that hunting pressure 
alone can decimate or extirpate wildlife populations.

With this recognition, many protected area projects supported by UNDP focus 
on promoting wildlife trade surveillance and building the response capacity of 
conservation agencies and stakeholders to prevent the illegal trade of endangered 
species. These include establishment of wildlife crime intelligence units to control 
and analyse intelligence data, and increasing capacity for wildlife crime monitoring, 
interception and conviction at the regional and site levels.

Photo: Svetlana Foote/Shutterstock.com

TIGERS! 
IN SHORT SUPPLY
Legend  has  it  that  Guru  Padma  Sambhava,  who 

introduced Buddhism to Bhutan in the 8th century, arrived 
at the Tigers Nest Monastery on the back of a flying tigress. 
Asias natural and cultural heritage cannot be fully described 
without mention of tigers. But tigers are in short supply. All 
are threatened with extinction in their last 13 range coun-
tries. Three of the nine subspecies are already extinct, 
and there are only an estimated 3,200 tigers left in the 
wild  a drastic decrease from the estimated popula-
tion of 100,000 at the turn of the twentieth century. 
Diminishing natural habitats due to conversion for 
agriculture, plantation and urbanization, increasing 
fragmentation of forests and other habitats, coupled 
with  enormous  poaching  pressure  for  illegal  wildlife 
trade accelerate the death of our tigers. Extinction looms.

UNDP  works  in  tiger  landscapes  in  seven  countries  in 
direct  support  for  the  Global  Tiger  Recovery  Programme 
under  the  World  Bank  coordinated  Global  Tiger  Initiative 
(GTI).  With  funding  from  the  GEF,  the  tiger  landscape 
projects  support  strengthening  of  frontline  enforcement 
actions  within  and  around  protected  areas.  They  support  
protection and enhancement of natural habitats that can 
ensure healthy prey population and necessary corridor move-

ment of tigers. In addition, these projects provide targeted support to make the  
economic case for increased investment in protected area management and    
forest  conservation,  as  well  as  establishing  and  implementing  national  
 

sustainable financing plans.

Tiger  conservation  is  not  just 
about tigers. Its about national 
development. When we pro-
tect the natural habitat of the 
tiger, we protect the forests 
that provide water and regu-
late water flows, regulate the 
climate and produce clean air, 
generate livelihoods for people 

and constitute major tourism

  assets.  We  must  also  strengthen 
governance systems to ensure effective 
                                 
enforcement  from  source  to  market  to  conserve 
species threatened by illegal and unregulated trade. The plight of the tiger 
represents the tip of an enormous iceberg  the US$7.8 to 10 billion a year 
illicit wildlife trafficking industry combined with fast economic growth and 
prosperity in consumer countries is generating rapidly growing demand and 
consumption.

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

25

Tiger Tiger       burning bright
  or heading       into darkness

Only 3,200 left.... 
What else are we losing? 

Photo: N.A. Nazeer

HOME

CONSERVING 
THE ASIATIC CHEETAH 
IN IRAN

Photo: Conservation of the Asiatic Cheetah Project/UNDP

Iran is big  the eighteenth largest country in the world, 

and from alpine peaks to coral reefs, desert to rainforest, it has 
a  tremendous  variety  of  habitats  and  biodiversity.  It  is  also  the 
last refuge of the Asiatic or Iranian cheetah, a formerly abundant 
species that once ranged from Arabia as far east as the Indian 
Subcontinent. Classified by the International Union for the Con-
servation of Nature (IUCN) Red List of Threatened Species as 
Critically Endangered, current population estimates are no higher 
than 75 animals, mostly living in the harsh and arid eastern and 
central plains of the Dasht-e Kavir desert plateau.

The challenge facing UNDP, GEF and other conservation organiza-
tions that make up the Conservation of the Asiatic Cheetah project, 
known as CACP, is immense. Just 110 game guards are employed 
to protect 40 percent of all territories under Irans Department of 
Environment (DoE) management  that is nearly 6 million hectares 
of cheetah habitat to be protected against the backdrop of myriad 
infringements.  110  rangers  and  6  million  hectares.  That  means 
each ranger has to patrol an area approximately twice the size of 
the city of Kuala Lumpur!

CACP was initiated in 2001 and is now in Phase two. The project 
has been singularly successful in forging national and international 
partnerships. Key players currently include the DoE, the Wildlife 
Conservation Society, the IUCNs Cat Specialist Group, Panthera 
and local NGOs and village councils. CACPs strategies include 
community  education  particularly  with  regard  to  overgrazing  in 
protected  areas,  which  poses  direct  competition  with  cheetah 
prey species such as goitered gazelle, wild goat and wild sheep. 
CACP also conducts basic education on cheetahs (many herders 

28

reportedly confuse cheetahs with other local predators such as the 
Iranian leopard, striped hyena, wolf and even caracal, lynx and wild 
cats) and supports efforts to reduce human-wildlife conflict. Other 
education initiatives include the official designation of August 31st 
as Cheetah Conservation Day during which media programmes are 
presented designed to raise awareness about conservation, and the 
formation of Cheetah Friends, a series of popular local youth clubs 
dedicated to education. The national football team even adopted 
the cheetah as its logo for the 2014 World Cup!

The science based approach to conservation is also a CACP focus 
and, given the massive land areas involved, camera traps are widely 
deployed to assist in wildlife population monitoring (predator and 
prey) and evaluation, although international sanctions have made 
obtaining some project equipment difficult.

Perhaps one of the most noteworthy of CACPs successes has 
been  capacity  building  among  the  DoEs  staff  through  multiple 
seminars and training sessions and provision of motorcycles and 
vans, which has built their professional skills and enabled them to 
more effectively patrol large areas. Training and study tours for 
local  people  to  visit  cheetah  sites  have  built  trust  and  fostered 
collaboration between guards and locals.

Ensuring the survival of the Asiatic cheetah is a daunting task but 
recent camera trap images of females with young earlier in 2013 
have thrilled the conservation world and at the conclusion of Phase 
One of CACP, an independent evaluation of project progress stated: 
The project has clearly contributed to saving the Asiatic cheetah 
from extinction.

CONSERVING 
THE LAST REFUGE 
OF ENDANGERED 
PRIMATES 
IN VIET NAM

The Ba Be and Na Hang Conservation Complex in north 
east Viet Nam, comprises the forest landscape in and around Ba 
Be National Park and Na Hang Nature Reserve. This landscape 
is almost the final refuge of the Tonkin snub-nosed monkey, one 
of the worlds most threatened primates, listed as Critically Endan-
gered by IUCN. Without coordinated management of the entire 
forest complex this species will almost certainly become extinct. 
The main threats to biodiversity in the area come from habitat frag-
mentation, large-scale infrastructure development, illegal hunting, 
over-exploitation and livestock grazing.

In response, a landscape conservation strategy for the area was 
developed through the Creating Protected Areas for Resource 
Conservation using Landscape Ecology (PARC) project in Viet 
Nam.  The  project  was  the  first  supported  by  UNDP  with  GEF 
finance in the country, and was implemented from 1999-2004. It 
piloted a landscape ecology approach for conserving the countrys 
diverse biological heritage in the complex and Yok Don National 
Park.

Yok Don National Park protects a seasonal habitat that is important 
for large mammals and birds. Therefore, conservation of suitable 
habitats outside the park borders is essential to ensure the con-
tinuity of migratory pathways. Biodiversity surveys during PARC 
Project recorded 102 mammal species (including 51 bats), 327 
bird species, 41 reptile species and 28 amphibian species from 
the Conservation Complex. Thirty-four of these species are listed 
as nationally or globally threatened. 

PARC identified priority habitat areas in the wet and dry seasons 
and management needs for long-term conservation. Based on this 
information, a multiple-use conservation strategy was produced 
that includes proscribed management of the wider landscape. 

Other achievements of the project include a hunting gun exchange 
programme in Ba Be and Na Hang Districts, which resulted in over 
1,000 guns being turned in, and new guard posts, monitoring sta-
tions and information centres.

Tonkin snub-nosed monkey (Rhinopithecus avunculus)
Illustration: Patricia Valenti

DID YOU KNOW? 

The tonkin snub-nosed monkey was 
presumed extinct before its rediscovery 
in 1989. There are thought to be fewer 
than 250 adults of this striking primate 
remaining in the wild.

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

29

HOME

Menuvu children in traditional dress
Photo: DENR-PAO/NewCAPP/UNDP

30

EMPOWERED INDIGENOUS COMMUNITIES 
CONSERVE THEIR ANCESTRAL HOMES 
IN THE PHILIPPINES: THE RISE OF ICCAS
In the highlands of the southern Philippines, the 

Menuvu tribe has garnered international recognition for document-
ing, mapping and registering their traditionally conserved ancestral 
lands. Like the territories of many other indigenous communities 
in the Philippines, the Menuvus traditional lands shelter significant 
biodiversity. But rising socio-economic pressures have increasingly 
threatened the countrys natural ecosystems. With support from 
the New Conservation Areas in the Philippines Project (known as 
NewCAPP), the United Nations Environment Programme World 
Conservation  Monitoring  Centre  (UNEP  WCMC)  has  formally 
recognized the Menuvu Indigenous Community Conserved Area, 
with  an  accompanying  community  conservation  plan  to  protect 
and govern their lands.

are  to  be  respected.  The  world  is  seeing  them  in  a  fairer  light, 
understanding their immense contribution to the conservation and 
management of locally and globally significant biodiversity.

Miles away in the highest peaks of the Northern Philippines, the 
project  has  contributed  to  resolving  conflicts  over  land  among 
indigenous groups. A long standing dispute between the Banao 
and Balatoc people within the Balbalasang-Balbalan National Park  
about each others claim to about 2,000 hectares of forested land 
that overlapped their ancestral domains was resolved. Through the 
projects introduction of the ICCA concept and series of dialogues 
with both tribes, the two have declared a truce and renewed a 
peace pact.

The Philippines is a treasure trove of biodiversity, containing 52,177 
species, half of which are unique to the country. But many of the 
countrys unique and threatened species and important ecosys-
tems lie outside the countrys protected areas and are threatened 
by indiscriminate logging, mining, land conversion, overharvesting 
of resources and infrastructure development. In 2009, about 65 
percent of the countrys 128 Key Biodiversity Areas  of global 
importance for biodiversity  lacked formal protection.

Over  its  lifetime,  NewCAPP  aims  to  expand  the  Philippines 
protected area system under new management regimes, includ-
ing  ancestral  domain  ICCAs  as  well  as  local  government-  and 
community-managed areas. About 120,613 hectares are in various 
stages of establishment as conservation areas (both ICCAs and 
LGU-managed)  in  400,000  hectares  of  Key  Biodiversity  Areas 
covered by the project. It is also building capacity to manage these 
protected areas effectively. 

Since 2009, with support from UNDP and finance from the GEF, 
NewCAPP has worked with the Government of the Philippines and 
local and indigenous communities to document, map and recognize 
new conservation areas that are managed by indigenous peoples, 
local government or local communities. These conservation areas 
expand coverage of Key Biodiversity Areas and empower them to 
conserve them. The project is implemented by the Department of 
Environment and Natural Resources through its Protected Areas 
and Wildlife Bureau, now renamed the Biodiversity Management 
Bureau.

Specifically, the project is supporting indigenous communities to 
strengthen  their  traditional  governance  mechanisms  that  were 
responsible for the continued protection of their sacred forests, 
lakes, mountains, burial grounds, and traditional hunting grounds 
which harbour important biodiversity and deliver ecosystem ser-
vices. These are carried out through a process of documentation of 
traditional practices and rituals, mapping of traditionally conserved 
areas, inventory of resources and delineation of Indigenous Com-
munity Conserved Areas (ICCAs). Community Conservation Plans 
have been developed by the community with project support to 
govern these areas. To date, two ICCAs, covering 7,115 hectares in 
total, have been formally recognised in the ancestral lands of the 
Menuvu and the Ayta Abellen peoples. These ICCAs have been 
registered in the UNEP-WCMC global database. 

Our community is known not just locally but now globally via the 
ICCA registry, bringing us a great sense of pride, says Menuvu elder 
Nonoy Nunay. Tribal leader Herminio Guinto agrees: The ICCA 
has been a big help, opening our eyes to reflect on our culture. 
He says the entire ICCA process has sent a strong message to 
indigenous peoples that their way of life in preserving nature is 
important; their systems of traditional governance and conservation  

In the nearby Zambales Mountain Ranges, a tribal leader was able 
to interact with fellow international ICCA advocates at the Confer-
ence of the Parties (COP) to the Convention on Biological Diversity 
(CBD) in India last October 2012. Ayta Abellen leader, Salvador 
Dimain of Cabangan Zambales, presented his peoples traditional 
knowledge systems and practices, which support the protection 
of their sacred forests as sources of water, food, and medicine.

The Philippines has been at the forefront in recognizing ICCAs 
and their role in biodiversity conservation, elevating them nation-
ally through the National ICCA Conference in March 2012, and 
internationally through the 11th CBD Conference of the Parties 
in Hyderabad, India

The Menuvu community in Mt. Kalatungan, Bukidnon, shows the 3-D map of their 
ancestral domain. The community has developed a Community Conservation Plan 
to sustain and improve protection and conservation efforts for the Indigenous 
Community Conserved Area (ICCA). Photo: Glaiza Tabanao

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

31

HOME

COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT AND 
EDUCATION SUPPORTS WILDLIFE 
MANAGEMENT IN 
PAPUA NEW GUINEA

Papua New Guinea (PNG) supports 

an estimated 5 to 7 per cent of the worlds biodiversity in its 
rainforests, reefs, swamps and grasslands. From the worlds tini-
est frog, the Pinocchio, to one of the worlds largest birds, the 
southern cassowary, a unique array of species have evolved here 
in isolation  about one in five of which are found nowhere else 
on earth. PNGs numerous indigenous clans depend directly on 
these rich ecosystems and natural resources for their livelihoods. 
They also control a large majority of the nations land through a 
system of traditional ownership. As a result, they hold the key to 
conserving their countrys natural wealth. 

In an effort to conserve more of this natural wealth, in 1995 
UNDP and PNGs Department of Environment and Conserva-
tion (DEC), embarked on an initiative with local clans in the 
Bismark-Ramu area. Bismarck-Ramu lies in the heart of PNG, 
plunging from the countrys highest point at 4,500m among the 
jagged peaks of the Bismarck mountain range, down through 
primary forests to the floodplains of the Ramu River on PNGs 
northern coast. Drawing on documented lessons learned from 
earlier projects in PNG, the UNDP supported GEF financed 
Bismarck-Ramu Integrated Conservation and Development Ini-
tiative (1995-1999) took a strongly participatory approach that 
emphasised community development, education and empower-
ment. 

The project trained local people as community development 
workers and deployed them in small teams to meet with clans in 
Bismarck Ramu. The community development workers focused 

on establishing a relationship with the communities through a 
carefully designed seven-step engagement programme that 
involved introductions, mutual story-telling exercises, community 
mapping, discussions of community aspirations and needs, ex-
ploration of possible solutions, visioning and development of ac-
tion plans to implement solutions. This was complemented by an 
education and outreach programme in communities, schools and 
churches, implemented by different staff, which aimed to raise 
awareness of the value of the environment to local livelihoods. 

Only once communities had indicated their interest in conserva-
tion to the community development teams, and had sought out 
the DEC Conservation Area Manager themselves to obtain infor-
mation and invite him to visit them, were potential options for 
setting aside land for conservation discussed. Visits were then 
arranged to discuss the clans motivations for wanting conserva-
tion, the different options for reservation and which the com-
munity wished to adopt. All clans selected to establish Wildlife 
Management Areas (WMAs). The project then worked with the 
clans to fulfil the requirements needed for declaration of their 
WMAs  to establish the boundaries of the area, a committee 
and rules to manage it, to submit a formal request to DEC for 
declaration, approval and gazette of the WMA. 

When the project ended, over 120,000 hectares of land had 
been designated by their traditional owners (thirteen clans from 
the Sepu area and four clans from the Foroko/Brimde area) as 
WMAs. As a result of the projects awareness-raising efforts, 
another village further out on the Madang coast decided to 
establish their own marine WMA as a no fishing zone. 

32

Papua New Guinean man in tribal dress
Photo: Joel Scriven

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

33

HOME

LOOKING ACROSS 
THE LANDSCAPE: 
MANAGING 
BIODIVERSITY 
AND ECOSYSTEMS 
WITHIN AND BEYOND 
PROTECTED AREAS

In a well-protected protected area, you will see it! 

Biodiversity in exuberant abundance! Stingrays, reefs, ferns, 
gibbons, leeches, giant forest hogs, infuriating ticks, fireflies, 
fungi... Biodiversity doesnt respect boundaries. Nor is it con-
fined to them. Most of our planets biodiversity occurs outside 
protected areas in land and seascapes dedicated to human 
activities or lies in the commons  areas belonging to nobody, 
but accessible to all. 

Simply protecting a specific area is not sufficient if biodiver-
sity conservation is a priority, hence UNDPs support of the 
landscape concept. This involves UNDP working with govern-
ments,  producers  and  communities  to  integrate  biodiversity 
and ecosystem management within and far beyond protected 
area limits. 

UNDP supported GEF financed projects have directly impacted 
a total landscape area of more than 60 million hectares since 
2000 in Asia Pacific alone. 

The landscape approach involves coordinating management of 
a mosaic of land and marine activities  including protection, 
restoration, subsistence use, and encouraging biodiversity and 
ecosystem friendly production in a wide range of sectors, from 
agriculture, forestry, fisheries and mining to tourism. A holistic 
landscape approach is far more effective in keeping high value 
biodiversity areas that sustain vital ecosystem services intact 
than simply concentrating solely on a single protected area. 

NEPALS WESTERN TERAI : INTEGRATED PLANNING 
AT THE LANDSCAPE LEVEL
Over the past seven years, the West-

ern Terai Landscape Complex project in Nepal has worked 
with the government and communities to build the basis for 
a landscape approach to conservation, which has helped to 
safeguard the areas biological wealth and its vital ecological 
functions.  Nepals  Western  Terai  is  an  important  home  for 
globally significant biodiversity: dense riverine forest harbours 
Bengal tigers; rhinos live in its swampy grasslands; and vast, 
tall stands of sal, the Terais most common tree, shelter huge 
herds of blackbuck deer.

Prior  to  the  project,  two  areas  of  this  forest  were  legally 
protected  the Bardiya National Park and the Suklaphanta 
Wildlife Reserve. Adjoining areas of productive forest act as 
corridors,  enabling  large  migratory  mammals  to  pass  from 
Nepals  protected  areas,  to  protected  areas  in  India.  These 
forests also reduce the effects of floods, prevent soil erosion 
and help maintain a high quality water supply for the one million 
people that live in the Western Terai.

Greater one-horned rhinoceros, (Rhinoceros unicornis), Nepal 
Photo: Utopia_88/Shutterstock.com

34

But logging, conversion of forest to farmland, over-grazing and 
uncontrolled forest fires were all degrading this landscape, re-
ducing and fragmenting the forest and threatening to encroach 
on the national park and wildlife reserve.

The project developed policies to guide integrated planning 
at the landscape level and worked with local communities to 
manage the Terais forests and wildlife. Through the project, 
10,375 people from local communities and government were 
trained in a range of activities, including conservation, sustain-
able forest management and improved livelihoods to enable 
them to conserve both the productive and protected landscape. 
The project was implemented by Nepals Ministry of Forests and 
Soil Conservation and supported by multiple partners, including 
UNDP, GEF, Netherlands Development Organisation (SNV) 
Nepal, WWF Nepal, Local Initiatives for Biodiversity Research 
and  Development,  Biodiversity  International,  and  the  Nepal 
Agricultural Research Council. 

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

35

HOME

The projects advocacy efforts have led the government to establish 
three areas of Protected Forests (totalling 130,565 hectares) within 
all three corridors in Western Terai and to develop management plans 
to govern their sustainable use. This is the first time that this category 
of protected area, which preserves the forest while allowing for some 
traditional and sustainable use, has been used in Nepal. A Protected 
Forest Manager and a number of Rangers have been employed to 
implement the management plans.

With project support, the participation of local communities in forest 
management has more than doubled. More than 73,612 households 
are now involved in participatory forest management systems through 
387 Community Forest User Groups. These groups work in the buffer 
zones of the protected areas to mobilise their own resources to imple-
ment biodiversity-friendly initiatives. 

To strengthen the wildlife reserve and national park, which are priority 
areas for biodiversity, the project has helped establish District Forest 
Sector Coordination Committees. These committees control encroach-
ment on protected areas of forest, illegal hunting and poaching and 
help govern forest user groups.

Critical habitats have been restored, including 914 hectares of grass-
land within protected areas and 37 wetlands within and outside of 
protected areas. The project has also produced conservation plans for 
two mammals, seven plants and 106 local varieties of crops.

The project has worked to integrate biodiversity and ecosystem man-
agement into planning and production practices in the Western Terai 
by  revising  51  Community  Forest  User  Group  plans.  These  aim  to 
promote biodiversity friendly activities, help communities to adopt new 
trades that reduce pressure on forests and other natural habitats, and 
establish anti-poaching groups. Almost 400 households have become 
involved in cultivating medicinal and aromatic plants, generating a total 
income of Nepalese Rupees (NRs) 5.4 million (US$ 63,529) in 2011, 
and reducing their reliance on the forest.

Swamp deer (Rucervus duvaucelii), Bardia National Park, Nepal
Photo:  Ashley Whitworth/Shutterstock.com

This holistic approach has brought tangible results. Forest cover in 
the Western Terai has increased by 260 km2 and in the Churia Hills 
by  48  km2.  Populations  of  tiger,  swamp  deer  and  blackbuck  have 
increased and rhino populations are stable. Of 4,759 families involved 
in income-generating activities though seed grant support, more than 
75 percent are still active.

After  the  projects  livelihood  interventions,  net  annual  household 
income of the forest dependent households increased by NRs 7,428 
(approximately US$ 87) against the project target of NRs 3,887 (or 
about US$ 45). Efforts to revive eco-tourism in the national park and 
wildlife reserve saw tourist numbers grow more than eight-fold (over 
the 2006 baseline of 1,191), benefitting both the protected areas and 
the enterprises and communities living around them.

As a result, the Government of Nepal has endorsed the landscape 
management approach for the first time (in its tenth National Develop-
ment Plan). The Landscape Support Unit in the Ministry of Forestry and 
Soil Conservation, which the project helped to establish, has provided 
national level support for this holistic approach.

Populations of tiger, swamp deer and blackbuck have 
increased and rhino populations are stable. Of 4,759 families 
involved in income-generating activities though seed grant 

support, more than 75 percent are still active.

36

MONGOLIAS
ALTAI: 
THE LANDSCAPE 
APPROACH 
IN THE LARGEST 
OF LANDSCAPES

Photo:  Midori Paxton

At first glance, Mongolias 104,250 km2 Altai wilderness 

of Alpine peaks and sweeping grasslands appears impregnable, immune 
to change and human influence.

Like many high altitude regions, however, this impression of invulner-
ability is deceptive. As the Altai Mountains Biodiversity Conservation 
Strategy  notes:  The  Altais  fragility  has  already  been  demonstrated 
through over-exploitation of land and wild species of animals and plants, 
leading  to  degraded  grasslands,  damaged  forests,  depleted  wildlife 
populations and polluted and diminished flows of water to downstream 
ecosystems.

The threats facing Altais natural resource base and unique biodiversity 
are many and varied. They include poorly regulated sport hunting and 
poaching, mining, deforestation, insensitive infrastructure development, 
pest poisoning and overgrazing.

In order to address these varied and often interconnected threats to 
biodiversity, the UNDP supported, GEF financed Mountain Landscapes 
of Mongolias Altai Sayan Eco-Region project adopted a landscape 
approach focusing on the entire area.

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

37

HOME

38

Simply stated, the landscape concept enables national and local actors to: i) Implement the ecosystem approach 
to biodiversity conservation for long-term impact; ii) facilitate working in co-operative partnerships to address 
the interconnected issues faced by biodiversity and society in an integrated way; and iii) promote the resilience 
of ecosystems and society to climate change.

With  these  objectives  in  mind,  the  project  amassed  a  huge  amount  of  existing  data,  filling  gaps  where  
necessary, and gathered new supplementary information in co-operation with NGOs, government agencies, 
local communities, herders, miners, scientists and businesses.

The result was that the many pieces of the vast Altai jigsaw  from new road developments to pasture degradation  
driven by unsustainably large goat herds fuelled by Kashmir demand and damaging government subsidies  
came together to create a comprehensive picture of the Altai landscape.

Contained within the Strategy are details of flora and fauna, topography, meteorology, demographics, legal mat-
ters, conservation gaps and solutions to fill them, all supported by an abundance of maps, charts, graphs and 
survey results. In short, it is an all you need to know and all that needs to be done guide to one of the largest 
and most biodiverse regions in Asia.

The  Strategy  has  already  been  approved  by  national  Government  and  has  been  adopted  by  the  regional  
Governments  of  Uvs,  Khovd,  Bayan  Oigii  and  Gobi  Altai  as  a  working  blueprint  for  landscape  biodiversity  
conservation. And with the Strategy, a practical land use plan was born to provide for the needs of both wild 
species  and  people  living  there;  a  plan,  in  the  words  of  the  Strategy,  to  be  followed  and  championed  by  
government, developers, non-governmental organisations and local residents.

CONNECTING LANDSCAPES 
IN BHUTAN AND MALAYSIA: 
CREATING AND STRENGTHENING 
BIODIVERSITY CORRIDORS AND NETWORKS

Humans strive for an ever more 

interconnected world. The same is important for 
biodiversity. As uncoordinated development and 
habitat conversion fragments landscapes into 
smaller and smaller patches of natural habitat, 
conserved areas risk becoming islands isolated 
from each other by roads, fences, farmlands and 
urban development.

Without connections between natural habitats, 
many migratory species are unable to travel the 
long distances they need to survive or to find an 
unrelated mate. Fragmentation reduces genetic 

diversity  and  disrupts  ecological  processes 
and vital ecosystem services. Linkages among 
natural habitats are particularly important in a 
changing  climate    to  ensure  species  have 
a wide range of options to migrate and shift 
ranges.

UNDP, with GEF finance, supports countries 
to increase landscape connectivity. UNDP sup-
ported projects have helped to establish and 
strengthen the management of corridors and 
buffer zones that connect protected areas, to 
allow species to move and genes to flow more 
easily between them.

UNDPs support has piloted the corridor con-
cept  in  Bhutan,  to  strengthen  the  protected 
area  network  and  support  conservation  of 
threatened species, such as the tiger. Bhutan 
is internationally recognised for its commitment 
to conservation  the Kingdom maintains 70 
percent forest cover, has conserved almost half 
of its territory in 11 protected areas and pledged 
to  create  conservation  corridors  to  connect 
them.  But  in  2003,  these  corridors  had  not 
been tested or operationalized on the ground.

The Linking and Enhancing Protected Areas 
in the Temperate Broadleaf Forest EcoRegion 

Photo: Midori Paxton

A herder home. The gers (yurts) are covered by layers of fabric and sheeps wool felt for insulation and weatherproofing. Inside is colorfully 
decorated with many carpets on the floor and on the wall.

Bhutan maintains 70 percent forest cover and has conserved almost half of its territory in 11 protected areas. 
The LINKPA project identified and delineated conservation corridors to connect them.
Photo:  Sarah Valenti

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

39

HOME

of Bhutan (LINKPA) project, a GEF financed 
collaboration between UNDP, the Ministry of 
Agriculture and Forestry and the World Wildlife 
Fund  (WWF)  Bhutan,  successfully  strength-
ened Bhutans biological corridors. The project 
identified suitable corridors, helped create the 
institutional framework that would be needed 
to operationalize and manage them, and piloted 
management approaches with local authorities 
and communities in the corridor, linking Thrum-
shingla National Park with two others.

Specifically, it developed and agreed a frame-
work for corridor management in the country, 
mandating Bhutans territorial Forest Divisions 
to  manage  the  corridors,  with  coordination 
by  the  Nature  Conservation  Division.  As  a 
result  of  the  projects  work,  forest  corridors 
are  afforded  greater  priority  for  sustainable 
management  than  the  rest  of  the  Bhutans 
government-managed  reserve  forest.  It  has 
also strengthened links among staff in Forest 
Divisions and protected areas.

LINKPA has helped to implement the Corridor 
Management Plan. Corridors are important to 
support the protected areas network. There is a 
clear need to operationalize the corridor policy 
officially declared over 10 years ago, supported 
by the thorough regulations and management 
arrangements  recommended  in  2010,  says 
Vijay Moktan, Conservation Director of WWF 
Bhutan. He adds that without a good corridors 

system to connect fragments of habitats, it will 
be difficult to maintain the tiger population  let 
alone increase it. By creating linkages among 
key habitats, it is expected that the corridors 
will  contribute  towards  increasing  Bhutans 
tiger population to reach targets set under the 
National Tiger Recovery Programme.

An  essential  element  of  this  work  has  been 
support to enhance the livelihoods of communi-
ties living in the corridors who are dependent 
on  natural  resources.  The  project  promoted 
ecotourism  to  generate  income,  supporting 
tourist trails and homestays and promoting a 
local  mushroom  festival  as  tourist  attraction. 
Most  of  the  communities  living  in  these  in-
between  spaces  of  corridors  are  among  the 
poorest  and  the  most  vulnerable,  says  Tashi 
Dorji,  former  project  manager  of  LINKPA; 
now  Programme  Analyst  at  UNDP  Bhutan. 
This  is  why  corridor  management  needs  to 
explicitly  incorporate  integrated  conservation 
and development projects and mechanisms for 
sustainable utilization and income generation 
opportunities. It will be important to build on the 
LINKPA lessons in future. 

UNDP is also supporting the Government of 
Malaysia  to  improve  connectivity  among  the 
remaining forests of Peninsula Malaysia. These 
forests serve as natural water towers for Pen-
insular Malaysia and neighbouring Singapore 
because of their water catchment function and 

also harbour an array of large mammals, includ-
ing the Critically Endangered Malayan tiger. But 
forest degradation, infrastructure development 
and conversion to agriculture has left them in-
creasingly fragmented  degrading the quality 
of tiger habitat and undermining the integrity of 
the landscape and its ability to sustain a supply 
of water to people in Malaysia and Singapore.

This  project,  which  began  implementation  in 
2014, will conserve biodiversity and ecosystem 
services  in  three  critical  landscapes  of  the 
Central Forest Spine (CFS), by supporting the 
countrys Central Forest Spine Master Plan to 
restore connectivity between forest complexes. 
The  project  will  create  corridors,  rehabilitate 
degraded forest and improve forest landscape 
management to increase linkages among the 
forest complexes and improve the integrity of 
the landscape. It will also strengthen national 
and  local  institutional  frameworks  for  forest 
management and law enforcement, and dem-
onstrate  sustainable  financing  mechanisms 
to  sustain  conservation  of  the  linkages  and 
reflect the value of ecosystem services in land 
use planning. 

Connected forests in the CFS mean improved 
habitat for wildlife and sustained water supply 
for people. A more interconnected natural world 
with benefits for people and wildlife!

LINKPA has helped to 
implement the Corridor 
Management Plan. 
Corridors are important 
to support the protected 
areas network. Vijay Moktan, 
Conservation Director of WWF Bhutan

MAP BELOW: Ecological linkages in the eight main forest complexes identified in Malaysias Central Forest Spine Master Plan. UNDP is supporting 
Malaysias Central Forest Spine Master Plan to restore connectivity between forest complexes. The project will create corridors, rehabilitate degraded forest 
and improve forest landscape management to increase linkages among the forest complexes and improve the integrity of the landscape.
Source: Malaysias Central Forest Spine Master Plan (2010)

ABOVE: A Malayan tiger basking in sunlight caught on camera trap. Only an estimated 250-340 individuals 
of the Malayan tiger remain in the wild. Malaysias Central Forest Spine Master Plan supports efforts 
to link priority tiger habitats.
Photo:  Malaysian Department of Wildlife and National Parks, Malaysia

Photo: Midori Paxton

The Belum-Temengor forest complex, within Malaysias 
Central Forest Spine is well known for its spectacular 
plants, birds and mammals. It is an Important Bird Area  
a site of international importance for bird conservation. 

Bhutans protected area network, with connecting biological corridors (shown in green). The LINKPA project piloted management approaches with local 
authorities and communities in the corridor linking Thrumshingla National Park with Jigme Singye Wangchuck National Park and Royal Manas National Park. 
Source: Wildlife Conservation Division, Department of Forest and Park Services, Ministry of Agriculture and Forests, Bhutan

40

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

41

HOME

CALM IN CAMBODIA: 
GENERATING SUSTAINABLE 
LIVELIHOODS THROUGH 
BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION

The Conservation Areas through Landscape Manage-

ment (CALM) project sought to empower local people. This UNDP supported, 
GEF financed, grassroots oriented biodiversity conservation initiative involved 
the  Wildlife  Conservation  Society  (WCS)  and  local  NGOs,  the  Government 
of Cambodia, indigenous farming, fishing and forest dwelling communities...
and the birds.

During the projects six-year lifespan, 5,000 local residents and government 
officials were trained to participate in conservation planning processes, man-
age their natural resources sustainably and expand their livelihood options. 32 
community-based organisations (CBOs), including five indigenous representa-
tion committees, were created to manage their immediate natural environments 
and land use plans were designed in 12 areas in the Kulen Promtep Wildlife 
Sanctuary, the countrys largest protected area (4,025 km2). This involved the 
designation of 30,000 hectares of land as either community use or sustain-
able use zones.

Fifteen villages within the Preah Vihear Protected Area developed forest plans 
thereby securing ownership and control of their own natural resources manage-
ment. A clear demarcation between communal land and adjoining forest was 
made to prevent confusion and inadvertent incursion into fully protected areas.

Cleaning the Ibis Rice
Photo:  Eleanor Briggs/WCS

Critically Endangered white-shouldered ibis (Pseudibis davisoni)
Photo:  Ashish John/WCS

42

LINKING BIODIVERSITY 
AND ECOSYSTEMS MANAGEMENT 
WITH ECONOMIC GROWTH

Community members get on-site training in wildlife protection in Tmatboey 
conservation area in Preah Vihear province, northern plains of Cambodia

Photo:  Sok Sony/WCS

Finding ways  to effectively link 

biodiversity  and  ecosystems  management 
with inclusive economic growth for long-term 
sustainable  development  is  UNDPs  priority. 
By  integrating  biodiversity  and  ecosystems 
considerations into development planning and 
production  sector  activities,  the  biodiversity 
and  ecosystem  services  that  sustain  human 
wellbeing can be safeguarded.

In the heart of the Emerald Triangle, near the 
Thai and Lao borders, Cambodias national bird 
is helping save threatened forests and, at the 

same, bringing dignity and growing prosperity 
to the people who inhabit them. The Northern 
Plains region of Cambodia, once described as 
the  Serengeti  of  south  east  Asia  due  to  the 
abundance  of  wildlife,  is  still  home  to  many 
species, 40 of which are listed as Endangered 
by IUCN.

Like many areas in the region, it is at an eco-
logical crossroads. The country as a whole has 
witnessed  war,  the  Khmer  Rouge  genocide, 
rampant deforestation and a wholesale, if piece 
meal, assault on its natural resource base. With 

the exception of deliberate criminal enterprises 
  for  example,  organised  poaching  and  traf-
fic in wildlife and tropical hardwoods  much 
environmental  damage  is  driven  by  poverty, 
necessity and perhaps most crucially, a lack of 
options for local people.
 
Once seen as unrelated, and sometimes even 
in  conflict,  conservation  and  local  economic 
development are increasingly being recognised 
as  being  interdependent  and  fundamentally 
symbiotic.

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

43

HOME

Eating a bird, I can only 
fill my familys stomach 
once, but guiding 
tourists to see the bird 
I get US$5 each time, 
Yin Sary, a former poacher turned tour 
guide (and gamekeeper) 

Patrol planning training
Photo:  Hugo Rainey/WCS

Weighing the Ibis Rice
Photo:  WCS

Ecotourism initiatives were supported by WCS 
and a local NGO partner and are currently thriv-
ing. A village development fund, with contribu-
tions from tourists, was established to support 
infrastructure projects that benefit the entire 
community. Fuelled by tangible results  some 
20,000 people in 23 villages have benefitted 
from  CALMs  interventions    attitudes  are 
changing. Income is being generated, and so 
are results.

Part  of  the  Northern  Plains  dry  forest  and 
wetlands protected areas where CALM worked 
were initially gazetted to conserve Cambodias 
National Animal, the kouprey, a giant wild ox re-
lated to the aurochs, ancestor of all our planets 
domestic cows. The last kouprey was sighted in 
1982 and it is believed to be extinct. The same 
was thought of the giant ibis until this Critically 
Endangered bird was re-discovered in the area.

The huge bird, largest of the ibises, is a prin-
ciple  ecotourist  draw,  as  are  other  wetland 
birds such as the equally Critically Endangered 
white-shouldered  ibis.  It  is  also  helping  rice 
farmers.  Instead  of  clearing  ibis  habitat  for 
standard paddy, the Wildlife Friendly Ibis Rice 
scheme has been developed whereby farmers 
are paid a premium price for rice cultivated in 
an  ecologically  sensitive  fashion.  Assistance 
in  packaging,  transportation,  marketing  and 
sales  is  organised  by  a  Cambodian  NGO, 
Sansom Mlup Prey, and the rice (along with its 

Bird watchers, Tmatboey conservation area
Photo:  Ann Koontz/WCS

conservation message) is turning up in bowls 
everywhere  from the Foreign Correspondents 
Club  in  Phnom  Penh  to  the  tourist  hotels  of 
Siem Reap near Angkor Wat.

The multi-pronged CALM approach has yielded 
many tangible results. In Preah Vihear, the num-
ber of logging incidents has decreased by 94.5 
percent and the number of hunting incidents 
fell by 88.5 percent over the project lifetime. 
Ecotourism models, pioneered in international 
award  winning  Tmatboey  village  are  being 
replicated elsewhere.

Things are so different in a good way, unlike 
previously when our village did not even have 
a paved road. I am very proud of what we have 
achieved for our community in terms of biodiver-
sity conservation and sustainable development, 
says  Dib  On,  village  head  of  the  ecotourism 
community in Tmatboey.

And as for the birds? Monitoring data showed 
that population density of four species of glob-
ally threatened water birds has more than dou-
bled since CALM began. Local people like that. 
Eating a bird, I can only fill my familys stom-
ach once, but guiding tourists to see the bird I 
get US$5 each time, says Yin Sary, a former 
poacher turned tour guide (and gamekeeper) 
Our community is earning thousands of dollars 
showing the same birds over and over again. 

44

HOME

PARTNERSHIPS 
FOR PARADISE: 
THE TIOMAN 
TOURISM STORY

At  first  sight,  Tioman  reads  like  a  tropi-

cal  paradise  tick  list  with  a  tick  in  every  yes  box.  Pristine, 
palm-fringed beaches? Crystal clear waters? Coral gardens 
(221 hard and soft coral species)? Mountains smothered in 
rainforest? Thats yes yes yes. Tick the lot. In 2013, CNN 
ranked Tioman, which is part of a 69-island archipelago off the 
east coast of peninsular Malaysia, one of the worlds top 100 
Best Beaches. But Tioman and its sister islands were, and to 
a degree still are, at risk of becoming a case of Paradise Lost.

Tourism  is  an  economic  staple  but  the  principle  assets  of 
the archipelago  the exquisite and varied marine life  were 
being degraded by a combination of factors. Tourist activities 
and the tourism service sector were ironically a major problem 
prompting damage to coral caused by reckless anchorage, litter 
accumulation on beaches, spear guns, pollution and irresponsi-
ble or naive purchases of shells and coral souvenirs. Although 
Malaysias Marine Parks cover 42 of these islands, illegal fish-
ing incursions in protected waters by both locals and raiding 
vessels from elsewhere in the country and from other nations 
were denuding resources and threatening a biodiversity-rich 
environment of global significance.

The Department of Marine Parks Malaysia (DMPM) staff and 
the villagers were in an uncomfortable situation. Local com-
munity  members  initially  saw  the  DMPM  staff  as  police.  In 
the words of DMPM officer, Che Mohd Khir B Omar, locals 
felt sidelined and caught in the middle between the need to 
earn an income, the restrictions, and limited options to earn 
income from other sources. There was, at first, he explains, 
little interaction between conservation authorities and locals.

This has changed and quite dramatically as the GEF financed 
and UNDP supported project Conserving Marine Biodiversity 
Through Enhanced Marine Park Management and Inclusive 
Island Development provided six years of solid support from 
2007 to 2013.

The project was characterized by a complex bit of diplomacy 
and a meeting of minds, and involved expansion of the marine 
parks  system,  strengthening  of  law  enforcement  capacity, 
community involvement, educational outreach by community 
groups,  international  conservation  and  development  bodies, 
local businesses and the tourists themselves.

Marine park management has improved dramatically with 156 
more staff fully trained in conducting patrols, with authority to 
arrest transgressors and an enforcement manual implemented 
thanks to project support. Two new marine parks were desig-
nated, expanding Malaysias marine protected areas system by 
an additional 6,400 hectares. Marine park management plans 
have been developed for all three targeted islands through a 
process that drew on information provided by committees of 
representatives at the community, state and national level.

A coral reef bleaching response plan was also developed and 
implemented  to  help  reduce  the  impact  of  coral  bleaching  
events on the marine parks reefs. The projects support has 

established  regular  coral  reef  clean-ups  and  300  square 
meters  (m2)  of  coral  reef  have  been  rehabilitated  through 
transplantation at three sites on Tioman Island. Marine surveys 
in 2013 indicate that live coral cover has increased 13 percent 
at Redang Island since the bleaching event in 2011. 

Project priorities with the island communities were practical 
and encouragingly effective. Give a man a fish and he eats for 
a day. Give him a fishing rod and he eats for a lifetime. This 
development cliche holds good in some cases but not neces-
sarily  in  a  marine  national  park  network  where  commercial 
fishing as a result of projects support is now banned within 
two nautical miles of the coast. They needed a different kind 
of fishing rod. The people of the Tioman archipelago needed 
alternative sustainable sources of income not dependent on 
marine exploitation.

Through a combination of training programmes, seminars and 
equipment  provision,  people  learned  a  wide  range  of  new, 
sustainable professions that did not impact local natural as-
sets. 484 people in the three project focus islands  Redang, 
Sibu-Tinggi and Tioman  were trained in non-destructive fields. 
Mayuzi Sidek, for example, has stopped fishing and now drives 
tourists through the wonderful seas out on snorkelling trips 
to see the islands thriving coral reefs. He received training 
to achieve his full boat licence through project support, which 
enabled him to get a job with a local five star resort. Hasni 
Abdul Gani makes yellow noodles ideal for the Malaysian cu-
linary classic Mee Goreng popular with tourists. She received 
equipment through the project. The noodles bring in US$ 113 
a month, explains Hasni.

This is sufficient to put her children through school and carry 
them through the low tourist monsoon season. Other locals 
have  received  scuba-training  certification,  training  for  safe 
boat  handling  and  have  started  cake  bakeries.  One  former 
housewife, Norhayati Binti Junoh, has now obtained a captains 
licence and is planning to captain a coastal cargo ship. And 
community groups have received training in marine park rules 
and are acting as the eyes and ears of the DMPM. Arrests for 
violations have fallen significantly and repeat offenders run the 
risk of having their boats confiscated for use as patrol vessels 
or being sunk to form artificial reefs. Relationships between 
Parks officials and local communities have flourished. Children 
are adopting their own rivers and clearing rubbish. Beach clean-
ups attract hundreds of people. Crown of Thorns, a coral eating 
alien starfish is hunted. New reefs are being created or restored. 
Tioman has a new philosophy Reef Etiquette.

Inspired by this burst of success other islands in the archi-
pelago are emulating the initiatives and Tioman, happily, seems 
destined to receive more media accolades for its beauty and 
commitment to conservation.

Photos: Department of Marine Parks Malaysia and Doungjun Roongruang

46

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

47

HOME

MANAGING THE IMPACTS 
OF CLIMATE CHANGE

UNDP works with countries to incorporate nature-based 
solutions into their strategies for adapting to and mitigating 
the negative impacts of climate change. Ecosystem-based 
adaptation helps vulnerable communities increase their 
resilience, and the resilience of the ecosystems on which they 
depend. In the Asia Pacific region, expanding and connecting 
protected areas to conserve intact forests, wetlands, mangroves 
and coral reefs will provide a natural buffer for vulnerable 
communities against disasters intensified by climate change. 

Stamps:  Neftali/Shutterstock.com

EMBEDDING CLIMATE RESILIENCE IN PROTECTED AREA 
PLANNING  THE CASE OF PAPUA NEW GUINEA
Papua New Guinea (PNG) 

has become one of the first countries to incor-
porate  climate  change  adaptation  strategies 
into  their  gap  assessment  of  the  countrys 
national protected area system. Developed by 
PNGs Department of Environment and Con-
servation (DEC) and The Nature Conservancy 
(TNC) with a grant from the UNDP supported 
and GEF financed Early Action Grant Project 
for Protected Areas initiative, the assessment 
provides  a  clear  blueprint  for  developing  a 
climate-resilient network of terrestrial protected 
areas across the country.

Member nations of the Convention on Biologi-
cal Diversity (CBD) have agreed to establish 
protected  area  networks  that  represent  the 
countrys  ecosystems  and  biodiversity.  Gap 
assessments  are  used  to  identify  gaps  in 
the  current  protected  area  network    where 
important  ecosystems  and/or  species  occur 
that  are  not  currently  covered  by  effective 
conservation measures. They involve mapping 
and comparing the current status of biodiversity 
with the current status of the protected area 
network. The resulting analysis can be used to 
design expanded protected area networks that 
are more effective at conserving representa-
tive ecosystems and biodiversity and meeting 
specific conservation goals.

48

Climate  change  is  expected  to  cause  rapid 
changes in biodiversity distribution and abun-
dance,  so  shifting  the  map.  But  the  precise 
nature  of  climate  change  impacts  and  their 
effects is uncertain.

PNGs gap assessment has incorporated three 
strategies for integrating climate change ad-
aptation into national protected area planning. 
In  addition  to  mapping  and  considering  the 
distribution  of  ecosystem  types  and  status, 
endemic species, planning units and the current 
protected area network, the assessment also 
set out to achieve the following:

1. Conserve diversity of land systems. As the 
climate changes, species naturally respond by 
shifting  their  location  or  reorganising  in  new 
ways.  Evidence  shows  that  diversity  of  land 
systems  for example, varied elevation and ge-
ology  helps to maintain species diversity. The 
assessment therefore mapped land systems in 
PNG and aimed to conserve the full spectrum 
of land diversity to maximise species diversity 
in a dynamic climate.

2. Protect climate refuges. When changes in 
climate outpace the natural capacity for species 
to adapt, biodiversity is lost. And the likelihood, 
speed  and  extent  of  climate-driven  changes 

are likely to be uneven. Places where climate 
changes are least severe are likely to serve as 
a  refuge  for  species  and  habitats  marginal-
ised by ecological changes elsewhere. Using 
models of projected climate change impacts, 
the  assessment  identified  areas  where  envi-
ronmental conditions  for example, available 
water capacity, average temperature and hot-
test months  were expected to remain most 
similar  to  their  current  state.  To  improve  the 
scope for natural adaptation and buy time to 
help improve the broader ecosystems ability to 
cope with climate driven changes, the assess-
ment aimed to protect these climate refuges. 
This significantly reduced the overall amount 
of climate change that habitats in the identified 
protected areas are predicted to experience.
3.  Prioritise connectivity across habitats and 
landscapes. Increasing geographic connectivity 
among protected areas at the landscape level is 
a common climate change adaptation strategy. 
To increase the likelihood that species popula-
tions will remain connected to suitable habitat 
as the climate changes, the assessment priori-
tised connectivity among both habitats  cooler 
and warmer, drier and moister  and protected 
areas. It did this by prioritising protection of lo-
cations with high environmental heterogeneity 
while maximising connectivity at the landscape 

As we move forward, the conservation priority areas 
identified in this report represent key components of a 
national conservation plan to help shape a bright future 
for the people and the biodiversity of this extraordinary 
country,Dr. Wari-lea Iamo, Former Secretary of the Department of Environment and 
Conservation

level. Explicitly considering environmental het-
erogeneity between adjacent areas resulted in 
protected area networks with 40 percent more 
internal environmental connectivity.

The resulting climate-ready gap analysis pro-
vides a clear map of priority areas for conserva-
tion, based on the number of times each was 
selected  according  to  the  criteria  prioritised. 
Because climate change projections alone do 
not drive the selection of protected areas, as 
targets  for  all  conservation  features  are  still 
being  met  based  on  current  knowledge  of 
biodiversity distribution, the solutions represent 
potential no regrets measures.

According to the authors of the assessment, in 
many other countries, these strategies could 
be implemented immediately with current data 
and expertise typically available during national 
conservation  assessments.  They  represent 
defensible ways to guide national conservation 
priorities given current uncertainty in our ability 
to predict climate changes and their impacts.

The project also includes a plan to integrate 
protected  areas  into  the  wider  landscape, 
seascape and sectoral plans, as well as devel-
oping a comprehensive legal framework. The 
next step will be to create the protected areas. 

As we move forward, the conservation priority 
areas  identified  in  this  report  represent  key 
components of a national conservation plan to 
help shape a bright future for the people and the 
biodiversity of this extraordinary country we call 
our home. I look forward to seeing these areas, 
not on paper, but as a tangible reality across 
our  nation,  says  Dr.  Wari-lea  Iamo,  Former 
Secretary of the Department of Environment 
and Conservation.

RESULTING ANALYSIS 
OF THE CLIMATE-READY GAP ASSESSMENT

The UNDP supported, GEF financed Early Action Grant Project for Protected Areas programme (active from 2008 to 
2013), which funded this work in PNG, was designed in direct response to the CBDs Programme of Work on Protected 
Areas. This global project has supported 46 countries (75 percent of which are Least Developed Countries (LDCs) and 
Small Island Developing States (SIDS)) to meet their commitments under this Programme of Work by undertaking criti-
cal actions towards achieving effective and sustainable National Systems of Protected Areas  from gap assessments 
to finance assessments to legal and management effectiveness assessments. The project resulted in more than 135 
products and key assessments, including a lasting legacy of e-learning modules available in multiple languages.

Source: Game, E. T., Lipsett-Moore, G., Saxon, E., Peterson, N. & Sheppard, S. (2011) Incorporating Climate Change Adaptation into National Conservation 
Assessments. Global Change Biology, 17 (10), 3150-3160.

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

49

UNDPS LEGACY  INSTITUTIONAL 
CAPACITY BUILDING FOR BIODIVERSITY 
AND ECOSYSTEMS MANAGEMENT
UNDP has a long and significant history 

Between 1970 and 1982, UNDP funded about 
35 projects totalling US$ 12 million in support 
of wildlife and national parks management in 
the Asia Pacific region.

support contributed to the establishment and 
strengthening  of  many  wildlife  reserves  and 
national parks in Afghanistan, Myanmar (then 
Burma), India, Indonesia, Iran and Nepal.

These projects were funded  by UNDP in its 
then capacity as the central funding organisa-
tion  for  technical  cooperation  in  the  United 
Nations (UN) system, and executed by the UN 
Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO). This 

Through country projects and targeted support, 
UNDP helped to establish organisations that 
play an instrumental role in biodiversity conser-
vation and sustainable ecosystem management 
in the region: the Wildlife Institute of India (WII) 
and the Mekong River Commission (MRC).

In the 1980s, the UNDP-funded and 
FAO-executed  Assistance  for  the  Establish-
ment of the Wildlife Institute of India project 
supported the formation of the WII at Dehra-
dun in 1982, with a mandate to build capacity 
through  training,  education  and  research  in 
wildlife conservation. Ongoing support provided 
by the project enabled the nascent institute to 
build up a distinguished faculty through rigorous 
training and state of the art research, to broaden 
its research, teaching and training base, and to 
equip itself with advanced computers, labora-
tories and field equipment.

The WII successfully became an autonomous 
institute under the Ministry of Environment and 

Forests under the Government of India in 1986, 
before the project closed in 1988. Today, it is 
an internationally acclaimed Institution, offering 
Postgraduate Diplomas, Masters Courses and 
professional  training  in  wildlife  management, 
conservation and science to trainees from India 
and more than 20 countries across Asia and Af-
rica. The Institute is a centre of national capacity 
in biodiversity conservation and management, 
having conducted ecological gap assessments 
of  Indias  protected  area  network,  protected 
area  management  effectiveness  evaluations, 
species action plans and impact assessments. 
It is also engaged in research on biodiversity-
related issues across the breadth of the India, 
with 190 research projects completed to date.

HOME

of investment in building capacity and partner-
ships to support ecosystems and biodiversity 
management in the Asia Pacific region. UNDPs 
mandate  and  involvement  in  environmental 
issues has its origins in the early years of the 
organisations existence (from 1966 onwards), 
reflecting the central importance of the environ-
ment for sustainable human development and 
poverty reduction.

WILDLIFE 
INSTITUTE OF INDIA

Illustration of the Wildlife Institute 
of India (WII), Dehradun, courtesy of WII,
WII AVCell 2014

MEKONG RIVER 
COMMISSION

UNDP-supported  negotiations  in  1994 
led to the 1995 Mekong Agreement (Agree-
ment on the Cooperation for the Sustainable 
Development  of  the  Mekong  River  Basin  of 
5  April  1995).  From  1993  to  1995,  UNDP 
provided extensive support and facilitation for 
drafting, negotiation, ratification and adoption 
of this agreement, which established the Me-
kong River Commission (MRC) and the MRC 
Secretariat  (MRCS).  The  MRC  is  the  only 
inter-governmental agency that works directly 
with the governments of Cambodia, Lao PDR, 

Thailand and Viet Nam on the joint management 
of shared water resources and the sustainable 
development of the Mekong River, which har-
bours three times more fish diversity per unit 
area than the Amazon River basin and is home 
to about 65 million people.

UNDP  support  enabled  the  establishment 
and the relocation of the MRC Secretariat, the 
operational arm of the Commission, and also 
contributed  to  the  development  of  the  first 
MRC Strategic Plan. Since its establishment, 

the MRC has adopted a number of rules and 
procedures, such as the Procedures for Water 
Quality,  to  provide  a  systematic  and  uniform 
process for the implementation of the Mekong 
Agreement. It also acts as a regional knowledge 
hub  on  several  key  issues  such  as  fisheries, 
environment monitoring, navigation, flood and 
drought  management,  hydropower  develop-
ment and climate change adaptation. 

INSTITUTIONAL 
STRENGTHENING 
FOR BIODIVERSITY 
IN CHINA

Nature Reserve Staff
in Yunnan Province
Photos: Midori Paxton

More  recently,  the  European  Union-
UNDP-China Biodiversity Programme (ECBP), 
a  joint  initiative  by  the  EU,  UNDP  and  the 
Chinese Ministry of Commerce and Ministry of 
Environmental Protection (MEP), has provided 
support to strengthen policies, guidelines and 
capacity to implement the Convention on Bio-
logical Diversity in China.

The programme has combined policy dialogue 
and  development,  institutional  strengthening 
and  awareness-raising  with  a  set  of  18  field 
projects  that  helped  improve  biodiversity  
conservation  and  management  at  all  levels 
across middle and western China. Implemented 
from 2005 to 2011, many activities under the 
programme  supported  strengthening  of  the 
overall  capacity  of  institutions  housed  under 
Chinas  MEP  and  the  Foreign  Economic  
Cooperation  Office  (FECO),  which  imple-
mented the ECBP.

At the national level, the programme focused on 
incorporating biodiversity into central govern-
ment policy. For example, ECBP provided financial 

and technical support to integrate biodiversity 
into the work of relevant Ministries. Many have 
participated directly in the programme, with the 
Ministry  of  Agriculture,  Ministry  of  Land  and 
Resources, the State Forestry Administration, 
and  others  having  developed  guidelines  for 
mainstreaming  biodiversity  into  their  work 
through the programme. ECBP supported the 
first ever biodiversity Strategic Environmental 
Assessment of an industrial development plan 
in China and developed national guidelines and 
procedures  for  including  biodiversity  consid-
erations effectively in Strategic Environmental 
Assessment (SEA) and Environmental Impact 
Assessment  (EIA).  MEP  is  now  planning  to 
integrate biodiversity into future SEA and EIAs.

Field  projects  conducted  with  69  partner 
organisations  have  also  integrated  biodi-
versity  considerations  in  sector  plans  and 
demonstrated community based conservation 
schemes and alternative livelihood models to 
reduce pressures on wild and agricultural bio-
diversity. Biodiversity priorities were introduced 
into  routine  provincial,  municipal  and  local 

government  through  the  formation  of  cross-
sectoral committees and the establishment of 
incentives for government departments to show 
improvements in the local status of biodiversity.
UNDPs support for institutional strengthening 
for biodiversity mainstreaming continues. The 
on-going GEF financed Institutional Strength-
ening  for  China  Biodiversity  Partnership  and 
Framework (CBPF) for Action (2011-2015) of 
MEP has supported development of provincial 
biodiversity strategy and action plans, as well as 
a sector biodiversity strategy and action plan of 
the State Oceanic Administration. The CBPF 
was established in 2005 and ECBP was one of 
the many initiatives under this umbrella. 

A pilot payment for ecosystem services (PES) 
legislation  project  in  Liaoning  Province  also 
started  in  2012,  which  facilitates  financial 
transactions between one upstream and one 
downstream municipality, based on water qual-
ity in Liaohe River. The PES payment, which is 
financed from the provincial budget, is expected 
to reach as much as US$80 million.

50

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

51

Mekong River
Photo: Doungjun Roongruang

HOME

Levels of Capacity and Entry Points for Capacity Development for 
Environmental Sustainability. UNDPs support on capacity development for 
enhanced ecosystems and biodiversity management in the region has been 
targeted at various levels and entry points.

          LEVEL

     ENTRY POINTS

ENABLING ENVIRONMENT: 
the political, economic policy, 
social, legal and regulatory 
systems within which 
organisations and individuals 
operate

ORGANISATIONS:
including government institutions 
and civil society, community and private 
sector organisations

INDIVIDUALS:
Women and men in their roles working 
within government and civil society or-
ganisations, and acting as citizens and 
members of families and communities

 Societal framework: cultural norms, social values, traditions 
and customs
 Constitutional framework for environmental sustainability (ES)
 Environmental governance: rule of law, accountability, trans-
parency and responsiveness
 Political framework
 Policy, legal and regulatory frameworks
 National/sub-national institutional, management and account-
ability frameworks
 National and sectoral planning frameworks
 Inter-agency coordination and collaboration frameworks
  Stakeholder  engagement  and  collaboration  (multi-agency, 
multi-sectoral)
 Financial flows/budgeting
 Knowledge and information systems
  Human  rights  and  equity  related  to  ES,  including  gender 
equality and access to natural resources and decision-making

 Organisational mandates, structures and functions
 Internal management, planning and operational frameworks
 Administrative and budgetary systems
 Personnel management and human resources development
 Stakeholder engagement mechanisms (organisational level)
 Information and knowledge management systems
 Infrastructure, facilities and equipment
 Knowledge and information systems
 Infrastructure, facilities and equipment
 Organisational culture to support ES
 Organisational culture Traditional organisations, both formal 
and informal: e.g., local, community and indigenous systems for 
managing environment and natural resources

 Awareness and attitudes: e.g., beliefs, values, motivation and 
commitment
  Knowledge:  related  to  environment  and  natural  resources 
management;  mainstreaming  ES  and  sustainable  develop-
ment  (integration  of  environment,  economic,  social  issues); 
and  information  systems/Information  and  Communication 
Technologies (ICT)
 Skills and behaviours: e.g., specialized scientific and technical 
skills; interdisciplinary skills, and communication and collabora-
tion skills

Department of Marine Parks Malaysia 
Patrol Staff

Ranger, 
Nature Reserve of China

BUILDING INDIVIDUAL AND 
INSTITUTIONAL CAPACITIES FOR 
ECOSYSTEMS AND BIODIVERSITY 
MANAGEMENT IN ASIA AND 
THE PACIFIC

Ministry of Forestry Staff, Bhutan

Menuvu people, Indigenous Community 
Conserved Area, Philippines

A patrol team in the Htamanthi Wildlife Sanctuary, Myanmar

Source: UNDP. 2011. Practitioners guide: capacity development for environmental sustainability. United Nations Development Programme, New York.

UNDP is working with local and national governments, communities, NGOs, and other partners across Asia Pacific to build individual and institutional capacities.
Photos: DENR-PAO for NewCAPP, Iranian Department of Environment, Midori Paxton, Doungjun Roongruang, WCS.

Lore Lindu National Park Staff,
 Central Sulawesi, Indonesia

Park Staff, 
Parishan Protected Area, Iran

Department of Marine Parks 
Malaysia Education Staff

52

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

53

HOME

HOW HEALTHY 
IS YOUR HOME ?

HOW HEALTHY IS YOUR HOUSE ? 
EVERYBODY NEEDS TO KNOW. 
THESE MEASURES ACT AS 
ESSENTIAL SURVEYORS!  

Western tarsier, (Tarsius bancanus) Sabah, Borneo
Photo:  Frans Lanting

A friend  from my college days in Britain used to say being 

able to monitor the health of his home and detect any early sign of 
its ill-health was absolutely vital to maintaining his medieval house. 
He lived in a traditional thatched cottage built in the 16th century just 
outside Cambridge.

It is the same for our health  the home for our soul. We go for regu-
lar health check-ups especially after the age of 40 to ensure we are 
in good shape. Doctors give us a series of biological, chemical and 
physical tests that can be easily undertaken on parts of the body that 
can be readily accessed.   Exactly the same thinking needs to apply to 
monitoring the health of our larger home  ecosystems and biodiversity.

Working  on  biodiversity  conservation  and  ecosystem  management 
projects, we often struggle with indicators to show the results of ef-
fective biodiversity management and improvement. Trends in species 
numbers, coverage of protected areas, and forest cover (to name a few) 
may indicate biodiversity and ecosystem health, but only very partially. 
In order to have a more integrated measure of biodiversity  to really 
assess the general health of biodiversity in a given area  we are try-
ing two kinds of index through GEF financed projects in Asia. These 
two indices have features in common. They are sensitive to pressure, 
are  feasible  and  cost-effective  to  implement  and  sustain,  and  are 
unambiguous, simple and clear.

BIODIVERSITY     
   HEALTH INDEX

One index is the Biodiversity Health Index (BHI). This is being applied in demonstration 
wetland protected areas in seven projects under Chinas Main Streams of Life (MSL)  The Wet-
land Protected Area System Strengthening Programme. The index assessment is done through 
a scorecard with a set of questions under three headings: habitat conditions, species welfare 
and socio-economic context. Protected Area managers, with specialist support, are expected to 
identify main threats and locally specific suitable indicator species to be monitored for the BHI.  
Elements under the three headings are as follows.

54

                                       ELEMENTS 

BHI HEADINGS AND ELEMENTS FOR MONITORING
    HEADINGS 
Habitat conditions  
 
 
                                                  
 
 
 
 

 Maintenance of habitat extent and diversity
 Maintenance of habitat quality (productivity, water supply, pollution, 
  damage and physical condi tion oxygen, temperature, turbidity)
 Adequacy of habitat connectivity
 Resilience to threats and changes
 Levels of existing or planned threats
 Stability of site (natural disasters)

 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 

 

 
 
 
 

 

 

Species welfare 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

Socio-economic  
context 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
    

 Containing and maintaining diversity of representative species 
  (including important target species)
 Indicator species show numerical stability or increases (good breeding levels, 
  low mortality rates)
 Incidence of hunting, poaching, alien species, new colonisation
 Sustainability of harvest of commercial species
 Response to disasters (fire, floods, droughts, pollution)

 Pressures on habitat and species from local communities (degree of dependence 
  on natural resources, sustainability of off-take, etc.)
 Additional threats or stresses from external developments (existing or planned)
 Success of alternative livelihoods
 Impacts from tourism or other disturbance
 Levels of respect, support and co-management in protection, monitoring, 
  research, fire-fighting, etc. 

Wetlands  not  only  harbour  biodiversity,  but  also  provide  essential 
ecosystem services for wildlife and human populations in areas far 
beyond.  Connected  with  waterways,  they  are  also  susceptible  to 
pressure from distant influences, including pollution, water extraction 
and water diversion.

Information for the BHI can be collected by monitoring a set of variables 
through day-to-day management actions to safeguard the health of 
wetland ecosystems. With this index, PA managers are able to gauge 
the dynamics of constantly changing biodiversity and ecosystem health, 
just as an investor may follow an endlessly changing financial index. 

BIODIVERSITY INTACTNESS INDEX

In Malaysia, in a new project to improve connectivity in the five 
million hectare Central Forest Spine (CFS) landscape running through 
Peninsular Malaysia, the Biodiversity Intactness Index (BII) is being 
piloted. BII was developed to meet the requirements set out by the 
CBD to provide an integrated measure of biodiversity. To date, the BII 
has been used to illustrate the state of biodiversity in Southern Africa 
during the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment (MEA), and has also 
been adapted and adopted for use in Norway, British Columbia, and for 
global analyses. It combines datasets comprising land cover, land use, 
species richness and abundance and impact factors on biodiversity, 
and synthesises them into a single, integrated index in a scientifically 
rigorous way. The BII is thus able to indicate the state of biodiversity in 
a given area, with high sensitivity to increased or decreased pressure 
on biodiversity as well as responses to the pressure, at a timescale 
relevant to policy decisions.  

The CFS is increasingly fragmented due to pressures that are mainly 
due to habitat loss to land use change. The proposed response to be 
supported by the project is the implementation of the interconnected 
system of PAs and corridors. This makes the BII an ideal indicator for 
the project. In addition, most of the necessary data sets are already 
available in Malaysia, which makes it feasible to monitor. 

Beyond projects, in order to achieve the national targets that are aligned 
with  the  Aichi  Targets,  countries  need  to  have  a  robust  framework 
to monitor the state of biodiversity. Countries need to have people 
on  the  ground  to  observe  species  numbers,  movement,  vegetation 
and threats. Countries need specific indicators that show changes in 
the state of species or elements of biodiversity. However, countries 
also need a couple of synthetic indices that can speak to the policy 
makers. For actual changes to occur to reverse the ever-increasing 
trends of biodiversity loss, conservation practitioners need to be able 
to communicate in five minutes what the state of biodiversity is and 
what needs to be done. We need brevity and executive summaries! 
UNDP-GEF support for these indices provides the opportunity to test 
the indicators in a country- and area-specific context. This supports 
future upscaling and provides an essential component of biodiversity 
monitoring. 

by Midori Paxton Regional Technical 
Adviser, Asia-Pacific

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

55

FOOD & WATER

Photo: happystock/Shutterstock.com

Biodiversity provides the critical foundation for 
sustainable development and human wellbeing. 
At the simplest level, it underpins the ecosystem 
functions that provide us with the basic resources 
needed for our survival, including food and 
water. The security of water and food resources 
in the Asia Pacific region has been compromised 
by decades of biodiversity loss and ecosystem 
degradation, driven by economic development. 
The Asian Development Bank (ADB) estimates 
that 75% of the countries in the region are facing 
an imminent water crisis, and in terms of food  
security, over 20% of the worlds undernourished 
populations live in South and South-west Asia. 
Going forward, the effective climate-smart  
management of biodiversity and ecosystems for 
sustainable development is a regional priority.

FOOD & WATER

SECURING 
THE FUTURE 
OF AGRICULTURE 
IN ASIA PACIFIC

The  security  of  the  worlds 
food  supply  is  being  compromised  as  more  

farmers  rely  on  fewer  and  fewer  varieties  of  crops  and 
livestock,  eroding  agricultural  biodiversity.  UNDP  works 
with  countries  in  Asia  and  the  Pacific  to  increase  the  
genetic diversity in crops and livestock to secure the future 
of agriculture against increasing threats from climate change, 
pests and disease. Sustaining the health of agro-biodiverse 
ecosystems is fundamental for future food security.

Rice field near Jinghong, Yunnan, China, where Chinas Ministry of 
Agriculture is working with farmers to conserve wild relatives of crops 
Photo: Thep Krit/Shutterstock.com

58

On a farm in Hainan province in China lies 

a patch of land where scruffy wild plants grow in sparse 
tufts. It may not look like much next to the lush green rice 
crops that carpet the fields on either side, but this apparent 
scrubland could hold the key to food security for people 
that  rely  on  the  major  grains  grown  in  this  area.  These 
plants are wild relatives of rice that farmers in Hainan are 
now voluntarily protecting on their farms, next to fields of 
cultivated rice, as part of an effort to conserve the countrys 
precious agricultural biodiversity.

Agricultural biodiversity or agro-biodiversity is the worlds 
insurance policy against threats to food security, including 
climate change, pests and disease. It includes all compo-
nents of biological diversity relevant to food and agriculture. 
Traditional crop varieties, locally developed over centuries, 
are storehouses of genetic diversity. Wild relatives of crops 
possess characteristics that could come in handy in the 
future. While not generally edible themselves, some are salt 
tolerant, high in protein or resistant to drought, flood, pests 
and disease. Conserving these genetic characteristics is 
essential to guard world agriculture from untold numbers 
of pests and diseases and the threat of increased drought, 
flood and sea level rise under climate change.

But as farmers abandon traditional seeds for new hybrids, 
and as wild crop relatives are threatened by habitat loss 
and degradation, this genetic diversity is being eroded. In 
the last century, an estimated 75 percent of crop diversity 
has been lost from the worlds fields as farmers have aban-
doned their multiple local varieties for genetically uniform 
high yield varieties. As world agriculture relies on fewer and 
fewer varieties, the need to preserve genetic diversity of 
crop species and domestic animals for future generations 
becomes increasingly urgent.

Because the Asia Pacific region is the origin of so many 
important agricultural crops and contains extensive agro-
ecosystems of such high conservation value, UNDP and its 
partners have developed a suite of GEF financed projects to 
protect agricultural heritage and its associated biodiversity, 
cultures and livelihoods.

These projects include efforts to conserve plants in fields 
as  well  as  in  seed  and  gene  banks,  enabling  wild  crop 
species to evolve in changing environments and providing 
useful  information  about  these  species  in  their  natural 
environments.

In  China,  where  surveys  show  that  the  diversity  of  wild 
crop relatives is deteriorating rapidly, the Conservation and 
Sustainable Utilization of Wild Relatives of Crops project 
has worked with farmers to conserve wild relatives of rice, 
wheat and soybean in fields on their farms in an effort to 
reverse this trend. The project, led by Chinas Ministry of 
Agriculture,  has  established  72  integrated  conservation 
sites (8 project target sites and 64 replication sties) for 
these wild relatives across 15 provinces.

A key innovation lies in the projects demonstration of a 
new in situ approach that incentivizes farmers to maintain 
conservation  areas  for  wild  crop  relatives  that  are  inte-
grated next to their own cultivated crops. Farmers create 
conservation  areas  in  return  for  project  investment  in 
infrastructure  and  goods  that  enhance  both  community 
and individual farming livelihoods. In addition, 273 farmers 
have been given interactive training on wild crop relative 
conservation and improved production practices. Farmers 
now understand the benefits of wild crop relatives and have 
become enthusiastic about conserving them.

Provincial  experts  report  that  there  has  been  a  visible 
improvement  in  the  density,  spread  and  variety  of  wild 
crop relatives at the conservation sites over the projects 
lifetime from 2007-2013. Threats to the conservation areas 
have been reduced by 67 to 80 percent according to the 
projects threat assessment. Incomes have increased at the 
projects demonstration sites and in Yunnan province, overall 
incomes have increased more than four-fold.

In the Lao Peoples Democratic Republic (Lao PDR), UNDP 
is partnering with the Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry 
and FAO to support conservation of agro-biodiversity at 
both the local and national level. With project support, the 
countrys National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan 
is being updated to pay special attention to sustainable 
use  and  conservation  of  agro-biodiversity.  The  project 
is reviewing relevant national policies and laws and has 
made  recommendations  to  incorporate  sustainable  use 
and  conservation  of  agro-biodiversity  in  the  Agriculture 
Law, Forestry Law and Land Policy.

In addition, the project is working with provincial government 
and local stakeholders to develop provincial Biodiversity 
Strategies and Action Plans. These will allocate conserva-
tion areas for maintaining agro-biodiversity on the ground. 
Xieng Khoung province has already allocated 300 hectares 
of  forest  for  conservation  of  medicinal  plants.  Over  its 
lifetime, the project aims to allocate 100,000 hectares of 
land for conservation areas.

In  Bhutan,  UNDPs  support  has  helped  farmers  to  re-
claim  virtually  forgotten  traditional  crop  varieties  while 
diversifying their income. In total, 555 farmers at 18 sites 
benefitted directly from the project, receiving training on 
improved  agricultural  practices  to  enhance  production, 
increase  income  and  conserve  native  varieties  such  as 
buckwheat, barley, soybean, maize, rice, and native breeds 
of yak, poultry, pigs, sheep and horses. Bhutans National 
Gene Bank was also significantly expanded to hold a vast 
number of crop and animal genetic resources for research 
and future use, enhancing national capacity for ensuring 
crop and breed diversity.

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

59

FOOD & WATER

HOW THEY 
HAVE DONE IT: EMBEDDING WILD RELATIVE 
CROP CONSERVATION INTO 
RURAL DEVELOPMENT

China  is  one  of  eight  Vavilov  Centres 

identified by Russian botanist and geneticist, 
Nikolai Vavilov, as the sources of modern crops. 
While  seven  of  the  Vavilov  Centres  embrace 
more than one country, China is the only country 
to stand alone in its own right. Among its 136 
endemic Wild Relatives of Crops (WRC), it has 
brought  the  world  onions,  cherries,  peaches, 
hemp, sugar cane, and, most significantly, rice, 
soybean, millet and wheat.

China is not just the birthplace of these varieties 
but also the repository of WRC genetic diversity, 
a living botanical library that if lost cannot be 
replaced. Those plants behind the fences might 
look like weeds, but they are far from that!

With this in mind, in 2001, China began carrying 
out in situ conservation of WRCs through use 
of  a  single  methodology:  physical  isolation. 
This  consisted  of  setting  up  guarded  enclo-
sures  around  the  areas  where  WRCs  occur, 
which  are  generally  located  very  near  to  or 
within  rural  settlements.  However,  this  made 
the  sustainability  of  such  conservation  sites 
questionable. Maintenance of the site proved 
too costly, requiring investment for the fencing 
enclosure and a small watch station needing 
upkeep and salaries for staff.

In  response,  the  Government,  through  the 
UNDP supported GEF financed Conservation 
and  Sustainable  Utilisation  of  Wild  Relatives 
of  Crops  Project  introduced  the  new  Main-
streaming-in-Agriculture  (MiA)  approach  to 
conservation. In this approach, no physical barri-
ers are used to guard conservation sites and an 
attempt is made to integrate the conservation 
of wild relatives with agriculture in and around 
the conservation area. The MiA approach has 
advantages  in  terms  of  sustainability,  liveli-
hoods and stewardship by local people of the 
conservation site.

The project has succeeded in demonstrating 
the approach at eight sites located in rural vil-
lages in eight provinces. More than 80 percent 
of the farmers who had land in the eight sites 
(1,172,968 hectares of agricultural landscape) 

have  changed  their  economic  activities,  re-
ducing negative impacts on the WRCs, while 
increasing their income between 5 and 48 per-
cent. The area protected for WRC conservation 
in the eight sites has been not reduced since 
the project ended and in many of the areas, 
an increase in the density and spread of the 
conserved plant was clearly observed.

The secret of success was the projects strategy 
to mainstream WRC conservation into the rural 
development and poverty alleviation activities of 
local government agencies. The project worked 
with local government officials and communi-
ties to design incentive mechanisms suited to 
each local context. The mechanisms focused 
on improving farmer livelihoods by supporting 
sustainable  alternative  sources  of  income 
generation  or  improving  existing  livelihoods. 
Support generally consisted of investment in 
public works, such as roads and irrigation in-
frastructure, as well as individual or small group 
support, such as grants for greenhouses, sheds 
for  animals,  access  to  improved  varieties  of 
crops, or micro-credit interest reduction. Seeing 
support that directly improved their daily lives 
and livelihoods, farmers embraced the concept 
of protecting the WRC sites.

The  projects  strategy  was  to  embed  WRC 
conservation  in  rural  development,  says  Dr 
Qingwen  Yang,  Chief  Technical  Adviser  for 
the project. It is worth noting that the majority 
of the incentives were financed through local 
government budgets allocated for agricultural 
development,  poverty  alleviation  and  water 
resource management.

In Guangxi provinces site, for example, the in-
centive demonstration project actively involved 
over 20 departments of local government. Li 
Kedi, a local government official says: The key 
to the involvement of these departments has 
been establishing the clear link between WRC 
conservation and the work of Chinese agricul-
tural scientist, Yuan Longping, who developed 
the first hybrid rice variety and demonstrated 
how the conservation of wild crops can improve 
food security.

Wild rice conserved at habitat in Guangxi
Photo: Conservation and Sustainable Utilization of 
Wild Relatives of Crops Project Management Office/ 
Ministry of Agriculture of China

In addition, in Guangxii, threats to a site that is 
home to a wild rice variety had been logging 
of pine for fuel and eucalyptus planting in the 
surrounding forest areas, which was affecting 
water  resources.  Water  diversion  from  the 
area  for  rice  paddies  elsewhere  was  also  a 
major  issue.  As  an  incentive  mechanism  for 
WCR  conservation,  an  irrigation  system  was 
provided that increased rice production. A road 
was also constructed that supported increased 
production of crops, such as watermelons, by 
providing more efficient access to transport for 
shipment. Biogas digesters were introduced as 
an alternative fuel source so that villages did 
not need to cut down trees. And communities 
have stopped planting rice paddies in the buffer 
area to aid the protection of WRC. 

Modern  development  and  prosperity  living  in 
harmonious proximity to ancient storehouses 
of genetic wealth  Vavilov would have been 
pleased!

A BIG BANG 
FOR YOUR 
BUCK CONSERVING 
TRADITIONAL CROPS 
IN BHUTAN

Phurba and her freshly prepared field for the next crop 
of buckwheat. The buckwheat is normally grown in 
April-May and harvested in OctoberNovember.  
Photo: Sutharin Koonphol

One of the happiest moments in Phurbas 
life was cooking traditional buckwheat noodles and pancakes for the 
Bhutanese Royal Wedding in 2011. It was very special to see the King 
and the Queen in real life and to actually do something for them. I was 
so proud that our local buckwheat was valued by others and placed 
on the royal table. For her, the revival of this once virtually abandoned 
traditional crop has changed her life; before, she worked hard in the 
fields and tended her family.

promote their buckwheat products. They also provided training and 
shared their results with other farmer groups.

The group has now developed 18 products, including buckwheat husk 
pillows. Waste not; want not! Previously buckwheat husks were dis-
carded but the new pillow contents provide income and are believed 
to help fight high-blood pressure, facilitate good sleep, and may even 
prevent snoring.

In  Bumthang  Valley,  farmers  have  abandoned  buckwheat  for  other 
cash crops, such as potatoes, when access roads opened the area 
to trade. Bhutans wealth of national agro-biodiversity underpins the 
countrys food security. It also provides genetic resources that may 
become beneficial and profitable in the future. Much of this diversity 
is held in traditionally cultivated varieties of crops, such as buckwheat. 
Alarmed by the decline of buckwheat production, Phurba and 14 other 
farmers formed the Bumthang Buckwheat Group in 2009, supported 
by the District Agricultural Office and the National Biodiversity Centre.

With the UNDP supported GEF financed Integrated Livestock and 
Crop  Conservation  Project  (ILCCP),  and  the  National  Biodiversity 
Centre, the group worked on value-added product development and 
diversification; cakes, biscuits, and pizzas, as well as more traditional 
products such as buckwheat noodles and pancakes.

The group soon opened a shop in 2011.The project supplied baking 
equipment, skills training and health benefit information. Buckwheat 
prices rose three-fold over five years and sales of flour, cakes and 
biscuits now bring the group a steady income. 

The area of land under buckwheat cultivation has more than doubled 
and buckwheat production in the area has increased by 56 percent 
since the initiative began. The group yields up to US$ 60 per day in the 
peak season from June to August. The group has recently expanded 
to include 30 additional contract farmers who supply buckwheat grain. 

Further expansion is planned to meet growing market demand. With 
support from the project and district agricultural office, Phurba and her 
friends have been travelling to biodiversity fairs around the country to 

Buckwheat wine is the next plan and has good market potential, ac-
cording to Sonam Tobgay, Chairman of Bumthang Buckwheat Group. 
To create opportunities for more farmers, the project also created a 
community seed bank to conserve buckwheat and other traditional 
crop varieties from the Dzongkhag area.

We distributed buckwheat seeds for free to those farmers wanting to 
grow the crop again and plan to introduce a price guarantee scheme, 
notes Gaylong, the District Agricultural Officer.

Bumthangs buckwheat exemplifies the biodiversity wealth of Bhutan 
and its close relationship with local livelihoods. Buckwheat is just one 
of several traditional crop and livestock varieties that the project helped 
farmers to reclaim and conserve through supply chain development 
in 18 sites spanning eight districts. Others promoted under this effort 
included traditional varieties and breeds of barley, soybean, maize, rice, 
yak, poultry, pigs, sheep, Nublang  a local cattle breed  and horses. 

The project targeted some of the poorest communities, living in the 
most remote regions of Bhutan, with 555 farmers benefitting directly 
from its efforts. The project also expanded the National Gene Bank to 
hold a vast number of crop and animal genetic resources for research 
and long term use, and trained gene bank staff and extension offic-
ers at local governments, resulting in enhanced national capacity for 
ensuring crop and breed diversity.

According to traditional Bhutanese belief, buckwheat is one of the 
nine  essential  grains  that  Lord  Buddha  gave  to  mankind.  Properly 
managed they will to continue as foundations for realizing high Gross 
National Happiness.

60

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

61

FOOD & WATER

Sonam Tobgay, Chairman of the buckwheat group, 
with his wife - Nazom, and the buckwheat goodies.
Photo: Sutharin Koonphol

Various traditional varieties in Bumthang are now 
kept in the community seedbank 
Photo: Sutharin Koonphol

RECIPE FOR 
PUTTALOCAL BHUTANESE 
BUCKWHEAT NOODLES

The two varieties of buckwheat commonly 
grown in Bumthang: sweet and bitter
Photo: Sutharin Koonphol

Ingredients
500 grams buckwheat flour
100 grams wheat flour
3 eggs, fried and chopped (optional)
6 teaspoons chili powder
2-3 teaspoons salt
Half cup cooking oil
Dry or fresh kichuram gop (chive leaves)
2 teaspoons Thingay powder (commonly known as Sichuan pepper)
Method
To prepare the noodles, sieve the buckwheat and wheat flour into a clean bowl. Add water to make a 
fluffy dough; then wrap the dough in cling film or a plastic bag and leave for 10-15 minutes to prove. 
Make a number of small balls from the dough and pass them through a noodle or pasta-making machine, 
one by one. Boil 2-3 litres of water; and add a few drops of oil to the water to prevent the noodles stick-
ing together while cooking. Add about 200 grams of noodles to the boiling water, and cook for about 
15-20 minutes. Wash the cooked noodles in cold water. Transfer the cooked and washed noodles to 
a bowl, add the remaining ingredients  salt, chilli powder, some Thingay powder  and mix well. To 
prepare the garnish and finish the noodles, heat the oil in a large frying pan and fry the chive leaves. 
Transfer the seasoned noodles to the frying pan too and mix well. Add fried egg, if desired. Once mixed, 
the noodles are ready to serve.

62

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

63

Conserved seeds in Royal Bhutan Genebank, 
National Biodiversity Centre
Photo:  Midori Paxton

FOOD & WATER

DID YOU KNOW? 

An estimate of the economic value of 
wetlands per geographical region around 
the world indicated that Asian wetlands 
have the highest economic value 
at US$ 1.8 billion per year

64

Siberian Cranes, Fereidunkenar Wetland, Mazandaran Province
Photo: Ali Mohajeran

MANAGING AND RESTORING 
PRECIOUS WETLANDS 
IN IRAN AND NEPAL

Wetlands come in many forms  rivers, 

lakes, mangrove forests, swamps, marshes, coastal 
floodplains, flooded forests and rice fields. These 
ecosystems provide essential services. As well as 
supplying and purifying water, they provide food, reg-
ulate the climate, control floods, protect coastlines 
and are invaluable centres of biodiversity. But the 
worlds wetlands are being lost and degraded faster 
than any other ecosystem, driven by conversion and 
development, water withdrawal, over-exploitation, 
pollution, drought and climate change.

With finance from the GEF, UNDP supports projects 
in 10 countries in the Asia Pacific region to conserve, 
sustainably use and restore wetland ecosystems.

In Iran, where competition for water resources and 
persistent drought severely threaten the countrys 
wetlands, UNDP has worked with the government, 
NGOs and local communities to pilot strategies to 
address these pressures. The project developed 
integrated wetland management plans for wetlands 
at three demonstration sites  Lake Uromiyeh Basin, 
Lake Parishan and Shadegan wetland  through 
a highly participatory process that lasted over two 
years and drew on inputs from community, local, pro-
vincial and national levels, 10 NGOs and 12 commu-
nity-based organisations. Replication of the projects 
accomplishments speaks to its success. Integrated 
wetland management plans are now being rolled out 
to another 50 wetlands across the country.

With project support, farmers living in and around the 
three demonstration sites were trained in sustainable 
agriculture techniques that use less water, control 
evaporation and have increased yields. At Lake 
Parishan, volunteers were trained as local eco-tour 
guides, a visitor centre was built to accommodate 
tourists, and women were given equipment to 
develop non-water dependent trades. Diversification 
of livelihoods reduces pressure on the wetlands and 
makes villagers more resilient to external shocks, 
including droughts.

Lake Parishan locals are also helping to conserve 
key species around the wetland. Some fish species 
had all but disappeared from the projects pilot sites. 
We have taken action to save them by creating 
several conservation ponds beside the wetlands to 
ensure their survival through periods of drought, 
explains Mr. Yaghoobalipour of the Fisheries Organi-
zation. More than 100 students, teachers and local 
villagers were trained to monitor otters living in the 
wetlands and were involved in developing a conser-
vation plan for this important species.

 
Persistent drought and water withdrawals have 
reduced Lake Uromiyeh to 40 percent of its original 
size in recent decades. The project developed a 
drought risk management plan for the basins wet-
lands. Drawing on the experiences of other coun-
tries facing similar problems, this plan established a 
framework for allocating water rights to each of the 
provinces surrounding the lake during droughts. It 
also included provisions on how to optimize water 
consumption and enforce these rights.
 
In Nepal, the Conservation and Sustainable Use of 
Wetlands project demonstrates that collaborative 
management and sustainable use of wetlands can 
improve both livelihoods and habitats for wildlife. 
Focusing on two priority wetlands, the Koshi Tappu 
Wildlife Reserve and Ghodaghodi Lake Area, the 
project restored 102 hectares of wetlands, mapped 
seven critical wetland sites and constructed a sluice 
gate at one of the sites to regulate water levels. It 
provided small loans to local community groups to 
help them adopt new trades, including poultry, goat, 
fish and pig rearing, leaf-plate making, vegetable 
farming and bicycle repairing.

As a result, the incomes of 463 wetland depend-
ent households have improved significantly. Com-
munity members who adopted these practices have 
increased their incomes by between 25 percent to 
almost 90 percent over the baseline average income. 
Cumulatively these efforts have positively impacted 
local wildlife. A recent census of wild water buffalo  
the flagship indicator species of Koshi Tappu Wildlife 
Reserve  showed an increase of 18 percent com-
pared to the previous census. Similarly, the cotton 
pygmy goose, an indicator waterfowl of Ghodaghodi 
Lake Area, has increased by 19 percent compared to 
last years record.

Both projects have culminated in important nation-
wide changes in Iran and Nepal. The Government 
of Nepal has for the first time allocated budget for 
important wetland sites. The Government of Iran 
has allocated a huge IRR (Iranian Rials) 1.75 tril-
lion for ecosystem management of wetlands and 
established an IRR 9 trillion fund for water resource 
management for wetlands. Significant advances have 
been made toward meaningful wetlands policy and 
legislation. Irans new National Wetlands Strategy is 
currently awaiting approval from Cabinet. In Nepal, 
a review of policies and regulations by the project 
has led the Government to draft a Wetlands Act and 
Regulations.

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

65

FOOD & WATER

Haor Khal, Hakaluki Haor wetland, Bangladesh
Photo: Sayam U. Chowdhury

Ruddy shelduck (Tadorna ferruginea), Bangladesh
Photo: Sayam U. Chowdhury

Hakaluki Haor wetland, Bangladesh
Photo: Sayam U. Chowdhury

SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE 
CAN SOLVE PROBLEMS 
FACING WETLANDS 

Less water, more yields! exclaims Mohammad 

Sharifi Moghaddam, a wetlands conservation project consultant and 
instructor for the sustainable agriculture initiative around Lake Parishan 
near the main South Western Iranian city of Shiraz. Most families living 
in the villages surrounding the wetland have been involved in farming for 
generations. Today, as family and plot sizes expand, rainfall decreases 
and water overuse has become ubiquitous, farming has become much 
more challenging  and more of a threat to the environment. Unsus-
tainable agriculture and inefficient irrigation methods are one of the 
main causes for damaging wetlands.

Since 2010, the Conservation of Iranian Wetlands project has helped 
farmers  adopt  new  water  management  techniques  that  use  water 
more efficiently, so preserving the wetlands. These techniques, com-
bined with simple agricultural methods such as composting and not 
tilling the soil, have boosted crop yields. The UNDP supported GEF 
financed project was conducted by the Departments of Environment 
and Agriculture. Villagers around Lake Parishan and the projects two 
other pilot sites are now acutely aware that preserving the wetland 
means more than saving the environment. In the long term, it means 
saving their economic livelihood.

A field farm school was set up as a demonstration site for nine dif-
ferent agricultural and water management techniques. Participating 
farmers work on the pilot site and replicate these sustainable methods 
in their own farms. These techniques offer an important alternative to 
traditional flood irrigation and the use of chemical fertilizer, which both 
use vast amounts of water. Locally made compost requires nearly two 
times less irrigation than chemical fertilizers, which need to be sprayed 
around the wetland.

Using the sustainable techniques introduced by the project, farmers 
save 42 percent of water previously needed. These techniques have 
also significantly increased yields, more than doubling average yields 
for common crops such as tomatoes or watermelons, from 70 to 148 
tonnes per hectare.

66

Mr. Ali Reza Cheraqui, Coordinator of the Sustainable Agriculture Pro-
ject and Expert in Kazeroons Department of Agriculture explains that: 
While it is of immense benefit to the wetland, ultimately, the project 
speaks to farmers in the language of money. It makes business sense 
for them to work more sustainably: their risk margin is small, so are 
their plots. They need the field farm school to demonstrate that these 
techniques will actually work for them before adopting them on their 
own  farms.  This  pilot  has  more  and  more  participants  for  a  simple 
reason:  sound  environmental  management  means  better  business 
opportunities now and in the future. At first, neither farmers nor the 
Ministry  of  Agriculture  was  acquainted  with  this  kind  of  approach, 
so it took some work to implement, but the results are speaking for 
themselves and have far exceeded our expectations. 

In  an  effort  to  expand  further  the  adoption  of  sustainable  farming 
techniques, and to involve more women in community development, 
the project has formed a group of 11 women facilitators from villages 
around the wetland. These women learn about new crop management 
techniques and extend their use in their own communities. The group 
has also constituted a micro-credit fund with seed money from the 
wetlands conservation project (IRR 20 million) and use their own sav-
ings to purchase the equipment necessary, such as egg incubators, to 
develop alternative livelihoods producing and selling natural composts. 

The  sustainable  farming  initiative  around  Lake  Parishan  has  been 
so  successful  that  it  has  already  been  replicated  around  the  Lake 
Uromiyeh Basin, and leveraged funding from government. In 2012, the 
project, which was implemented in 72 hectares of farm lands, resulted 
in 50 percent reduction in water consumption, 44 percent reduction in 
usage of chemical fertilizers and poisons, and an 18 percent increase 
in farm performance in a pilot site around SiranGuli wetland (one of 
Uromiyehs satellite wetlands). 

Mangrove planting, Bangladesh
Photo: UNDP Bangladesh

Perhaps more so than for any other nation, the fate of Bang-

ladesh  both of its people and prospects for sustainable development 
 is determined by its relationship with water and wetlands. During the 
monsoon season, at least seven to eight million hectares or about half 
the country, may be considered wetland. In addition to providing food 
and livelihoods for millions of people, these habitats support a huge 
variety of aquatic life and lie on key flyways for migratory water birds.

But growing human pressure from overexploitation, habitat destruction 
and pollution is degrading these wetlands and threatening the liveli-
hoods and species that depend on them. UNDP and the Government 
of Bangladesh teamed up to manage mounting threats to the coun-
trys important wetlands through the UNDP supported GEF financed 
Coastal and Wetland Biodiversity Management at Coxs Bazar and 
Hakaluki Haor project, implemented from 2002 to 2011. 

The  project  worked  in  four  of  eight  sites  especially  designated  as 
Ecologically Critical Areas (ECAs)  wetland sites that harbour sig-
nificant biodiversity but where degradation has reached or threatens 
to reach a critical state. The project has successfully developed and 
demonstrated a collaborative system for managing these ECAs on the 
ground, with the Bangladeshi Department of Environment, working in 
partnership with local people, other government agencies, NGOs and 
ECA coordinating committees. 

Through 72 Village Conservation Groups (VCGs) established across the 
sites, 3,267 local people have become actively involved in protecting, 
restoring and sustaining the wetlands of the ECAs, including replanting  

CONSERVING 
ECOLOGICALLY 
CRITICAL AREAS 
IN BANGLADESHS 
VAST WETLANDS

of mangroves in the coastal wetlands of Coxs Bazar and swamp forests 
around the seasonal freshwater lakes of Hakaluki Haor, so regenerating 
habitats. VCGs have also taken an active role in sand dune stabilization, 
turtle and fish conservation, and anti-poaching measures, with 138 
members trained and deployed as conservation guards.

With training in alternative trades and small loans, communities have 
adopted  more  sustainable  livelihoods,  including  livestock  rearing, 
homestead gardening, fish selling, tailoring and improved horticulture 
and  agriculture.  Collectively  the  projects  efforts  reduced  violations 
of ECA regulations by 70 percent over its lifetime, according to field 
reports. Hunting of waterfowl has ceased in Hakaluki Haor and turtle 
mortality has been greatly reduced at the ECAs in Coxs Bazar.
 
Conservation management plans and zoning schemes were developed 
for the sites, though extensive survey work and local community partici-
pation, and used by the Department of Environment to govern decision 
making. The groundwork and experience gained through the initiative 
will provide valuable lessons to inform the planning and management 
of four new ECAs established during the project. The Government of 
Bangladesh will follow up this with another project, the Community 
Based Adaptation in Ecologically Critical Areas through Biodiversity 
Conservation and Social Protection funded by their Climate Change 
Trust Fund. This will build on the ECA management model and incor-
porate climate change adaptation measures.

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

67

FOOD & WATER

THE CONSERVATION 
AND REHABILITATION 
OF LAKE INLE 
IN MYANMAR

Lake Inle lies at an altitude of 900 metres on Myanmars Shan 

plateau and covers an area of some 2,500 square kilometres, making 
it the second largest body of freshwater in the country. Notable for its 
high levels of endemism (particularly aquatic species of mollusk and 
fish), its abundant birdlife, physical beauty and the rich cultural tradi-
tions of the ethnic minority groups that make its shores and waters 
their home, Inle is currently under consideration for UNESCO World 
Heritage Site designation. It is also a lake in trouble.

Poor rains in recent years, combined with other climate change impacts, 
may be two contributing factors to a fall in water levels and surface 
area shrinkage. But the driving force behind Inles woes is primarily 
anthropogenic.

For example, the local custom of constructing large floating gardens 
on earth-covered weed platforms has unintentionally resulted in land 
reclamation  as  the  gardens  take  root  in  its  shallows.  Fertilizer  and 
pesticide run-off from both these gardens and shoreline agriculture is 
also an issue, along with sewage emanating from households, most of 
which lack sanitation. Sediment is being washed down from surround-
ing hills, which are being deforested. Alien species introduced to fuel 
fisheries yield and water hyacinth infestation are also major concerns. 

The challenges facing Inles environmental integrity and to the sus-
tainable  livelihoods  of  local  communities  are  formidable.  But  here, 
like  elsewhere  in  Myanmar,  the  opportunities  for  positive  change 
are considerable. Isolated for decades, the country has inadvertently 
remained a lost world and its levels of biodiversity and forest cover 
are almost unrivalled in South East Asia. If prompt action is taken to 
conserve this inheritance and reverse degradation, conservationists 
can remain optimistic. 

68

INTERNATIONAL WATERS
SHARING AND SUSTAINING 
MARINE, COASTAL AND 
FRESHWATER RESOURCES 
ACROSS BORDERS

UNDPs International Waters (IW) pro-

gramme works to manage and sustain transboundary water systems, 
such as large marine ecosystems bounded by more than one nation, 
river  basins  where  water  flows  from  one  country  to  another,  multi-
country  lake  basins  and  groundwater  resources  shared  by  several 
countries. It promotes multi-country cooperation for the management 
of  these  shared  ecosystems  through  sustainable,  integrated  and 
ecosystem-based approaches.

Since 1991, UNDPs IW programme, financed by the GEF, has sup-
ported countries to deliver a cumulative portfolio of projects of US$ 
98.11 million in the Asia Pacific region. 

These initiatives address agreed environmental and water resource  
concerns facing regional waterbodies. The programme builds institu-

tional and system capacity at the national and regional levels for the 
management  of  significant  shared  marine,  coastal  and  freshwater  
resources. This is vital for the billions of people who depend on these 
ecosystems for their livelihoods and security.

In the Yellow Sea Large Marine Ecosystem (LME)  one of the most 
affected by human development  countries bordering the ecosystem 
have agreed on tangible targets to reduce fishing and pollution dis-
charge into the marine environment. With UNDP support, these nations 
have introduced sustainable marine aquaculture practices that are more 
profitable and less environmentally damaging compared to traditional 
methods; they have approved a network of new marine protected ar-
eas; and agreed to establish a regional monitoring network for better  
understanding of the status of the marine environment and to inform 
adaptive management in the Yellow Sea.

Photo: Sarah Valenti

In 2011, UNDP became a key partner in a series of initiatives to restore 
Inles environmental health in collaboration with Myanmars Ministry of 
Environmental Conservation and Forestry, conservation and scientific 
organisations, and with financial support from Norway. UNDP provided 
USD 0.6 million to set up the Inle Lake Conservation and Sustain-
ability project, aimed at restoring environmental stability and improving 
the quality of life of local people, empowering them to conserve their 
fragile and unique environment.

A  series  of  micro-projects  focused  on  improving  household  waste 
treatment in disadvantaged communities and planting fruit trees on 
barren land to act as wash off traps were combined with educational 
programmes  designed  to  foster  biodiversity-friendly  behaviour  and 
agricultural  practices  without  altering  the  unique  character  of  Inle 
life. In addition, a five-year plan based on in-depth consultations with 
all government ministries and various key stakeholders and the es-
tablishment of the national Inle Lake Sustainability and Conservation 
Committee was developed.

Inle is Myanmars tourism jewel  with stunning coastal temples, water 
festivals,  silver,  silk  and  weaving  markets,  and  outstanding  natural 
beauty.  Visitor  numbers  will  inevitably  surge  in  the  countrys  new 
environment of openness; protected area entrance fees likewise. A 
Trust Fund to support local community conservation projects using 
this increased protected area revenue is envisaged. This is the first 
of its kind in Myanmar, but in the current climate of change, Myanmar 
is a nation of firsts.

Photo: Ugo Montaldo/Shutterstock.com 

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

69

FOOD & WATER

HOW LOCALLY 
MANAGED MARINE 
AREAS ARE MAKING 
A DIFFERENCE

I have always been fascinated by history. When I visit a place I try to 

imagine what the area or town looked like a hundred years ago and 
how the people lived. What was life like for the king of the castle, the 
carpenter or the blacksmith in a medieval town? But what did natural 
areas look like? Were they just vast untouched wildernesses, devoid 
of people, or were they already being altered or managed in some way 
by the humans that shared them? The answer is perhaps surprising.

Throughout history, humans, especially those that depended on natural 
resources for their wellbeing, have stewarded the land and conserved 
natural  resources,  including  biodiversity.  For  example,  communities 
of the Arabian Peninsula have practiced Hima, a traditional system 
of resource tenure, for more than 1,400 years. Hima literally means 
a protected place and is believed to be the most widespread and 
longstanding  traditional  conservation  institution  in  the  Middle  East 
(and perhaps on Earth).

On my recent professional introduction to the Pacific, I learned that a 
similar, albeit less well-known traditional system exists for conserving 
marine and coastal natural resources. Depending on which country 
you visit, the system is called by different names  raui in the Cook 
Islands, tabu in Fiji, kapu in Hawaii, and bau zones in Palau. But 
essentially they all refer to an area where a prohibition on fishing, or 
fishing for certain species, is declared. As societies modernized, this 
traditional practice was increasingly abandoned, but has fairly recently 
been revived as overfishing, overharvesting and insufficient implemen-
tation  of  regulations  have  depleted  marine  resources.  This  has  led 
to the Locally-Managed Marine Areas (LMMA) concept, one that is 
quickly spreading through the Pacific and the rest of the (marine) world.

For example, the local Ucunivanua community of the eastern coast 
of  Fijis  largest  island  was  the  first  Fijian  community  to  establish  a 
LMMA in 1997. When the community noticed that populations of kai-
koso clams, a staple food source, were declining from the mud flats 
around their village, they declared a ban on harvesting from inshore 

waters over these mudflats for three years, building on the tradition 
of tabu prohibitions.

After seven years of local community management, the clam popula-
tion has rebounded and village incomes have risen significantly with 
increased  harvests.  The  success  of  the  Ucunivanua  LMMA  spread 
rapidly,  and  a  support  network    the  Fiji  Locally  Managed  Marine 
Area Network  grew from this. By 2009, the network had expanded 
to include 250 LMMAs, covering some 10,745 square kilometres of 
coastal fisheries, more than 25 percent of Fijis inshore area. In 2002, 
the  network  won  the  Equator  Initiative  Prize  in  recognition  of  this 
achievement.

Well-managed LMMAs (and other marine reserves) can support healthy 
fisheries and secure livelihoods for local fishermen. They can also help 
degraded ecosystems and depleted fish stocks to recover. With over 
three billion people depending on marine and coastal biodiversity for 
their livelihoods, establishing an effective network of LMMAs represents 
a key strategy for poverty alleviation. UNDP is supporting expansion and 
strengthening of LMMAs in the Philippines, and (through the Ridge to 
Reef Programme supported by GEF and UNDP) in the Cook Islands, 
Federal States of Micronesia and Fiji.

The Ridge to Reef projects work with a range of partners to promote 
integrated management of natural resources in these archipelagos  
from water catchments through to the sea. This will include support-
ing local communities and organizations to establish and strengthen 
networks of LMMAs to maximize their ecological viability. The projects 
will build the capacity of local people and organisations to effectively 
manage LMMAs. The projects will also support piloting of innovative 
revenue generation schemes for LMMAs to help them become finan-
cially sustainable. We hope that this support to local communities and 
traditional management practices will contribute to an LMMA legacy 
that future generations can look back on with pride!

Tagbanuan fishing family in their dugout canoe, 
Busuanga Calamianes Marine Protected Area Philippines
Photo: Zafer Kizilkaya

WHAT IS A LOCALLY 
MANAGED MARINE 
AREA (LMMA)?
An LMMA is an area of near-shore waters 

Photo by Zafer Kizilkaya

and coastal resources that is largely or wholly 
managed at a local level by the coastal communities, 
land-owning groups, partner organizations, and/or 
collaborative government representatives who reside 
or are based in the immediate area. The community 
may implement a variety of fisheries management 
tools  such as no-take areas, gear restrictions, 
seasonal restrictions and protected zones  within 
different parts of the LMMA at any one time. The 
LMMA refers to the entire marine area under local 
management, including both fishing and non-fishing 
zones.  (Govan, H., Allbersberg, W., Tawake, A. and 
Parks, J. 2008. Locally-Managed Marine Areas: 
A Guide for Practitioners. The Locally Managed Area 
Network).

70

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

71

by Johan Robinson
Regional Technical Adviser, Asia-Pacific

Island on a coral atoll of the Federated States of Micronesia
Photo: bradlifestyle/Shutterstock.com 

FOOD & WATER

SUSTAINING FORESTS 

AND WATERSHEDS 

IN INDONESIA 

In times past, when night fell on the 

Srimenanti Pekon (village) people of Lampung 
province  in  Sumatra,  it  was  either  a  case  of 
kerosene lamps, candles or lights out. Water, 
with a little help from UNDP, smart technology, 
business  and  government  partnerships  and 
local initiative, has changed all that.

Now the remote hill village glows in the dark-
ness of the adjacent protected forests courtesy 
of  micro-hydro  electric  generators  (MHEG), 
which  use  the  energy  of  local  streams  to 
produce enough power to operate four 15W 
lamps, chargers for mobile phones and a small 
television  per  household.  Provided  the  water 
flows, the power remains on 24 hours a day. 

MHEG power does not just save the people 
money  they  would  otherwise  have  to  spend 
on kerosene. It also reduces the risk of fires in 
the community and, significantly, has prompted 
residents  to  take  a  much  greater  interest  in 
the health of the watershed and the upstream 
forests that ensure regular water flow. People 
are learning that if the rivers run dry, it will be 
lights out again.

Srimenanti is not alone in adopting micro-hydro. 
Working with the Ministry of Forestry, UNDPs 
GEF  supported  Strengthening  Community 
Based Forest and Watershed Management Pro-
ject (SCBFWM) has successfully channelled 
US$ 23 million from the Indonesian Govern-
ments  Forest  Watershed  Based  Community 
Management Programme into micro-hydro and 
hundreds of coffee farmers are now benefitting 
 in some cases in unexpected ways. 

Most  communities  in  this  remote  region  are 
not  connected  to  the  national  grid  and  have 
traditionally  enjoyed  an  isolated  existence. 
Using micro-hydro powered internet they can 
now  interact  more  efficiently  with  the  world 
at large. With the internet, we can check the 

latest conditions of the market price of coffee. 
In short, we improved our standard of living, 
says Sunyoto (52), a farmer and Treasurer of 
a local marketing group speaking in an August 
2013 interview published by Kompas newpaper. 

Indonesia  comprises  approximately  190  mil-
lion hectares of land area of which 133 million 
hectares are classified as forest. This tree cover 
serves as crucial watershed, but forest degra-
dation  is  ongoing  and  of  17,000  watersheds 
nationwide, approximately 3,000 are currently 
considered to be in a critical condition. 

Deforestation,  particularly  in  mountainous 
areas, has negative effects both upstream and 
downstream  in  the  form  of  seasonal  floods 
or drought, and results in erosion and deadly 
landslides. Agriculture and food security for the 
52.4 percent of Indonesians living below the 
poverty line on less than US$ 2 a day is also 
negatively impacted. In addition, fisheries and 
marine ecosystems also suffer with corals and 
fish nurseries swamped by sediment run-off.  

The SCBFWM Projects objective is to catalyse 
the impact of the Government of Indonesias 
new programmes on community based forest 
management, reforestation and afforestation, 
and is designed to address the root causes of 
deforestation related to poverty, unequal distri-
bution of benefits and weak law enforcement 
due to lack of inter-sectoral co-ordination and 
collaboration.

282  watersheds  have  been  prioritized  at 
government  level  for  restoration.  These  are 
located in 400 districts in 32 provinces. The 
governments professed goal is to plant a bil-
lion  trees,  an  initiative  sustained  by  massive 
overseas financial support (over US$ 1 billion 
in the last two decades). 

To date 1,561,000 seedlings have been planted 

in  the  six  watersheds  targeted  as  pilot  sites 
by  the  SCBFWM  project.  Seedling  planting 
is not always a guarantee of success  some 
seedlings, particularly those of favoured fruit or 
nut trees, are subsequently removed by locals 
and replanted by their houses. Other seedlings, 
if improperly planted or planted in the wrong 
location on degraded land, wither and die. But 
despite these failures, satellite image analysis 
shows  a  forest  cover  increase  in  the  project 
pilot watershed sites of 576 hectares. 

72 community based organisations have been 
formed  under  SCBFWM,  including  womens 
groups,  and  emphasis  is  firmly  placed  on 
incentivizing  people  to  engage  in  watershed 
management by offering tangible benefits for 
good practice. These come in different forms. 
Electricity is one clear example; employment 
is  another.  Raising  and  selling  seedlings,  for 
example, has generated US$ 3.8 million for the 
Dahlia womens group in Suranadi village. The 
guarantee of a clean and reliable water supply 
due to the provision of pipes and the reduction 
of sediment in reservoirs has enabled women 
elsewhere to devote less of their lives search-
ing  for  safe  water  and  more  of  their  time  to 
generating income through small scale private 
enterprise such as operating food stalls. 

Education is another benefit  793 community 
members have received training in fields such 
as tree nursery management, non-timber forest 
products development, administration, financial 
management  and  agro-forestry.  575  govern-
ment  officials  have  also  received  training  in 
watershed management.

The  project  has  facilitated  public  discussion 
and consultation at the national level and, as a 
result, legislation has been enacted such as the 
Government Regulation Concerning Watershed 
Management (2012).

RIGHT: Community members conducting rapid hydrologi-
cal appraisal in the buffer zone area of Rinjani Mountain 
National Park, West Nusa Tenggara
Photo: Eliza/UNDP SCBFWM Project

FAR RIGHT: Many local farmers living in the buffer zone 
of Bukit Barisan Selatan national Park are coffee farmers
Photo: Gandhi/UNDP SCBFWM Project

Madakaripura Waterfall, East Java, Indonesia
Photo:  James Jones Jr/Shutterstock.com 

72

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

73

FOOD & WATER

participation. Women are an essential part of this equation, and where 
they may not normally be involved in public debate, efforts to listen to 
their concerns and suggestions must be made. Equally, it is important 
to build the skills and capacities of both male and female project staff 
to implement projects. The identification of gender champions within 
Country Offices means that gender expertise and priorities can be 
embedded into project design and management.

MAKING THE CASE FOR GENDERED 
INTERVENTIONS
The basic premise for integrating gender in ecosystem management 
and biodiversity conservation initiatives is that it not only advances the 
equity agenda, but also improves efficiency and effectiveness. 

For example, during the project preparation phase for the UNDP-GEF 
project Western Terai Landscape Complex Project in Nepal, signifi-
cant gender and ethnic disparities with regard to access to resources, 
benefits and decision-making were identified. Assessments showed 
that female literacy stood at around 16 percent in Bardia and Kailali 
villages (project pilot sites) compared to 42-45 percent for male literacy.

As a result, gender and social inclusion were accorded a high priority in 
the project. Following a gender and social audit report in 2010, women 
were encouraged to assume membership and/or chair roles on think 
tanks and in community organizations (such as the Chamomile Grow-
ers Group) promoted by the project. The project also increased the 
participation of women in community level natural resource manage-
ment groups (including Community-based Forest User groups) and 
also built their capacity to participate in community-based enterprises. 

Projects that consciously focus on the specific integration of gender 
considerations into project objectives inspire more sustainable gender 
outcomes.  For  example,  the  Mainstreaming  Biodiversity  Conserva-
tion in Production Systems in the Juniper Forest Ecosystem project 
in Pakistan has implemented several measures to integrate gender 
into each of the four goals of the project, including: gender analysis 
to enable formulation of policies addressing both men and womens 
role in natural resource management; a review of existing policies and 
laws to identify barriers to greater community involvement in resource 

The Coastal and Marine Biodiversity in Sindhudurg project has looked at ways to 
encourage alternate livelihoods for fishing communities, particularly women. 
In Wadatar village, women manage an oyster farm and sell oysters in the local market. 
Pictured here, Kasturi Dhoke examines oyster spats that form under shells left on 
bamboo frames.
Photo: Prashanth Vishwanathan/UNDP India

protection  efforts;  empowering  communities  to  take  advantage  of 
opportunities for economic incentives particularly for women, who are  
the main users and managers of forests; and the creation of village 
conservation committees to voice womens opinions and encourage 
the involvement of women resource users in the project.

In other cases, positive gender interventions have emerged naturally 
because women were closely involved in project planning. For example, 
the Linking and Enhancing Protected Areas in the Temperate Broadleaf 
Forests Ecoregion of Bhutan (LINKPA) project which supported the 
sustainable conservation of the temperate forest and mountain eco-
systems in Thrumshingla National Park and its corridors, had several 
gender directed activities, such as providing grant support to a local 
womens weaving association (yathra weaving) and providing support 
for roofing materials in households headed by women. 

Similarly, in the case of the Gulf of Mannar Marine and Coastal bio-
diversity project in India, it was recognized that women from fisher 
communities held the key to improving local economic conditions and 
enhancing marine biodiversity conservation. As a result, 2,341 self-help 
groups were formed comprising 34,699 members, more than 1,800 of 
which (>76.7 percent) were womens groups with 27,413 (79 percent) 
women members.

GENDER  SENSITIVE  MONITORING  AND 
EVALUATION
Projects can only understand and measure gender equality when the 
right questions are asked, for example, by including sex-disaggregated 
data in baseline and other surveys. The Nepal Western Terai project 
adopted Gender and Social Inclusion (GESI) disaggregated data in its 
reporting. In addition, the project also employed a GESI specialist for 
the terminal evaluation to ensure that these issues were examined in 
greater detail. The same project has promoted the use of wellbeing 
and wealth ranking exercises to better target pro-poor interventions. 

As  a  result  of  the  integration  of  gender  considerations  in  projects 
around the world, an increasing number of women and their families 
are able eat their food warm.

by Doley Tshering
Regional Technical Adviser, Asia-Pacific

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

75

THE POWER OF WOMEN: 
INTEGRATING GENDER 
INTO ECOSYSTEM AND 
BIODIVERSITY MANAGEMENT

It is 6am. My mother wakes me. Her motto is anyone who 

sleeps late will not be able to eat their food warm. Its a Bhutanese 
phrase meaning you cant feed yourself or family or meet their needs. 
As early as it feels to me, I know she has already spent two hours feed-
ing the animals, fetching a mountain of leaf litter to serve as bedding 
for the cows and later as manure, and cooking breakfast (which she 
has grown for us herself) for all of us. This is how most women in my 
village begin their days. After breakfast, she and other women tend 
crops, walk to the forests to collect more firewood or leaf litter, and 
travel far to bring water to irrigate the fields. 

Women play a pivotal role in natural resource management; they ensure 
the wellbeing and very survival of many rural families. Despite the fact 
that women also play a vital role in the conservation, management and 

sustainable use of biodiversity, their contribution is often overlooked. 
Women stand at the heart of the food-water-energy nexus.

For effective natural resource management, women must be seen and 
heard. They are the cornerstones of equitable and effective conser-
vation strategies, and have the power to make a project thrive rather 
than wither. This is why UNDP-GEF follows a proactive approach to 
ensure the integration of gender considerations into the design and 
implementation of all ecosystem and biodiversity projects.

ENGENDERING PROJECT DESIGN
During the early design stages of a project, UNDP identifies stakehold-
ers and interests so as to embrace as wide a variety of views and options 
as possible and ensure adequate balance in terms of gender input and 

74

FOOD & WATER

COMBINING SUSTAINABLE 
FOREST MANAGEMENT AND 
ENERGY EFFICIENT COOKSTOVES 
IN CAMBODIA

Cambodias forests cover almost 60 percent of the 

country, harbour more than half of the countrys threatened species and 
are essential to local livelihoods. Yet they are being degraded rapidly 
as  a  result  of  logging,  conversion  to  agriculture,  development  and 
unsustainable extraction for firewood. UNDP, with GEF finance, has 
teamed up with the Forest Administration, The Ministry of Agriculture, 
Forestry and Fisheries of Cambodia, NGO Group for the Environment, 
Renewable Energy and Solidarity (GERES) and local communities in 
an initiative designed to help communities manage and use the for-
est sustainably while improving their livelihoods. Launched in 2011, 
the project combines traditional community forest management with 
efforts to reduce demand for firewood by promoting energy efficient 
cookstoves.

With  project  support,  30  community  forests  are  being  established. 
Communal land use plans are being developed by the project in four 
communes to coordinate use of the forest by different communities 
in a sustainable manner. 

The project is developing management plans for the 30 community 
forests covering a total area of 11,310 hectares, through a consultative 
process that involves 8,167 families. These plans also aim to increase 
the area of woodlots managed by local communities to produce sustain-
able charcoal, so that they generate income from the forest while using 
it sustainably, said Mr. Khorn Saret, Deputy Director of Department of 
Forest and Community Forestry, Forest Administration, The Ministry of 
Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries. 

Through the projects support, the institutional process for allocating for-
est to communities is being streamlined and refined, to make it quicker 
for the government to declare these areas and develop participatory 
plans for their management.

Once  these  local  communities  begin  managing  their  own  natural 
resources, they are able to obtain benefits from using them sustain-
ably.  Business  plans,  as  part  of  the  Community  Forest  Plans,  are 
being developed to support community income generation. Studies 
conducted through the projects support have identified a number of 
potential products with good business potential to generate income 
for the communities through sustainable forest management. These 
include fuel wood, charcoal, timber, and non-timber forest products 

such as honey, rattan and bamboo. At the 
same time, the project is providing training 
to build the capacity of government staff 
and local people to implement sustainable 
practices. So far, 1,328 people have been 
trained  and  have  actively  participated  in 
their community forest development and 
management planning. 

At  the  same  time,  the  project  aims  to  
reduce demand for fuel wood from forests 
by promoting use of improved cookstoves 
that are more energy efficient and require 
less firewood or charcoal. An estimated 84 
percent of Cambodian households rely on 
firewood and charcoal for cooking. Unsus-
tainable woodcutting contributes to forest 
degradation. To help tackle this, in addition 
to  the  sustainable  community  managed 
forests  being  established,  support  has 
been  provided  to  train  local  people  to 
produce improved cookstoves in Kampang 
Chhnang province. 

The training has enabled local women to 
take  up  cookstove  production,  reducing 
wood  consumption  and  increasing  their  income.  Sous  Chamroeun 
is 24 years old and lives with her family who are rice farmers. After 
attending a cookstove training provided by the project, Sous and her 
cousin  Kong  Saren  started  making  improved  cookstoves  in  2012. 
Today the stoves make a substantial addition to the monthly income 
of the family. Depending on how much time they have to spend in 
the rice fields, Sous and her cousin make from 75 to 250 improved 
cookstoves per month, which she sells to retailers for 3,000 Riels per 
stove (approximately US$ 0.75). With an average production of 200 
stoves per month, she makes a net profit of about 470,000 Riels (or 
US$ 115) per month.

Making cookstoves makes my income more stable as the combination 
of two different income sources, rice farming and stove making, makes 
me  more  flexible  and  resilient  to  unexpected  events  and  changes, 

says Sous. Before, when I made other pottery, I had a monthly income 
of about 300,000 Riel (about US$ 73). After the training from the 
cookstove centre, I have increased my monthly income by more than 
50 percent to about 470,000 Riel (almost US$ 115).

Long Kong is another rice farmer from Kampang Chhnang who started 
producing cookstoves in 2012. Now she produces about 150 to 300 
Neang Kongrey stoves per month, and is very happy with her new life 
as a businesswoman. Before, I had no stable income in addition to 
the farming. I would help other cookstove producers, but the pay was 
low, and the working hours and demand irregular. Now I am both my 
own boss and I make more money than I did before. I think I will make 
cookstoves for the rest of my life, says Long Kong, and laughs.

The cookstove production training provided 
by UNDP and GERES has allowed Sous Chamroeun 
to increase her monthly income by almost 50 percent.
Photo: Seth Chase

The project supported 30 traditional cook stove producers to upgrade 
their technology to produce improved cook stoves. These offer 11 to 15 
percent energy savings over the cookstoves traditionally used by local 
communities. As a result, 16,230 improved cookstoves have been sold 
as of June 2013, saving 4,767 tons of carbon dioxide emissions. The 
project has also built five energy-efficient charcoal kilns, which offer 
energy savings of 17 percent. Seven sites within the community forests 
have been identified to supply sustainable fuel wood to these kilns. Next, 
the project plans to certify the charcoal as sourced from sustainably 
managed community forest so that it can be sold at a premium price.

76

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

77

FOOD & WATER

GO LOCAL! 
IN MICRONESIA - 
PROMOTING 
THE CHEEF BENEFITS 
OF LOCAL FOODS

The  global  GEF  Small  Grants  Programme, 
implemented  by  UNDP,  has  been  active  in 
the Pacific region since 2004. Grants of up to 
US$50,000 are awarded to local non-govern-
mental and community-based organizations to 
conserve  and  restore  the  environment  while 
enhancing peoples wellbeing and livelihoods. 
SGP embodies the very essence of sustain-
able development by thinking globally, acting 
locally, demonstrating that community action 
can maintain the fine balance between human 
needs and environmental imperatives.

In 2005, SGP awarded a grant for US$50,000 
to  the  Island  Food  Community  of  Pohnpei 
(IFCP)  to  undertake  activities  in  the  village 
of  Mand.  Working  initially  in  Madolenihmw 
Municipality  at  Mand  Community  Project  for 
Agricultural  Biodiversity  Conservation  in  the 
north  east  of  the  island,  a  series  of  small 
demonstration projects set out to improve tra-
ditional food production and consumption and 
build awareness of healthy local foods, while 
improving community livelihoods.

From  small  beginnings,  the  project  achieved 
impressive results with global and local benefits.

Through  ground-breaking  scientific  analysis 
of  the  nutritional  value  of  local  traditional 
foods,  ICFP  has  shown  that  the  cultivation 
and consumption of local agro-biodiversity can 
improve public health. This in turn has led to 
increased household biodiversity and greater 
dietary  diversity  in  local  communities.  It  has 
also stimulated demand for market availability 
of ready-made local foods in place of imported 
processed products.

The highly successful Culture, Health, Environ-
ment, Economic and Food Security (CHEEF) 
campaign has driven the demand behind these 
new markets by promoting the CHEEF ben-
efits of growing and eating healthy biodiverse 
local food. Through a dynamic mix of media and 
events, the CHEEF campaign has supported 
face-to-face nutrition education in schools and 
been featured in local newspapers and on na-
tional radio, reaching more than 30,000 island-
ers. We have run countless community events 
that celebrate local foods and showcase local 
food  preservation  and  processing,  explained 
the  late  Dr.  Lois  Englberger,  IFCP  Executive 
Director. By promoting the CHEEF benefits of 
growing and eating healthy local food, we have 
revitalized traditional knowledge for managing 
food supply, strengthened our cultural identity, 
and contributed to biodiversity conservation.

To  conserve  traditional  crop  germplasm,  the 
project  has  created  the  only  known  in  situ 
genebank  in  the  Pacific  with  conservation 
sites in various villages. More than 100 herit-
age cultivars are now grown and managed by 
local farmers, including most local varieties of 
giant swamp taro, banana, and pandanus. The 
genebank, IFCP and the partner communities 
have become suppliers of these rare species to 
a number of farmers island-wide and planting 
materials have been distributed nation-wide to 
enable other communities to grow rare cultivars, 
which are more resilient to the effects of chang-
ing climate regimes.

Through  this  success,  the  project  has  been 
able to influence food policy development at 
multiple  levelsgovernmental,  community 

Spread across 2,500 kilometres of the 

north-western  Pacific  Ocean,  just  above  the 
Equator,  the  Federated  States  of  Micronesia 
(FSM)  consist  of  the  four  states  of  Chuuk, 
Kosrae, Pohnpei and Yap and their more than 
600 widespread islandsonly 65 of which are 
currently inhabited. 

In recent years, as these isolated communities 
have faced the modern pressures of globaliza-
tion, they have experienced dramatic changes 
in consumption, which have led to a range of 
nutritional disorders. 

By 2008, it was estimated that 73 percent of 
the dietary intake of communities living in FSM 
came  from  imported  food  products,  leaving 
the  nation  with  a  highly  negative  food  trade 
balance,  and  vulnerable  to  global  food  price 
fluctuations and disruptions to food transport. 
This was accompanied by increasing neglect 
of  traditional  food  systems,  lifestyle  changes 
and reduced levels of exercise. A World Health 
Organization (WHO) STEPS assessment in the 
same year reported that 32 percent of Pohnpei 
adults had Type 2 diabetes. However, recent 
studies have also identified locally grown (and 
globally important) staple foods that could help 
alleviate  vitamin  deficiencies  and  anaemia, 
including bananas, taro and pandanus. These 
carotenoid-rich foods can help protect against 
diabetes, heart disease and some cancers.

The planting of rare diverse cultivars therefore 
provides a local solution to a range of develop-
ment challengesfrom conserving biodiversity 
to  providing  reliable  and  resilient  local  food 
supplies,  and  meeting  healthcare  goals  to 
generating new opportunities for sustainable 
livelihoods.

78

Photos: GEF SGP Micronesia

In 2011, the FAO endorsed the IFCP approach 
through  the  publication  Lets  Go  Local!
Guidelines for Promoting Pacific Island Food, 
a  step-by-step  guide  to  replicating  the  IFCP 
initiative. Both WHO and FAO recognized the 
transferability  of  the  initiative  and  IFCP  has 
begun  supporting  the  development  of  local 
initiatives in 3 other FSM states and regionally 
in Palau, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, 
Marshall Islands and Kiribati. In 2013, IFCP won 
the prestigious WHO Healthy Islands Recogni-
tion Best Practice Award, and has successfully 
leveraged US$100,000 to continue funding the 
project with a competitive grant from the United 
States Forest Service.

and  individual.  The  Lets  Go  Local!  slogan 
has organically been adopted by government 
departments, schools and community events, 
and IFCP served as the key advocate for the 
new  Presidential  Proclamation  on  Food  Se-
curity 2010. This encourages all government-
sponsored events to cater using healthy, local 
foods.  Several  state  departments  have  now 
banned imported foods from their offices, and 
IFCP has been instrumental in the considera-
tion of the soft drink tax bill.

At the community level, IFCP is currently driving 
the  implementation  of  the  Local  Food  Policy 
for  community  events  and  activities.  At  least 
10 churches, CBOs, schools and private busi-
nesses have agreed on local food only policies. 

With a second SGP grant, the project has also 
catalysed  the  development  of  a  small  food 
processing  industry  using  locally  designed, 
affordable  energy  efficient  equipment,  such 
as smokeless charcoal ovens and solar dryers 
to support sustainable livelihoods. Only climate 

resilient local foods are processed to decrease 
the  reliance  on  imported  foods  on  the  small 
islands  and  prevent  the  loss  of  indigenous 
knowledge on biodiversity.

By  supporting  local  food  growth  and  value-
added production, such as taro flour and banana 
chips,  we  are  building  healthy  and  resilient 
communities that are self-sufficient and less 
vulnerable to global social pressures, explained 
Dr.  Lois  Engleberger,  Executive  Director  of 
IFCP. We are working directly with the Pohnpei 
Womens  Council  and  their  member  groups 
to  improve  womens  health  and  livelihoods 
by training them in the energy-efficient food 
preparation of biodiverse food crops.

IFCP has now moved on to work with the rural 
communities  of  Salapwuk  and  Rohi,  and  the 
urban Kapinga village in the centre of Pohnpei. 
These communities have invested in smokeless 
ovens and learned about the benefits of local 
food through the CHEEF initiative.

IFCP is an NGO that works to educate the people of Pohnpei 
about the relationship between diet and health, and to help 
generate economic benefits and strengthen cultural identity 
by using local foods. 

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

79

WORK
&MONEY

Photo:  Midori Paxton

Development challenges in Asia and the Pacific 
are as diverse and complex as the region 
itself. While the region has some of the worlds 
most dynamic economies, it is home to more 
than half of the worlds poorest people. One of 
the greatest challenges facing the region is to 
eradicate poverty while achieving more 
inclusive and sustainable green growth. 
The regions ecosystems and biodiversity 
provide the basis for livelihoods and multiple 
economic sectors  including water supply, 
agriculture, fisheries, forestry, health and 
tourism. Managed effectively and sustainably, 
ecosystems and biodiversity constitute an 
important driver for sustainable development. 
Driven by country priorities, UNDPs work aims 
to bring about a progressive shift to sustainable 
models of development that enable countries 
to maintain and restore their natural capital 
while unlocking their full potential to support 
human development.

WORK & MONEY

RECONNECTING 
PEOPLE WITH 
THE NATURAL 
WORLD
My sister recently sent me a challenge: describe what you do in no 

more than seven words. After a bit of thought, I wrote: Helping people 
and the environment. Mostly people. Because at the end of the day, 
our work on biodiversity and ecosystems is really about people.

The ecosystems we live within and the biodiversity that enriches them 
form the web of life on which every human being depends. This vibrant 
and amazing web had endured and evolved for millennia, with human 
beings safely nestled within it. But as this region has developed rapidly, 
many people have come to forget how completely their lives depend 
on priceless natural resources.

So much of the development in this region, and the aspirations of its 
people, seems set on getting as far away from nature as possible. 
People aspire to concrete houses in urban cities to get away from 
the wood and dirt of rural life, to cars that seal them away from their 
surroundings  as  they  travel,  and  to  air  conditioning  that  insulates 
them from the heat and dust carried by natures breezes. Many of our 
young aspire to creamy pale skin as a sign that they no longer toil in 
the outdoors, as their parents and grandparents did.

All of these aspirations are valid and worthwhile. The desire for a better, 
more comfortable life for our families has motivated amazing progress 
and improvements in welfare for all of us.
  
But  in  striving  to  get  away  from  nature,  people  sometimes  forget 
how irreplaceable nature is for all of us. And how essential sustaining 
ecosystems and biodiversity is to sustaining progress  nature not only 
provides our life support; it underpins livelihoods of millions of people 
and economic activity. The richest, most urbanized sophisticate in the 
high-rises of Singapore, Shanghai or Bangkok depends on nature every 
bit as much as a poor farmer in India or tribal woman in the highlands 
of Papua New Guinea. The water we all drink, the air we breathe and 
the food we eat can all only come from the web of life around us.

The only difference is that increasing sophistication may lead us to 
overlook this crucial connection. And this lost connection is the real 
driver for much of our ecosystem and biodiversity loss today.
  

82

n
o
t
x
a
P

 
i
r
o
d
M

i

 
 
:
o
t
o
h
P

Without that connection, the web of life simply becomes a trove of 
resources to be extracted, converted and sold; a source of money for 
other needs and purposes. What is gained is too easily measured, but 
what is lost is overlooked.

Re-establishing this connection has been the central purpose underpin-
ning UNDPs environmental work over the last 40 years. All our various 
approaches and strategies point to this same goal: rebuilding the link 
between people and their environment. Better development planning 
systems and policies that guide what governments do; or valuation 
and financing work to influence how money is spent; or livelihoods, 
awareness  and  community  engagement  initiatives  to  reinforce  the 
direct connection between people and their ecological home. 

As demonstrated in these pages, UNDP supports the governments, 
economies and societies of this region to use their skills, resources 
and technical knowledge to protect their natural wealth. Different ap-
proaches with the same underlying goal: reflecting the real value of 
ecosystems and biodiversity to humanity and shifting to sustainable 
models of development that sustain the regions life support system. 

Protecting ecological infrastructure is fundamental to support liveli-
hoods and to meet country development priorities, including food and 
water  security  and  resilience  against  shocks.  We  must  remember 
our unavoidable dependence on the ecosystems around us. Only by 
restoring this connection will the people of this region protect their 
ecosystems. And its only by protecting their ecosystems that the peo-
ple of the Asia-Pacific will be able to thrive and prosper in the future.

by Joseph DCruz
Regional Team Leader, Inclusive Growth, Asia-Pacific

WHY BIODIVERSITY AND ECOSYSTEMS ARE CRUCIAL 
FOR SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT

Ecosystems and biodiversity provide our food, water, fuel, medicine and shelter. They shield us from natural disasters and reduce our 
vulnerability to climate change. They create the very air we breathe, recycle nutrients, control pests and generate the soil in which our 
food is grown. Nature also provides a wealth of untapped genetic resources with potential to be developed into useful products through 
domestication, development and improvement. Here are just a few examples of the goods and services provided by nature.

SUPPORT LIVELIHOODS 
AND ECONOMIC SECTORS

Billions of livelihoods and many economic sectors, including water 
supply, agriculture, fisheries, forestry, health, nutrition, energy, trans-
port and tourism, depend on biodiversity and ecosystem services.

DID YOU KNOW?
 The worlds fisheries provide a source of livelihood and income for 
millions of people. Commercial capture fisheries had an estimated 
value of US$ 274 billion in 2007 and recreational fisheries are 
worth some US$ 190 billion to the global economy. 
 Ecotourism generates significant employment and is now worth 
around US$ 100 billion per year. Many tourism businesses rely fully 
or partially on biodiversity and ecosystem services. Whale watching 
alone was estimated to generate US$ 2.1 billion in 2008, with over 
13 million people undertaking the activity in 119 countries.
 Genetic diversity is central to the seed industry. Its 10 top compa-
nies had commercial seed sales of US$ 15 billion in 2006.
 Insects and other animals that carry pollen between crops, es-
pecially fruit and vegetables, are estimated to be worth more than 
US$ 200 billion annually to the global food economy.

FOOD AND WATER SUPPLY

Food production depends largely on biodiversity and services provided 
by ecosystems. They regenerate the soil, pollinate food plants and crops, 
and provide the genetic pool of traits that will be needed to adapt our 
food systems under changing conditions and keep them resilient to pests, 
disease and climate change. Ecosystems store, supply and cleanse water.

DID YOU KNOW? 
 About 100,000 species of insects, as well as birds and mammals, pol-
linate more than two-thirds of food plants and are responsible for more 
than one-third of the worlds crop production.
 Globally, fish provides about 3 billion people with almost 20 percent of 
their intake of animal protein. In areas of Asia Pacific, fish is even more 
important; accounting for half of total animal protein intake in Bangla-
desh and some small island developing states, and 50 to 80 percent in 
countries of the Lower Mekong River Basin.
 The Himalayas are often called the water towers of Asia. This collec-
tion of snow-clad mountains and glaciers feed rivers, including the Indus, 
the Ganges, and the Tsangpo-Brahmaputra, which supply water to 40 
percent of the planets population. 

PROTECTION

A range of ecosystems act as buffers against natural hazards, providing 
valuable yet under-utilized assets for climate change adaptation, enhanc-
ing natural resilience and reducing the vulnerability of people to floods 
and the effects of land degradation. 

DID YOU KNOW?
 The largest mangrove forest in the world, the Sundarbans, stretches 
along the coasts of Bangladesh and India and protects millions of people 
living along this coastline from the worst extremes of storms and cyclones. 
 Planting and protecting nearly 12,000 hectares of mangroves in Viet 
Nam cost just over US$1 million. But it has saved annual expenditures 
on dyke maintenance of well over US$7 million.

PHARMACIES

80% of people living in rural areas in developing countries rely on 
traditional plant-based medicines for basic healthcare, according to 
an estimate by the WHO. But many modern prescription drugs are 
also derived from substances found in plants, animals and fungi; 
either  directly  or  by  providing  biochemical  models  or  templates 
used to make synthetic compounds. 

DID YOU KNOW?
 The alkaloids that cure the cancers Hodgkins lymphoma and 
acute childhood leukaemia are derived from the rosy periwinkle, a 
plant indigenous to Madagascar.
 A drug that made organ transplants viable  cyclosporine  was 
obtained from an obscure soil fungus found in Norway (Tolypocla-
dium inflatum). 
 Marine sponges are rich sources of anti-cancer chemicals  many 
of these chemicals are tumour suppressants and some have already 
been approved for treatment of cancer.

Photos: Doungjun Roongruang, Tom Pietrasik/UNDP India, 
Mazzzur/Shutterstock.com, UNDP/India

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

83

NATURAL 
CAPITAL

Photo: Fadzil VII

INSURANCE 
FOR OUR FUTURE

www.undp.org/biodiversity

WORK & MONEY

THE PRICE OF 
PARKS - FINANCING 
PROTECTED AREAS

Karl Marx remarked, The writer must earn money 

in order to be able to live and to write, but he must by no means live 
and write for the purpose of making money. In an oblique way this 
logic might similarly apply to protected areas. Protected areas need to 
earn money to support their existence and they must be recognized 
for their monetary value. But making money can never be the purpose 
of their existence. If it is all about cash, the whole point of a national 
parks existence would decay and become meaningless. The value of 
the park lies in the biodiversity and ecosystem services it provides to 
support human development.

Underfunding of protected area systems is a universal phenomenon. 
In Mongolia, for example, the government invests US$ 2.9 million to 
develop and manage a vast 27 million hectares of national protected 
areas. If we are talking dollars and nonsense (no cents!), this works 
out at US$ 0.1 per hectare, meaning that one ranger must look after 
50,000 hectares alone, even in the relatively well-established Orkhon 
Valley National Park.

In Myanmar, the government invests US$ 0.75 million in park manage-
ment, with less than 600 staff covering 3.2 million hectares. Broken down,  
this amounts to about US$ 0.23 per hectare. An ASEAN study sets 
a benchmark of US$ 10 to 18 per hectare for parks to be adequately 
managed. Undervaluation of protected areas is thus one of the main 
causes for under-investment by governments worldwide. Policy mak-
ers are failing to understand that protected areas make vital economic 
contributions, as national tourism assets, as the providers of watershed 
services, by maintaining water resources and regulating water flows, 
and by providing people with basic food and materials.

The value of these invisible and largely unnoticed services is phenom-
enal. A 2010 Conservation International (CI) study estimated that the 
value of the natural systems of Qinghai Province, China, is between 
US$  385  billion  and  US$  9  trillion  each  century.  The  province,  in 
particular the vast 15 million hectare Sanjiangyuan National Nature 
Reserve is one of the source areas for the Yellow, Yangtze and Mekong 
rivers, underpinning water provision for drinking, irrigation and industry 
supporting over a billion people. Yet, the field operation budget for the 
park is less than US$ 100,000 per annum with just a handful of staff.

Tourists kayaking in Mergui Archipelago, Myanmar. Protected areas make vital economic 
contributions as national tourism assets. Photo: Ethan Daniels/Shutterstock.com 

what they need for the upkeep of the parks.

Department is currently looking into different options.

CONSERVATION IS A SERIOUS BUSINESS 
AND PAS NEED TO MEAN BUSINESS! 
In order to develop capacity for management oriented budgeting, a 
range of GEF financed projects are supporting development of park 
business plans. Detailed business plans aim to cost actual biodiversity 
and the management actions required to manage it, and to clarify how 
much human and financial resource is needed to achieve the parks 
intended outcomes. It also looks at the revenue generation potential 
of protected areas to gauge how the necessary costs can be met for 
basic and optimal management scenarios. 

The spreadsheet we used was fantastic. All protected area informa-
tion, such as functions and programme areas, work responsibilities, 
staff  information  and  financial  data,  were  integrated,  explains  Gou 
Xiaocheng, a manager at the Taohe National Nature Reserve. It is 
designed  to  guide  staff  in  costing  different  essential  management 
activities. For example, how much will it cost to conduct an adequate 
level of law enforcement patrol? How many days of rangers time, how 
much for petrol, vehicle maintenance and over time allowances? And so 
on. The spreadsheet specifies the required staff, operational resources 
and one-off investment costs needed to complete work programmes 
at the current, basic and optimal scenarios. It identifies funding gaps 
and revenue opportunities, and finally discusses the economic benefits 
of the protected area.  

There are many different ways for filling financing gaps. The Financing 
Plan for the Mongolias Protected Area system lists the following as 
having high potential for the country to achieve financial sustainability: 
better  capturing  of  revenue  and  revenue  retention,  introduction  of 
land use fees, introduction of tourism and other concession systems, 
and mining biodiversity off-sets. The Protected Area Administration 

Various  new  financing  mechanisms  for  protected  areas  have  been 
successfully established through GEF financed projects around Asia. 
The Upper Mustang Biodiversity Conservation Project in Nepal, which 
ended in 2007, has succeeded in establishing an agreement with the 
Government to plough back 60 percent of Upper Mustang tourism 
entry fees into the King Mahendra Trust for Nature Conservation for 
use  on  conservation-linked  community  development  activities  over 
the long-term.  

With support of the GEF-financed Biodiversity Management in the 
Coastal Area of Chinas South Sea project, which was completed in 
2012, sustainable financing mechanisms have been developed to sup-
port the operational recurrent costs of the Sanya National Coral Reef 
Nature Reserve in Hainan Province, China. Based on the assessment 
of operating costs, a financing pattern was proposed which relies on 
government funds as a major source of funds, complemented by sea 
use fees (for coral reef use by tourism enterprises) and public dona-
tions. Sanya districts Development & Reform Commission and Finance 
Bureau have cooperated in making a proposal to the authorities for 
using sea use fees collected annually to bridge the shortfall for the 
marine park operation and management costs. A proportion of the 
sea use fees is earmarked to support marine park operational costs.

By using the business planning template, we learned a brand new 
way of thinking about our work, says Niu Yunxia, an officer at the Li-
anhuashan National Nature Reserve, in Gansu Province of China, who 
was trained under the Strengthening Gansu Protected Area project. 
The new way of thinking  management needs based costing  also 
encourages park managers to focus on objectives of the parks they 
are entrusted to look after. They must make sure that there will be 
enough money for safeguarding the biodiversity values they protect.

Photo:  Sarah Valenti

Another  underlying  problem  for  insufficient  financing  of  protected 
areas is the fact that park managers or agencies don't know exactly 
what is required to manage parks to meet conservation and manage-
ment objectives. This means there is no clear basis for motivating for 
increased funding. 

No request, no results. And definitely no funding.

Parks staff are typically not business-minded people, says Oyuntulkhu-
ur Bandi, the project manager for the GEF financed Strengthening the 
Protected Area Network project in Mongolia. They are more focused 
on conservation work on the ground, but now they also need the skills 
for ensuring adequate finance for their work. They need to become 
savvy in showing what parks can do for the society and economy and 

86

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

87

GROWING A SOCIALLY 
RESPONSIBLE BIODIVERSITY
-BASED ECONOMY 
IN THAILAND

In Thailand, the countrys growing population and rapid economic 
development is putting increasing pressure on biodiversity both inside 
and  outside  protected  areas.  To  promote  biodiversity-responsible 
business,  UNDP  is  working  with  the  Biodiversity-based  Economy 
Development Office (BEDO), a public organization under the Govern-
ment of Thailand mandated to promote biodiversity conservation in 
production landscapes, improve local community knowledge of best 
practices for sustainable production, and enhance biodiversity-based 
economic development. 

The UNDP supported GEF financed BEDO project began in 2013 and 
aims to help BEDO to integrate biodiversity conservation into produc-
tion and marketing of agricultural, forestry and fishery business, in order 
to create community incentives to conserve and enhance biodiversity 
while generating income. This is achieved by supporting the develop-
ment  of  biodiversity-friendly  businesses,  piloting  community-based 
social enterprises, and mainstreaming biodiversity business into the 
supply chains of high value consumer markets.

BioEconomy Academy, which resonates strongly with BEDOs vision 
for a thriving and sustainable bio-economy underpinned by empowered 
local  communities,  says  Wutthipong  Sommanas,  acting  Executive 
Director of BEDO. 

Housed  within  the  Academy  is  a  permanent  exhibition  of  Thai  in-
digenous products and traditional knowledge and a biodiversity law 
library. It is hoped that these and the projects wider training work will 
help raise awareness of the value of biodiversity and how community 
enterprises may protect it. 

Fabrice Mattei, executive and Thailand country manager at law firm 
Rouse, who are partnering with the project on the Academy, adds: 
Through the BioEconomy Academy, we plan to empower Thai busi-
nesses and local communities by helping them to understand and ex-
ercise their Intellectual Property rights. The project is also establishing 
a Bio-economy Forum to enable policy dialogues and raise awareness 
among the general public. 

Though  only  in  its  early  stages  of  implementation,  the  project  has 
already  set  up  a  BioEconomy  Academy  (BEA),  an  initiative  for 
developing and supporting biodiversity business in Thailand, working 
with BEDO and law firm Rouse. The Academy provides training and 
organises workshops for local communities throughout Thailand to 
promote the use of intellectual property and legal tools to help protect 
the countrys biodiversity and traditional knowledge. 

We are delighted to be working through this project to launch the 

The project, working through BEDO and other partners, has also de-
signed and developed a Bio-responsible product label to strengthen 
community-based  social  enterprises.  This  certification  label  will  be 
awarded to products that meet the certifications standards according 
to how eco-friendly they are, whether they use local ingredients and 
other criteria. The project has consulted with local communities at four 
pilot sites  Ranong, Phang Nga, Kanjanaburi and Prachinburi  on 
biodiversity-friendly product development for community based social 
enterprises and plans to launch pilot products in 2014. 

IF ITS NOT SUSTAINABLE, ITS NOT DEVELOPMENT.

www.undp.org/environmentandenergy

The BEDO project has consulted with local communities on biodiversity-friendly product development for community based social enterprises. 
Some of the potential products identified for development under a bio-responsible product label include shrimp paste, eco-tourism and charcoal. 
Photo: KobchaiMa/Shutterstock.com

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

89

WORK & MONEY

THE IMPORTANCE OF 
NATIONAL BIODIVERSITY 
STRATEGIES AND 
ACTION PLANS (NBSAPS) 
AND BIODIVERSITY 
FINANCING

UNDP, through GEF financed enabling activities, has been providing support 
to nations to update their National Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plans (known as 
NBSAPs). Globally, 42 countries are supported with 6 of those in the Asia and Pacific 
region  Fiji, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, Sri Lanka and Viet Nam. Countries are 
obliged under the Convention of Biological Diversity (CBD) to align their NBSAP with 
the global Aichi Biodiversity Targets, which must be achieved by 2020. 

UNDP support entails not simply updating NBSAP documents... A New Generation 
of NBSAP is the slogan of the UNDP support.

The aim is to ensure that NBSAPs integrate the value of biodiversity into national 
and local development and poverty reduction strategies; provide a concrete plan for 
mainstreaming biodiversity into development and sector planning; develop a plan for 
creating incentives and removing harmful subsidies; establish a clear plan for mobilis-
ing the necessary financial resources for effective implementation; and incorporate 
challenges and opportunities linked to ecosystem-based adaptation and resilience.   

To support countries around the world working on the NBSAPs, share knowledge and 
experiences and provide peer review services, an NBSAP Forum has been established 
(http://nbsapforum.net) in close collaboration with the UNEP and the CBD Secretariat. 

Linked to the NBSAP programme, the European Union, Switzerland and Germany 
have  funded  a  Global  Biodiversity  Financing  project,  known  as  BIOFIN,  including 
Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines as several of the initial 12 pilot countries. The 
global biodiversity financing workbook was developed under this project as the tool 
for  the  participating  countries  to  assess  policy  and  practice  drivers  of  biodiversity 
and ecosystem change; assess current investment in biodiversity and the costs of 
implementing NBSAPs; and to develop a resource mobilisation plan.  

The BIOFIN project focuses on direct engagement with Ministries of Finance and 
national development planning agencies. By bringing these critical actors to discus-
sions  on  biodiversity  management  and  financing,  the  project  assists  countries  in 
transforming national biodiversity finance, enabling them to implement their NBSAP 
and achieve the Aichi Targets. 

NBSAPs are more than a set of plans, says Jamison Ervin, the UNDP senior adviser 
for the NBSAPs project. They are pathways to national and global sustainable devel-
opment. BIOFIN helps to secure the financing to achieve this.

NBSAPs are more than a set of plans. They are pathways to 
national and global sustainable development. BIOFIN helps to 
secure the financing to achieve this. Jamison Ervin, the UNDP senior adviser for 
the NBSAPs project

90

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

91

Top left: NBSAP Workshop, Bhutan. Photo: National Biodiversity Centre, Ministry of Agriculture and Forests, Royal Government of Bhutan
Others: Delegates from Malaysia, Indonesia and the Philippines at BIOFIN Technical Workshop in Bangkok, 2013. 
Photos: Jamison Ervin

WORK & MONEY

BIODIVERSITY 
IS THE BEDROCK 
OF THE MALDIVIAN 
ECONOMY

Photo: R McIntyre/Shutterstock.com 

In the Maldives, rapid social and 

economic change has been outpacing institu-
tional capacities to conserve biodiversity. Home 
to about 5 percent of the worlds coral reefs, 
which equates to 250 species of coral teeming 
with over 1000 species of fish, the Maldives is 
rich in biodiversity. This biodiversity forms the 
bedrock of the Maldivian economy. 

An  economic  valuation  study,  commissioned 
by the UNDP supported GEF financed Atoll 
Ecosystem  Conservation  (AEC)  project,  has 
recently  determined  that  the  biodiversity  of 
atoll ecosystems underpins at least 71 percent 
of national employment, 89 percent of Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) and 98 percent of ex-
ports in the Maldives. This study was launched 
by  the  President  and  drew  in  the  support  of 
diverse sectors to protect the biodiversity that 
drives the national economy.

The AEC project was initiated in 2003 by the 
Government  of  the  Maldives  in  collaboration 

with UNDP and other partners. It was designed 
to demonstrate a collaborative approach to bio-
diversity management and sustainable develop-
ment in Baa Atoll that could serve as a model 
for other atolls in the Maldives, building on the 
existing baseline of national and local institu-
tions, laws and policies. With the projects sup-
port,  biodiversity  conservation  priorities  were 
mainstreamed into the Baa Atoll Development 
Plan, Island Development Plans and land-use 
plans, which guide future development.

The  project  supported  the  establishment  of 
Baa Atoll as a UNESCO Biosphere Reserve 
and  World  Heritage  Site  (WHS)  around  ten 
core  protected  areas.  Baa  Atolls  resorts  are 
using the UNESCO Biosphere and WHS brand 
to  strengthen  marketing  and  to  drive  better 
water, waste and energy management, and to 
inform  biodiversity-friendly  practices    such 
as, working with hotels to buy sustainably and 
locally caught fish directly from local fishers to 
serve to tourists.

With grants provided through project support, 
local people on the islands of Baa Atoll have 
set up their own small businesses making and 
selling traditional crafts, such as brewing herbal 
medicines and rope making from dried coconut 
husks, which has helped revive traditions and 
provide income.

The Baa Atoll Conservation Fund, the first of 
its kind in the Maldives, is expected to sustain 
this work after the projects close in 2012. It was 
developed through a Public Private Partnership 
with  the  tourism  sector,  and  visitor  permits 
now contribute to top up the Fund and pay for 
rangers to manage the Reserve. Eight resorts, 
dive  centres  and  other  tourism  companies 
have  signed  up  to  support  the  rolling  Fund. 
Going  forward,  it  will  support  conservation, 
livelihoods  and  outreach  work,  including  the 
implementation of management plans for the 
protected areas. The Fund is expected to gen-
erate between US$200-300,000 per annum 
within two years.

92

IF WE DONT PROTECT 
THE ENVIRONMENT 
THAT SURROUNDS US, 
WHAT IS LEFT TO SAVE US? 
ABDUL RAZZAQ MOHAMED, 
RETIRED CHIEF OF BAA ATOLL

Photos: Mike Moser

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

93

WORK & MONEY

POVERTY ENVIRONMENT 
INITIATIVE: GREENING 
INVESTMENTS IN LAO PDR

The Poverty-Environment Initiative (PEI) of the United Nations  

Development  Programme  (UNDP)  and  the  United  Nations  En-
vironment  Programme  (UNEP)  is  a  global  programme  that 
supports  country-led  efforts  to  achieve  a  greener  and  more  
inclusive  development  path.  In  Asia-Pacific,  PEI  has  programmes 
under way in five countries and provides technical support to four oth-
ers. The programme has supported Ministries of Planning and Local 
Government to integrate poverty, environment and climate issues into 
their planning processes and to work more closely with Ministries of 
Environment. 

In  Lao  Peoples  Democratic  Republic  (PDR),  PEI  works  with  the 
government  to  improve  the  management  and  quality  of  invest-
ments,  so  that  they  take  account  of  environmental  and  social 
considerations.  The  economy  is  driven  by  high  inflows  of  foreign 
direct  investment  mainly  into  natural  resource  sectors.  Natural 
resource-based growth is putting pressures on traditional livelihoods 
and  valuable  natural  assets,  including  the  countrys  forests  and  

biodiversity. PEI works with the government to develop and implement 
tools, mechanisms and strategies designed to increase the proportion 
of quality investments in the country, those that minimize impact on 
the environment and maximize local benefit. The overall goal of this 
work is to help achieve more inclusive and sustainable green growth.

For example, a cost benefit analysis conducted by PEI of four different 
land use practices examined the social and environmental implications 
of on-going rapid changes in land use from traditional practices to com-
mercial agriculture. The results of the study will support development 
of guidance on Environmental Impact Assessment for the Agriculture 
and Forestry Sector to conduct environmental and social impact as-
sessments required under national legislation. In collaboration with the 
government, PEI is also developing a number of tools and standards, 
including  model  contracts  for  concessions  and  environmental  and 
social obligations for commercial agriculture and forestry, which should 
support  better  ecosystem  and  biodiversity  management  and  social 
protection once implemented.

Photo: Poverty Environment Initiative Lao PDR / UNDP Lao PDR 

94

UN-REDD PROGRAMME: 
CALCULATING THE REAL 
ECONOMIC VALUE OF 
FORESTS IN MONGOLIA

Few people deny the value of housing, roads, energy, water 

treatment plants and other built infrastructure to national economies 
and  human  wellbeing.  But  the  goods  and  services  that  natures  
infrastructure provides are often less well understood and markets  
generally fail to account for their real value, or the real costs of losing 
them. 

A  study  conducted  by  UNDP  through  the  UN-REDD  Programme 
for  the  Government  of  Mongolia  highlights  the  hidden  value  of  
Mongolias forests to the countrys economy. This work  funded by the 
UN-REDD programme, which is a United Nations (UN) collaborative 
programme jointly implemented by UNDP, FAO and UNEP  formed 
part of Targeted Support requested by the Government of Mongolia 
to assist the country to prepare for the implementation of REDD+ 
activities, including reducing deforestation and degradation, restoring, 
conserving and sustainably managing forests.

The  study  found  that  forests  are  worth  around  US$  310  mil-
lion  (MNT  431  billion)  a  year  to  Mongolias  economy  and  people.  
Unfortunately, as is the case in many other countries, most of these 
important  values  remain  invisible  in  official  development  statistics 
because  the  monetary  worth  of  the  environment  still  tends  to  be 
calculated just in terms of the raw materials and physical products 
that it yields. The value revealed through the study is many times that 
recorded in official GDP figures. The recorded GDP share of the forest 
sector is currently recorded at less than 0.5 percent; at about USD 40 
million or MNT 70 billion. By explicitly considering the multiple services 
provided by forests  in terms of timber and fuelwood, wild plants and 
animals, pasture, tourism, watershed protection and climate change 
mitigation  the study helps to paint a more complete picture of the 
real value of Mongolias forest sector.

Photo: Seng Kit/Shutterstock.com 

For  example,  just  the  net  value-added  to  rural  households  from  
fuelwood use, wild foods and other non-timber forest products and 
forest grazing is equivalent to more than 12.5 percent of recorded 
per capita GDP. Conserving the forests that lie to the north west of 
Ulaanbaatar, Mongolias capital city is worth around MNT 60 billion a 
year or US$ 42.3 million a year to downstream water users. Forest 
based recreation supports up to 6,000 jobs and generates more than 
MNT 41 billion or US4 34.6 million in visitor spending, sales and wage 
earnings for the tourism sector. 

Furthermore, investing in sustainable forest management brings high 
development returns. The government earns fiscal revenues of almost 
MNT 3 for every MNT 1 of public budget allocated to forests, and each 
MNT 1 of government and donor funding helps to leverage broader 
benefits to the Mongolian economy worth just under MNT 30.

Another key message of the study is that investment in sustainable 
forest management remains very low, as compared to the economic 
importance  of  the  sector.  Opportunities  remain  to  further  enhance 
the economic value-added of forest goods and services. Stakeholder 
meetings were convened with the Ministry of Environment and Green 
Development (MEGD) to discuss these findings. The challenge, now, 
is to set in place the policies, markets and investments that can help 
to  mainstream  the  forest  sector  into  sector  agendas  and  budgets, 
and help it better achieve its potential as a key development sector in 
Mongolia. The drive for this initiative forms part of the Government of 
Mongolias commitment to transitioning to a green economy, as set 
out in the National Green Development Policy of 2014  a landmark 
piece of legislation that responds to the challenges posed by climate 
change as well as the range of new economic, social and environmental 
opportunities it creates.

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

95

WORK & MONEY

FAIR AND EQUITABLE 
FRAMEWORKS FOR 
ACCESS AND
BENEFIT SHARING

What we mustnt forget is to ensure that 
benefits arising from use of genetic resources 
also contribute directly to biodiversity 
conservation in this megadiverse country. 
This constitutes the very basis of our 
bio-economy. Nagulendran Kangayatkarasu, the former 
Deputy Undersecretary at the Ministry of Natural Resources and 
Environment and an ABS specialist

Photo: Azrie Aliamat, ITBC

The natural world harbours vast potential biological 

wealth for discovery and human development. A myriad of industries 
 pharmaceutical, biotechnology, seed, crop protection, horticulture, 
cosmetics, fragrance and flavour, botanicals and food and beverage 
sectors    use  genetic  resources  from  plants,  animals  and  micro-
organisms for research and development of commercial products that 
generate substantial benefits. In 2006, the biotechnology industry had 
a market value of US$ 70 billion.

But the custodians or providers of genetic resources  the countries, 
local  communities  and  indigenous  peoples  territories  that  house 
most  of  the  worlds  biodiversity    are  often  not  business  oriented. 
They have often not been compensated for providing or safeguarding 
these resources. 

In 2010, Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity agreed to the 
Nagoya Protocol on Access and Benefit-Sharing, making the access 
and benefit sharing from the use of genetic resources a matter of inter-
national law. This landmark international treaty aims to achieve fair and 
equitable sharing of benefits arising from the use of genetic resources, 
so that both the providers and users benefit from royalties, research 
results and other gains from their commercialisation. The agreement 
also aims to provide that a portion of the benefits will be invested in 
conservation, to preserve the resources and others yet undiscovered. 

The  UNDP  supported  GEF  financed  Access  and  Benefit  Sharing 
(ABS) projects assist countries to implement the Nagoya Protocol by 
building the capacities needed to access, derive and equitably share 
benefits from the nature-based products that they house. By estab-
lishing standardised conditions for access to genetic resources and 
helping to ensure benefit sharing with the country of their origin, this 
work aims to create greater legal certainty and transparency for both 
providers and users of genetic resources. 

Photo: Kishneth Palaniveloo, ITBC

Photo: Biodiversity Conservation Agency/Ministry of Natural Resources and 
Environment of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam

Photo: Biodiversity Conservation Agency/Ministry of Natural Resources and 
Environment of the Socialist Republic of Viet Nam

OPPOSITE PAGE: Researcher examining a Lichen in Kinabalu Park. Nature provides many 
compounds that could form the basis of new pharmaceuticals or other useful products. With 
UNDP support and GEF finance, Malaysia is developing a full national framework on Access 
and Benefit Sharing, including a financial mechanism to reinvest funds from ABS agreements 
back into conservation.
ABOVE LEFT: Research diver taking samples of soft corals at Mantanani Island, Malaysia. 
Compounds chemically extracted from soft corals have been shown to have anti-inflammatory 
and anti-cancer properties.  
ABOVE RIGHT: A Dao woman harvests herbs in Ta Phin commune, Sapa district, Lao Cai 
Province, Viet Nam. The Dao people are famous for their traditional medicines and restorative 
herbal baths made from medicinal plants. A UNDP supported project being initiated in Viet Nam 
aims to strengthen capacities for ABS and establish a system for protecting valuable traditional 
knowledge.
LEFT: Dao spa products made using traditional herbs from Viet Nam.

UNDP is currently supporting Malaysia and Fiji to implement projects 
in this field. In Malaysia, UNDP work began in 2010 with a project 
funded through UNDP Target Resource Assignment from the Core 
(so-called TRAC funds) and the Government of Malaysia, supporting 
the development of a draft ABS bill. With GEF finance, a full national 
regulatory  and  institutional  framework  on  ABS  is  being  developed, 
including a national law and spurring regulations and financial mecha-
nism to reinvest funds from ABS agreements back into biodiversity 
conservation. The project also includes building national institutional 
and stakeholder capacity for implementation of ABS through training 
programmes, creation of an information gateway for knowledge sharing 
on ABS, and awareness raising with researchers, industry, indigenous 
and local communities. 

In addition to fulfilling the provisions of the Nagoya protocol, Malaysia 
is using this project to advance pilot projects on bio-prospecting with 
fair and equitable benefit sharing provisions, Prior Informed Consent 
processes (PIC) with indigenous and local communities implemented 
in accordance with community protocols, and the dissemination of best 
practices on ABS agreements and PIC processes at regional level.

This project is timely as the government promotes bio-economy under 
the New Economic Model (NEM), 2010. The NEM highlights the po-
tential of biodiversity to catalyse the transformation of Malaysia into a 
high income developed nation, says Nagulendran Kangayatkarasu, the 
former Deputy Undersecretary at the Ministry of Natural Resources and 
Environment and an ABS specialist. What we mustnt forget, though, 
is to ensure that benefits arising from use of genetic resources also 
contribute  directly  to  biodiversity  conservation  in  this  megadiverse 
country. This constitutes the very basis of our bio-economy.

In Fiji, a UNDP-supported ABS project, with finance from GEF and 
the Nagoya Protocol Implementation Fund, will work with the govern-

ment  and  multiple  partners  on  the  discovery  and  development  of 
nature-based products. Through partnership with the Centre for Drug 
Discovery and Conservation at the University of the South Pacific and 
other universities, and training and investment in state of the art tech-
nology, the project will strengthen bio-prospecting capacity to identify 
new compounds from nature. Efforts will focus on Fijis rich marine and 
coral reef ecosystems  and screening the seaweed, algae, sponges 
and other marine organisms that are a rich source of potentially useful 
compounds (including those that may be used to treat cancer, malaria 
and tuberculosis) for the pharmaceutical and agrochemical industries.  

The project aims to make ABS operational by linking bio-prospecting 
with marine conservation actions in conjunction with local communities. 
The project aims to strengthen incentives for conservation at both com-
munity and government levels. The project will assist the government 
to develop and clarify relevant roles, procedures and administrative 
systems for ABS agreement negotiations between the government, 
communities and relevant institutions, including roles and responsibili-
ties of the government institutions at the sub-national level. The project 
will strengthen overall national capacities on: negotiations; instituting 
engagement processes; advertising bio-prospecting initiatives; satisfy-
ing the customary requirements for development; and, monitoring of 
benefit-sharing and bio-prospecting projects.

UNDP supported ABS projects are also being initiated in Bhutan and 
the Cook Islands with finance from the Nagoya Protocol Implementation 
Fund, and in China and Viet Nam with GEF finance. Ultimately, these 
investments in implementing the Nagoya Protocol on ABS nationally 
should mean both providers and users of genetic resources are able 
to fairly and equitably share in natures bounty. 

96

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

97

WORK & MONEY

SUPPORTING 
SUSTAINABLE, 
ALTERNATIVE 
AND 
BIODIVERSITY
-FRIENDLY 
LIVELIHOODS
Ecosystem and biodiversity loss is a challenge 
for us all, but it is a particular challenge for the worlds 
poor. Many of the 1.2 billion people living in severe 
poverty, on less than US$ 1 a day, depend directly on 
nature for food, clean water, fuel, medicine, shelter, and 
reduced vulnerability to climate change and natural 
disasters. Dependent on ecosystem goods and services 
for their livelihoods and subsistence, the poor stand to 
suffer the most from ecosystem degradation. UNDP 
supports countries to stimulate job creation and 
safeguard biodiversity by promoting nature-based 
tourism initiatives, sustainable harvesting livelihoods and 
biodiversity-friendly business that generate income for 
local communities.

FROM TIMBER 
TO TOURISTS: COMMUNITY 
TRANSFORMATION ON SAMAR 
ISLAND 

Eugene Igdalino knew he was breaking the law and 

risking arrest every time he loaded his torpedo boat with timber cut 
from  what  is  now  the  450,000  hectare  Samar  Island  Nature  Park 
(SINP), the largest terrestrial protected area in the Philippines. His 
motives, he explains, were simple; with few other livelihood options 
available, selling wood to local sawmills was the only way, the easiest 
way, to get money.

Eugene still plies the river in his torpedo boat, but his cargo is now 
legal thanks to the Samar Island Biodiversity Project (SIBP) supported 
by UNDP and financed by the GEF. Working with the Department of 
Environment and Natural Resources (DENR), the project has spent 
the last decade working to ensure the sustainable establishment of the 
park and the protection of the countrys biggest contiguous expanse of 
old-growth forest. In addition to lobbying for official protected status for 
the park both at the national and local government level, SIBP (mindful 
of the importance of sustaining local peoples livelihoods) has adopted 
the strategy of fostering eco-tourism development. 

Eugene is one of many beneficiaries of a project that has seen the es-
tablishment of home stay businesses, the creation of trails, the construc-
tion of tourist facilities and park staff infrastructure, the development 
of educational and interpretive materials, and a range of promotional 
activities designed to put Samars rich and unique biodiversity assets 
firmly on the tourist map.

Some locals now guide visitors to attractions such as caves and wa-
terfalls. Eugene loads his boat with tourists and couldnt be happier 
about it; his income is steady, higher than his timber poaching days 
and he has become aware of the importance of the forests and the 
dangers of environmental degradation. 

The floods last year were terrible, Eugene recalls. SIBP people helped 
in the rescue  they lent us kayaks and bancas (small dugout boats). 
Later they explained that the floods were caused by forest destruc-
tion and that we needed to stop cutting down trees because without 
trees, there is nothing to stop water from coming down the mountains.

For Eugene, timber is still integral to his livelihood but with the inter-
vention of the SIBP, he is acutely aware that it is worth much more to 
him standing than cut. I am proud now that I help protect the forest 
and  the  river,  says  Eugene.  Although  three  Provincial  ordinances 
have been passed protecting the park and banning logging and min-
ing within its confines, it is this sense of new found local pride, more 
than any policies or regulations, that gives real hope to the possibility 
that the magnificent old-growth forests of Samar will be around for 
generations to come. 

River boat rides are popular with tourists in the Philippines. The Samar Island 
Biodiversity Project helped local people like Eugene move from illegal logging
to alternative tourism-based livelihoods, such as the torpedo boat adventure ride. 

The Philippine eagle (Pithecophaga jefferyi) is one of the largest and most threatened 
eagles in the world, listed as Critically Endangered on the IUCN Red List of Threatened 
Species. Samar Island is one of just four Philippine islands from which the raptor is 
currently documented (Mindanao, Luzon, Leyte, and Samar). 

In India, UNDP, with financing from the GEF, is supporting local communities to develop sustainable agricultural processes and alternative livelihoods. Atulas family, 
along with the 4,000 other households in the villages of the northeastern state of Nagaland, have witnessed a 20% increase in their average income. 
Photo: Zubeni Lotha/UNDP India

98

Photo: Peter Sobolev/Shutterstock.com

Photo: Edwin Verin
/Shutterstock.com

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

99

WORK & MONEY

Woman selling food on Tonle Sap Lake
Photo:  Artur Bogacki / Shutterstock.com

MICROCREDIT FOR 
SELF HELP GROUPS 
LEADS 
TO SUSTAINABLE 
LIVELIHOODS AND 
GREATER SECURITY 
IN TONLE SAP LAKE, 
CAMBODIA

A fisherman glides through the water in his 

canoe against a backdrop of emerald green trees that 
rise from the water behind him. Every spring, the monsoon 
rains deluge the Tonle Sap Lake  a tributary of the lower  
Mekong  River    creating  this  world  of  submerged  
forests and grasslands, where water birds fly overhead, hous-
es stand above the water and schools of fish swim below.  
Covering between 250,000 hectares in the dry season 
and  more  1  million  hectares  during  the  annual  flood, 
this is the largest freshwater lake in Southeast Asia. It  
supports an incredible array of animals and plants and 
is  an  important  nursery  for  hundreds  of  migratory  fish 
species that swim here to spawn. The people here live in 
stilt houses and make their living from the lakes waters 
and floating forests. 

The  lake  and  a  significant  part  of  the  flood  plain  has 
been  declared  a  UNESCO  Biosphere  Reserve,  but  it 
faces  multiple  human  pressures  from  slash-and-burn 
agriculture, encroachment of farming onto habitats in the 
flooded forest areas, unsustainable firewood collection, 
poaching and overfishing. 

A  UNDP  supported  initiative  Sustainable  Livelihoods 
Support to the Core Areas of the Tonle Sap Biosphere 
Reserve has worked with local people to help reduce 
their impact on this complex ecosystem. The programme 
aimed to help residents develop new, more sustainable  

alternative  incomes  and  introduced  
affordable  technologies  to  help  them  use  
natural resources more efficiently. 

Working  through  UN  Volunteers  (known  as 
UNVs),  the  programme  helped  residents  to  
establish  self-help  groups.  The  Self  Help 
groups  started  with  a  handful  of  families 
who  were  given  access  to  savings  and  loan 
schemes that enabled them to adopt alternative  
sustainable  livelihoods,  such  as  household 
fish  farming,  livestock  rearing,  and  making  
handicrafts from weeds growing naturally in the 
lake. More than 500 families became involved in 
25 self-help groups, each supported by a UNV. 

This  support  enabled  members  to  avoid  
expensive  commercial  moneylenders  and  
manage the loans themselves, greatly reducing  
costs,  and  resulting  in  substantial  profits  or 
savings and reinvestment back into the group 
funds. 

Some  of  the  groups  increased  their  initial  
investment funds four-fold and at least 15 have 
become  totally  self-sustaining.  Total  group  
savings increased to over Rial 400 million (US$ 
50,000+) and almost half of all group members 

increased  their  incomes  by  US$  40  to  US$ 
150 per month. The majority of members were 
women, who are often the keepers of the family 
finances. The project developed the leadership 
capacities  of  the  members  and  established 
a  platform  for  other  donors  to  replicate  the  
success in other areas of the Tonle Sap. 

The  self  help  groups  also  provided  useful 
starting  points  for  spreading  awareness  of 
eco-friendly practices. Fishing and fish farming 
have been the mainstays of life on Tonle Sap 
for centuries, but local shops had been selling 
unsuitable chemicals to treat fish diseases. Not 
only did the toxins remain in the lake after use, 
harming biodiversity, but they were also harmful 
to human health.
 
People  from  the  self  help  groups  were  
informed of the dangers and also given classes 
to  enhance  their  existing  fishing  knowledge. 
The  project  team  and  Ministry  of  Education, 
Youth and Sports also succeeded in introducing  
the  first  environmental  education  curriculum,  
training  programme  and  eco-clubs  in  
Cambodias schools. Through these initiatives, 
255 teachers have been trained and curriculums  
developed to increase environmental awareness. 

The people of Tonle Sap Lake live in stilt houses and make 
their living from the lakes waters and floating forests.
Photo:  Stephane Jaquemet/Shutterstock.com

Villagers were trained in efficient techniques 
for mushroom farming, and 36 families set up 
floating  vegetable  gardens.  Both  initiatives, 
using  technical  advice  from  the  UNVs  and 
local agricultural schools, aimed to reduce the 
impact of overfishing on the local environment.  
Cookstoves distributed via the self-help groups 
used  up  to  40  percent  less  wood  than  the 
traditional  variety,  last  longer  and  are  safer. 
Ecotourism was also piloted in village of Peak 
Kantel,  in  conjunction  with  Osmose,  a  local 
NGO. Local families were trained in hospitality 
skills and given equipment to set up. Around 
100 paying visitors so far to the ecotourism site 
have boosted the villages income.

This  initiative  was  undertaken  as  part  of  the 
Tonle Sap Conservation Project implemented 
between  2004  and  2011,  a  collaboration  
between UNDP, GEF, UNDP Cambodia, the 
Wildlife Conservation Society and UN Volunteers  
/Japan Trust Fund and the Royal Government 
of  Cambodia  though  the  Cambodia  National 
Mekong Committee.

100

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

101

WORK & MONEY

PROTECTING THE MARKHOR: 
CONSERVATION AND 
SUSTAINABLE LIVELIHOODS 
IN PAKISTANS NORTHERN 
HIGHLANDS

Livelihood options for people living 

in the remote and rugged terrain of Pakistans 
northern  highlands  are  very  limited.  Little  of 
the land among these steep peaks and valleys 
is arable and poverty is widespread. UNDP, in 
collaboration with partners including financing 
from GEF, has supported two interventions stra-
tegically designed to improve local livelihoods 
while conserving the regions rich biodiversity 
and natural resources. 

The region is a storehouse of biodiversity, har-
bouring  the  majority  of  Pakistans  remaining 
natural forest and several threatened species, 
including  the  lynx  and  Pakistans  national 
animal, the markhor, one of the worlds largest 
and most magnificent species of wild goat. But 
illegal hunting by local villagers for food and 
by outsiders for sport (without permits), along 
with  habitat  degradation,  was  placing  heavy 
pressure on the local populations of markhor. 

UNDP in collaboration with GEF, IUCN, WWF, 
the  Government  of  Pakistan  and  other  local 
partners, began working with village and valley 
communities of these highlands in 1995, first 
through a pilot project and then through the 
Mountain Areas Conservancy project. 

These projects identified an opportunity to in-
centivise local people to conserve the markhor 
by developing a carefully designed, monitored 
and controlled sustainable trophy hunting pro-
gramme. Working in the Khyber Pakhtunkhwa 
and Gilgit-Baltistan regions, the project helped 
communities to step up control of illegal hunt-
ing, conduct surveys to monitor markhor popu-
lations, and implement a quota system whereby 
only  a  handful  of  permits  to  hunt  individual 
animals were sold or auctioned each year for 
a huge premium. Each permit fetched up to a 
huge US$ 56,000 per individual animal. 

By auctioning a limited number of permits on 
the lucrative tourist market, the scheme made 
the markhor worth much more to the commu-
nities as a species conserved for this purpose 
than they could make through hunting, even 
many,  animals  for  food.  In  return,  the  com-
munities agreed to cease hunting of animals 
themselves and instead became custodians 
of the species, reducing overall pressure on the 
population. The income and community benefits 
derived  from  sale  of  the  permits  provided  a 
direct incentive for communities to protect local 
markhor populations and their natural habitats. 

The project developed stringent trophy hunting 
procedures and established a transparent and 
equitable process for sharing quota allocations 
of  trophy  permits  and  revenue  generated  by 
their  sale  among  valley  communities.  Only 
older male markhor were selected for trophy 
hunting  to  protect  the  breeding  population 
of  younger  animals  and  females,  allowing 
population  growth.  80  percent  of  the  profits 
from the sale of the permits were allocated to 
communities and 20 percent to local govern-
ment. Community profits were ploughed into 
community development, such as building water 
channels,  building  and  repairing  schools  and 
community  centres,  and  community  support 
services. A proportion of the community share 
was invested into the Valley Conservation Funds 
established by the project, to be used for habitat 
conservation. 

To  coordinate  conservation  work,  the  project 
mobilized communities to form Valley Conser-
vation Committees (VCCs), with representation 
from  the  clans  living  in  a  given  valley.  With 
project  support,  they  developed  Valley  and 
Conservancy Management Plans, pasture and 
forest  management,  species  recovery  and 
grazing  regulations.  Collectively  these  activi-

ties improved relations between communities 
and government agencies, and raised aware-
ness  of  the  value  of  natural  resources  and 
the  benefits  of  managing  them  sustainably. 
As a result, communities decided to rest high 
country  pastures,  reduce  livestock  numbers 
and  conserve  the  habitat  of  wild  species. 
Due to its success, the VCC and conservancy 
approach  was  also  adopted  in  other  valleys 
outside the projects target sites. The projects 
strengthened community capacity for conserva-
tion and successfully demonstrated that local 
livelihoods  and  incomes  could  be  improved 

through the sustainable use and conservation 
of wild species.

Pakistan will now build on the achievements 
of  this  work,  with  the  Mountain  and  Market 
Biodiversity Business project. As markhor were 
not evenly distributed among all conservancies, 
this  project  specifically  focuses  on  develop-
ing community-based biodiversity businesses 
based on sustainable use of wild species that 
are widely available across all conservancies to 
ensure that all communities are able to benefit 
from sustainable use and conservation. The pro-

ject will support local communities to develop 
and sell natural products from wild non-timber 
products  found  in  the  forest,  such  as  cumin 
seed, honey, medicinal herbs and mushrooms. 
Currently, there is little incentive to conserve 
these heritage species. 

The project will support local communities to 
obtain voluntary certification of their products 
based on their adoption of sustainable harvest-
ing regimes and contribution to conservation. 
The  premium  they  earn  from  selling  these 
certified biodiversity-friendly natural products 

is expected to create new incentives for con-
servation.  The  project  will  especially  benefit 
poorer  and  more  marginal  groups,  including 
nomadic  pastoralists,  women  and  children, 
who  are  the  main  collectors  of  these  wild 
non-timber forest species. The project aims to 
stimulate market demand for certified natural 
products,  so  that  other  communities  across 
the conservancies can benefit from community 
biodiversity enterprise development through the 
sustainable harvesting of these wild non-timber 
forest products.

Markhor (Capra falconeri)
Photo: Nataly Karol/Shutterstock.com

102

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

103

WORK & MONEY

The entrepeuners

A DISTINCTLY FRUITFUL 

OUTCOME!

Wild apricot (Prunus armeniaca) kernels
Photos: GEF SGP India

PROFITING FROM 
WILD APRICOTS  
ENTREPRENEURIAL 
WOMEN CAPITALIZE 
ON SMALL GRANTS

Here among the soaring Himalayan peaks and plunging valleys 

of northern Indias Kullu district the figures speak for themselves: 65 
newly  established  womens  groups,  1,200  members,  a  communal 
bank balance of US$ 15,600. All of this has been fuelled by a grant 
from the UNDP implemented GEF-Small Grants Programme (SGP), 
a community-based organisation named Jagriti, and wild apricots.

Ironically, the success of this initiative was prompted by another fruit 
 the apple. Life in the remote mountain villages is hard. Many are 
without access roads and are only reachable by paths. One third of 
people living in Kullus Gadsa Valley have incomes below the national 
poverty line and lack of job opportunities force many men to leave 
the area, meaning that women are faced with the burden of water, 
firewood and fodder collection, grazing the cattle, raising the children 
and tending to the elderly.

Eventually, apple farming arrived and rapidly the orchards, owned by 
men for historical and cultural reasons, sprawled further and higher 
up the slopes. Native vegetation and biodiversity fell to the axe and 
Gadsas face changed. Alarmed by the danger of ecological catastrophe 

The products

and social upheaval (people here, particularly 
the women, have traditionally relied on natural 
forests  for  their  livelihoods  and  medicines), 
Jagriti began to organise womens groups and 
train members for self help.

One tree significantly threatened by clearance 
was the wild apricot. This species, whose fruits 
yield valuable oils, became a keystone of Jag-
ritis conservation and financial empowerment 
strategy. With financial and logistical support 
from  UNDP  and  GEF  SGP,  Jagriti  trained 
women, mostly from marginalised Scheduled 
Castes,  in  techniques  designed  to  maximise 
profits from wild apricots.

They  learned  about  collecting  and  grading 
seeds,  drying  them,  using  oil  expellers,  and 
packaging  and  selling  their  products    par-

ticularly  aromatic  oils,  which  are  increasingly 
popular in overseas markets. They also planted 
wild apricots and walnuts, and were introduced 
to accounting practices, record keeping, group 
management  skills,  and  issues  regarding 
deforestation,  biodiversity  conservation  and 
sustainable forest management.

Equipment was procured including a machine 
to  de-shell  apricot  kernels,  which  raised  the 
efficiency to 50 kilogrammes per person per 
day from just three kilogrammes prior to the ma-
chines installation. It also reduced the drudgery 
involved in the shelling process.

By 2008, nearly 20,000 kilogrammes of kernels 
yielding 400 litres of oil were being collected 
in a season yielding an income of US$ 8,600. 
By 2010 yield was up, to 1,200 litres and US$ 

17,500. The price of one litre of oil, originally 
US$ 2 has now risen to US$ 12. Besides the 
oils, women started marketing four species of 
aramanth,  apple  chips,  beeswax,  rosehip  tea 
and other nature-based products.

Local products are now sold under the umbrella 
name of Mountain Bounties and with the co-
operation of an organic herbal supply company, 
Herbal Partners, are being certified organic and 
ethical thereby increasing their value.

104

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

105

HEALTH 
& SECURITY

Biodiversity and ecosystems represent the Earths life-support 
system. Through the goods and services they supply  food, 
water, medicine, clean air, shelter  they sustain the health 
and security of our planet, and a growing human population.
In particular, healthy ecosystems provide security and a 
safety net for the poorest and most vulnerable. They provide 
physical protection from natural disasters, mitigate climate 
change and increase the resilience of societies to the negative 
impacts of climate change and shocks. These functions are 
particularly important in the Asia Pacific region, which has 
suffered the most casualties from natural disasters during 
the last decade and faces continuous threats from climate 
change. UNDP works with countries to increase the socio-
ecological resilience of their ecosystems and the people that 
depend on them.

Photo: Prashanth Vishwanathan/UNDP India

HEALTH & SECURITY

ECOSYSTEM HEALTH 
AND HUMAN SECURITY 
GO HAND IN HAND

Homes engulfed in sand

Angels will kiss the hands of those who help us, the man said. 

The face behind the handshake was grizzled and weathered. His tanned, 
leathery skin spoke to years of harsh living. The fishermans eyes welled 
with suppressed tears. He yearned, like many in this area, for a time 
when his life was one of plenty. Lakes brimmed with water, he told me. 
And fish. His children were happy, splashed about, and life was good.

I was so moved by his story that I impolitely forgot to ask his name. He 
wanted me to listen and then tell the world about the desperate condi-
tions in Irans harshest, poorest region: the Hamoun wetlands of Sistan.

Wetlands is really not the right word, for these are parched lands. 
There is little gainful employment, and more than half the residents get 
by on welfare delivered through the Imam Khomeini Relief Foundation 
(IKRF), a parastatal organization. They are  or were  mainly fisherfolk. 
Almost all are now unemployed. They live amid the decayed ruins of 
ghost-like villages built on the side of once-thriving lakes. Winds howl 
around  the  creaking  jetties,  empty  fish  markets,  and  broken  boats, 
which are strewn everywhere. 

The  Hamouns  comprise  three  large  wetland  areas  covering  5,660 
square kilometres. Two thirds of these wetlands are located in Iran, 
linked and fed by water from Afghanistans Helmand River. Twenty years 
ago, most of this area was green. Flora and fauna were abundant. The 
lake teemed with fish. The total annual catch used to exceed 12,000 
tons and fisherfolk would regularly haul in large catches weighing 20 
kilogrammes. The wetlands also supported agriculture and herds of 
grazing water buffalo, providing a livelihood for thousands of families. 
But water levels in the lakes have plummeted with the development of 
dams and canals in Afghanistan, which are drawing off water to feed 
agriculture, and the construction of reservoirs in Iran. 

What is striking is the pace of the man-made catastrophe that has 
resulted. In just 20 years, livelihoods have been devastated. Homes 
are now buried under sands blowing from the dried out lagoon beds of 
the Hamouns. The environmental crisis has forced thousands to leave 
the region. The government indicates that in 2012 alone, as many as 
5,000 families left the area. In total, 600,000 people have moved out. 
Most have trekked 2,000 kilometres northwards to Golestan province to 
start new lives, others are scattered across Iran. The ones who remain 
simply get poorer, year after year.

This was the fisherman. 

The slow death of the Hamouns signals a warning for the future. In 
this century  a century that will make or break our environment  
we are beset by challenges to human security. As the exhaustion of 
the Hamouns demonstrates, water security, ecosystem security and 
human security are inextricably linked. First popularized by UNDP in 
1994, the concept of human security shifts the traditional notion of 
national security away from its exclusive focus on the state. It seeks 
to ensure the security of people; not just borders. It speaks to the 
hugely  destabilizing  impact  of  the  relentless  challenges  facing  the 
poorest and most vulnerable, from hunger, food and water insecurity, 
disease, pollution, natural disasters and the impact of climate change 
to water shortages and expanding desertification. These threats can 
prompt massive movements of populations, potentially millions of en-
vironmental refugees, fleeing these afflictions. Such movements can, 
in turn, prompt desperation, lawlessness, crime and conflict.

So when people ask me about the real human security challenges we 
face, I lose no time in focusing my gaze on the future. True security 
 human security  must focus on people. In addition to political and 
economic considerations, it must focus on food, health, community, on 
the person and on the environment. Nature generates the services that 
are the foundation of life on earth. 

Ecosystems and biodiversity  the variety of life on earth  provide the 
goods and services that we all rely on. They secure livelihoods, food, 
water and health for billions worldwide and provide a safety net for the 
poorest and most vulnerable. They also mitigate climate change and 
provide a source of resilience  a range of ecosystems from forests 
to wetlands act as buffers against natural hazards and shocks, absorb 
and store carbon and guard against land degradation. 

Water is our biggest resource constraint in Iran. As water resources 
come under increasing threat, so does agriculture. Water over-use, 
over-grazing, deforestation and desertification coupled with climate 
change, are driving rapid land degradation, compounding this threat and 
making land less productive. In summary, we are at risk from a perfect 
storm  the combined impacts of water scarcity, land degradation, 
and climate change. These pressures are being felt all across Iran.The 
country has 1,000 wetlands, many of which are at risk. To combat this, 
current  water  and  natural  resource  management  approaches  need 
to be enhanced and climate change resilience strengthened at the 
community and national levels. 

There are several examples of what can be done  and replicated. Since 
2005, the Iranian Wetlands Project  a GEF-financed joint initiative 
of the Iranian Government and UNDP  has been working in satellite 
wetlands surrounding Lake Uromiyeh and others to bring them back 
to life. I was there and I saw some of them working well. Places like: 
Qharagheshlaq; Nowruzlu; Shur Gol; Dorgeh Sangi; Dorna Gol; Solduz; 
Ghori Gol and Kanibarazan. This project is working together with local 
organisations and communities to restore wetlands, create integrated 
plans  for  their  sustainable  management  and  introduce  sustainable 
agricultural techniques that use less water, control evaporation and 
increase yields. 

The project has also provided a scientific evidence base to track Irans 
most emblematic environmental catastrophe in Lake Uromiyeh. Unlike 
the lesser-known Hamouns, the rapid decline of Lake Uromiyeh has 
been the subject of much attention. Once one of the worlds largest 
saline lakes, water extraction and persistent drought have shrunk it by 
two thirds since 1997. Part of the problem has been diverging interests 
around the lake have pulled in different directions. The UNDP Iranian 
Wetlands project has helped to provide a platform for negotiations 
concerning  the  lakes  future.  It  has  developed  management  plans 
and improved the institutional arrangements for cooperation to ad-
dress the problem. Crucially, public awareness of the threat has also 
increased as a result.

Hope can be drawn from initiatives such as the UNDP wetlands project 
and others  where communities are working to revive their wetlands 
and implement sustainable management regimes. Most of the solu-
tions we seek lie within Iran. But the problem does not only affect Iran. 
As  we  collectively  respond  to  current  global  challenges,  it  is  clear 
that we must seek to conserve, manage and restore ecosystems and 
biodiversity as the key to human security. If we fail, we face the same 
plight as the Hamouns.

by Gary Lewis, UN Resident Representative 
in the Islamic Republic of Iran

Boats on the sand of the empty Hamouns
Photos: Gary Lewis

108

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

109

HEALTH & SECURITY

MANAGING AND 
RESTORING 
ECOSYSTEMS FOR 
CLIMATE CHANGE 
MITIGATION AND 
ADAPTATION IN 
ASIA AND 
THE PACIFIC

DID YOU KNOW?

Over 15 percent of global terrestrial 

carbon stocks are held in formal 

protected areas, with more in 

indigenous and community conserved 

lands, with an estimated value in 

the trillions of dollars.

Climate change represents a serious risk to efforts 

to reduce poverty and threatens decades of development gains. 
Receding forests, changing rainfall patterns, more intense floods 
and droughts, and rising sea levels exacerbate existing economic, 
political and humanitarian stresses and affect human develop-
ment in all parts of the world. Asia-Pacific not only has many of 
the worlds most climate-exposed territories, it is also home to 
millions of the most vulnerable people. The negative impacts of 
climate change pose a particular challenge to poor people, who 
are often dependent on natural resources and are less equipped 
to cope with climate variability and extremes. 

In response to these growing and increasingly evident threats, 
governments  across  the  region  are  paying  more  attention  to 
climate change. Significantly, there is a growing appreciation of 
the  importance  of  natural  ecosystems  and  protected  areas  in 
managing climate change. Restoring and maintaining key eco-
systems can help communities in their mitigation and adaptation 
efforts and support livelihoods that depend on ecosystem ser-
vices. UNDP supports countries and communities to incorporate 
nature-based solutions into their strategies for adapting to and 
mitigating the negative impacts of climate change. Projects in the 
region are working to support national efforts to address climate 
change, in this rapidly developing work area, building knowledge 
and experience on different approaches. 

Photo:  taboga/Shutterstock.com 

110

ECOSYSTEM BASED 
ADAPTATION
Ecosystem-based adaptation 

(EbA)  involves  the  sustainable  management, 
conservation and restoration of ecosystems to 
provide services that help people adapt. UNDP 
supports countries in Asia Pacific to implement 
EbA approaches that can help vulnerable com-
munities  increase  their  capacity  to  adapt  to 
the impacts of climate change, and build the 
resilience  of  the  ecosystems  on  which  their 
livelihoods and welfare depend. 

  IN  MONGOLIA,  a  UNDP  supported 
project financed by the Adaptation Fund, the 
Government of Mongolia and UNDP, is sup-
porting  EbA  approaches  to  maintain  water 
security  in  the  Altai  Mountains  and  Eastern 
Steppe  landscapes.  Working  with  multiple 
partners, the project uses traditional knowledge 
and technological innovation to maintain water 
provisioning services supplied by mountain and 
steppe ecosystems. Over its lifetime the project 

aims to achieve quantifiable improvements in 
water  quality,  water  use  efficiency  and  land 
use practices through improved management 
and restoration of key ecosystems to improve 
resilience. 

 IN NEPAL, a project supported collabora-
tively by IUCN, UNEP and UNDP and financed 
by the Federal Ministry for the Environment, Na-
ture Conservation and Nuclear Safety (BMU) 
of  Germany,  is  supporting  EbA  in  mountain 
ecosystems. The project will demonstrate EbA 
measures that sustain key ecosystem services 
and enhance the capacity of local communi-
ties  and  national  government  to  build  and 
better integrate EbA options as part of overall 
adaptation strategies in Nepal. The project will 
include an assessment of the cost-efficiency 
of  EbA  by  considering  economic,  social  and 
environmental  aspects,  in  order  to  make  the 
business case for EbA. 

UNDP works with countries to strengthen their 
resilience to respond to climate and other en-
vironmental impacts through effective conser-
vation and management of natural resources. 
Ecosystem  rehabilitation  and  expanding  and 
connecting protected areas to conserve intact 
forests, wetlands, mangroves and coral reefs 
provides a natural buffer for vulnerable com-
munities  against  natural  disasters  intensified 
by climate change. For example, the Pakistan 
Wetlands  project  has  planted  more  than 
130,000  mangrove  saplings  at  various  sites 
in the Makran Coastal Wetlands Complex. In 
Malaysia, the Conserving Marine Biodiversity 
through Enhanced Marine Park Management 
and Inclusive Sustainable Island Development 
project  transplanted  coral  at  badly  bleached 
sites  within  the  marine  protected  area  and 
developed a coral bleaching response plan. 

ECOSYSTEM 
BASED MITIGATION
Conservation  and rehabilitation 

 
 IN MALAYSIA a UNDP-managed project 
has  worked  to  improve  forest  condition  and 
restore peat swamps in Sarawak State, Sabah, 
and South East Pahang. Among other activities, 
the project developed integrated management 
plans for the three project sites. 

of  natural  ecosystems  that  function  as  ef-
fective  carbon  sinks  contributes  to  reducing 
greenhouse  gas  emissions.  UNDP  supports 
countries in developing capacity and accessing 
new sources of finance to maintain and restore 
these ecosystems, which include forests, peat-
lands, wetlands, tidal marshes, mangroves and 
seagrass beds. Communities are directly sup-
ported in securing land tenure and accessing 
new sources of finance to manage ecosystems 
effectively  and  sustainably,  using  both  tradi-
tional knowledge and innovative techniques. 

UNDP supports projects in a range of coun-
tries  in  the  Asia  Pacific  region  to  promote 
sustainable  forest  management  measures. 
Destruction and degradation of peatlands can 
lead to the release of greenhouse gases, with 
a  global  warming  potential  that  is  equivalent 
to 13-30 percent of the global emissions from 
fossil fuel combustion. UNDP supported GEF 
financed projects support countries to reduce 
carbon emissions from peatlands and increase 
the resilience of economies and communities.

  IN  THAILAND,  a  new  project  aims  to 
conserve,  restore  and  manage  peatlands  to 
maximise their capacity to act as carbon sinks, 
as well as their capacity to provide habitat for 
important species and to support livelihoods. 
The  project  will  work  to  expand  the  area  of 
peatswamp  forest  under  protection,  develop 
and establish integrated management plans for 
this forest, restore areas degraded by storms 
and fires and implement systems for prevent-
ing encroachment and monitoring carbon flux. 
In addition, the project will seek to strengthen 
national policies and frameworks for managing 
peatswamp forests. 

Photo: Midori Paxton

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

111

A community lies in the shadow of south Annapurna and Fishtail Mountain 

in Annapurna Conservation Area, Nepal. Many come to visit these iconic mountains and trek
these popular trails, but to the locals that live here, it is simply home. A project supported 
collaboratively by IUCN, UNEP and UNDP and financed by the Federal Ministry for the 
Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety of Germany, is supporting ecosystem-based 
adaptation (EbA) in mountain ecosystems of Nepal. The project will demonstrate EbA measures 
that sustain key ecosystem services and enhance the capacity of local communities and national 
government to build and better integrate EbA options as part of overall adaptation strategies in Nepal.

Photo: Jesse Montes

HEALTH & SECURITY

Mongolian family in the Eastern Steppe
Photos: Midori Paxton

114

GREAT STEPPES 
FORWARD IN 
MONGOLIA THROUGH 
ECOSYSTEM-BASED 
ADAPTATION

Although 60 percent of Mongolias population 
now lives in towns, nearly 40 percent of people are reliant on subsist-
ence livestock herding. The livelihoods of these nomadic communities 
are completely dependent on the ability of the ecosystem to provide 
surface water and pasture. In recent years, herders have noticed a 
marked change in rainfall patterns and an increase in temperatures. 

The hydrological system has also changed, altering the volume and 
timing of river flows and floods. Streams and lakes have dried up. Soil 
infiltration rates and water storage capacity have declined, resulting in 
deteriorating pasture quality and quantity. In addition, the occurrence of 
summer droughts and extremely severe winter weather events called 
dzuds  has  increased.  The  2010  dzud  killed  more  than  one  in  five 
livestock in the whole country, affecting 700,000 people. Changes in 
climatic patterns are already having noticeable impacts on the herders, 
exacerbating already serious land degradation problems.

Good pasture and water mean everything to us, says a 23-year old 
herder  from  the  Altai  region.  Without  them,  we  cannot  exist.  For 
people living in this landscape, there is simply no livelihood if surface 
water and pasture disappear. And for these resources to continue to 
be available for the present and future generations, it is essential to 
ensure that the ecosystems in these landscapes, which provide water 
and nurture pasture, remain healthy and resilient enough to cope with 
climate change.

Launched in 2012, the Ecosystem-based Adaptation (EbA) Approach 
to Maintaining Water Security in Critical Water Catchments in Mongolia, 
co-funded by the Adaptation Fund, the Government of Mongolia and 
UNDP, is working with communities, local and national governments, 
and NGOs in the Altai and Eastern Steppe landscapes to address this. 
The project combines traditional knowledge and technological innova-
tion to maintain water provisioning services supplied by mountain and 
steppe ecosystems, and to incorporate climate change risk responses 
and ecosystem resilience principles into land use and water resource 
planning and management at the landscape level. 

The  project  applies  the  principles  of  Ecosystem-based  Adaptation 
 working to protect ecosystems and maintain essential ecosystem 
services in order to reduce the vulnerability of people to climate change 

impacts. By working to improve water use efficiency, water quality, land 
use practices and integrated river basin management, the project aims 
to achieve specific quantified targets for improvements to ecosystem 
health. It supports evidence-based decision-making through improved 
knowledge and understanding of ecosystem dynamics, resilience and 
the impacts of different land uses. The project also assists community 
actions to implement EbA principles and practices for the long-term 
sustenance of their livelihoods. 

At the national level, the project supports mainstreaming of the EbA 
approach in the countrys adaptation framework and related sector 
policies. To date the project has supported the development or revi-
sion of three new water regulations and three new forest regulations 
to incorporate EbA principles. The new or reformulated regulations 
aim to promote sustainable use of water and conservation of forests, 
which help to store water, by providing incentives for efficient water 
use and protection, restoration and sustainable use of forests. It is also 
strengthening the capacity of key climate change policy and planning 
agencies to incorporate EbA approaches. The project makes great 
steps forward for safeguarding the worlds largest Steppe ecosystem 
and its keepers. 

The steppe ecosystem that supports the livelihoods of these nomadic communities is 
characterized by temperate grasslands; the communities are completely dependent on 
the ability of this ecosystem to provide surface water and pasture.

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

115

HEALTH & SECURITY

INTEGRATING 
BIODIVERSITY INTO 
REDD+

Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degra-
dation (known as REDD+) is a dedicated effort to value the carbon 
stored in standing forests as a way to incentivize developing countries 
to protect, manage and restore forests to mitigate climate change. 
The United Nations REDD (UN-REDD) Programme is a collaborative 
initiative between FAO, UNDP and UNEP that supports countries to 
prepare to implement REDD+ activities, including reducing deforesta-
tion and degradation, restoring, conserving and sustainably managing 
forests under the UNFCCC climate change convention. To date, a total 
of 15 countries have sought support from the UN-REDD Programme 
in the Asia Pacific region. 

The UN-REDD Programme works with national governments to pre-
pare for participation in a future REDD+ mechanism with the active 
involvement of all stakeholders, including indigenous peoples and other 
forest-dependent communities. The Programme supports countries to 
develop national REDD+ strategies that will guide the implementation 
of nationally appropriate REDD+ activities in the country. 

Financial flows resulting from REDD+ will not only reduce carbon emis-
sions, but can also benefit developing countries by generating additional 
social and environmental benefits, such as conserving biodiversity and 
vital ecosystem services and promoting local livelihoods. The UN-REDD 
Programme has developed a set of Social and Environmental Principles 
and Criteria and a range of decision support tools that are intended 
to assist countries in developing a national safeguards approach that 
emphasizes delivery of multiple benefits from REDD+.

This  safeguards  approach  includes  applying  the  principles  of  Free, 
Prior and Informed Consent in the context of REDD+ to protect local 
communities rights and forest-dependent livelihoods and to reduce 
risks through ensuring mutual understanding and agreement between 
all parties concerned. Under the UN-REDD Programme, UNDP has 
led work in Viet Nam to develop national guidelines on Free, Prior and 
Informed Consent (FPIC) in the context of REDD+, as part of sup-
port to prepare the country to implement REDD+ activities. National 
Guidelines on applying the principles of FPIC for REDD+ have been 
developed through an extensive process of consultation and testing, 
including pilot exercises in Lam Dong province and evaluations of this 
work. This constituted the first practical example, worldwide, of the 
application of FPIC principles in REDD+. The guidelines will now be 
refined through provincial planning processes. 

116

Photo: John Bill
/Shutterstock.com 

Similar work is on-going in Papua New Guinea, where working national 
guidelines on FPIC have been developed through a collaborative 3.5 
year process involving more than 13 consultations and three full revi-
sions. Papua New Guineas working guidelines will be tested in REDD+ 
pilot sites and the lessons learned from these tests incorporated before 
they are presented to the government. 

In  the  UN-REDD  National  Programmes  pilot  province  of  Central 
Sulawesi in Indonesia, a set of maps has been developed to support 
decisions on where and how REDD+ could be put into practice. The 
maps were developed by UNEP World Conservation Monitoring Centre 
(UNEP-WCMC) on behalf of the UN-REDD Programme, in collabora-
tion with the Ministry of Forestry of Indonesia and a number of other 
partners.  They  have  been  designed  to  support  the  development  of 
plans for REDD+ actions that provide multiple benefits for livelihoods 
and biodiversity in line with the needs of different stakeholder groups, 
in addition to storing carbon. 

The potential benefits of implementing REDD+ actions in a certain 
location are influenced by a range of factors, including the biophysical, 
geographic, socio-economic and cultural characteristics of an area, as 
well as future development plans. The set of maps includes different 
data layers that show current land uses, carbon stocks, potential areas 
for REDD+ activities, current state forest area, population density and 
the location of areas important for biodiversity. Additional variables, 
such as planned infrastructure development, can easily be added, if 
requested by decision makers.

By  overlaying  this  spatial  information,  the  maps  demonstrate  how 
different data layers can inform planning and prioritization of areas 
suitable for REDD+ activities based on selected criteria. For exam-
ple, data layers showing the location of endangered forest types, of 
Important Bird Areas, and the nesting grounds of the endemic maleo 
bird, a flagship species in the province, can be used to assess the 
importance of different areas for biodiversity conservation. Data layers 
on slope and watershed boundaries can help to assess the importance 
of various areas of forest for delivering ecosystem services, such as 
erosion control. Combining this information with stakeholder analysis 
and consultation can help planners to identify, for example, areas of 
forest to maintain that will not only store carbon but which are also of 
significant value for biodiversity and ecosystem services.

Important Bird Areas (as a proxi-indicator 
for high biodiversity) and Total Carbon 
in Central Sulawesi Province, Indonesia
Map showing Important Bird Areas in relation to total carbon in Central Sulawesi Province, Indonesia, a UN-REDD 
Programme pilot province. This map is one of a set developed by the UNEP World Conservation Monitoring Centre 
(UNEP WCMC) for the UN-REDD Programme, as a decision-support tool for REDD+ planning that delivers multiple
benefits. The maps were developed by UNEP WCMC in collaboration with the Ministry of Forestry of Indonesia, 
DG Forest Planning, the Regional Forest Service Central Sulawesi and Tadulako University.

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

117

HEALTH & SECURITY

COMMUNITY COOPERATION 
HELPS HERDERS TO COMBAT 
ENVIRONMENTAL CHANGE

The Altai Mountains of Mongolias extreme west 

are harsh, daunting, and offer spectacular views of snow-capped peaks 
beyond  sweeping  grasslands,  milky  rivers  that  derive  their  startling 
colour from glacial melt flow, and immense lakes. 

This is home to the Kazakh nomads of the Akhbastau (literally: White 
Springs) community. People here are herders and horsemen who hunt 
with golden eagles and who live in gers (yurts) decorated with colour-
ful wall and floor carpets. These mountains are also an important area 
for global conservation, harbouring a number of threatened species, 
including the snow leopard. 

Older generations of the Akhbastau community have witnessed clear 
environmental changes over the last 70 years. Wildlife numbers have 
declined as a result of overhunting and overfishing, and pastures have 
deteriorated. Overgrazing is one of the main causes of environmental 
degradation in the range, worsened further by the harsh effects of 
climate  change  on  precious  water  and  land  resources.  Many  herd-
ers have stopped traditional rotational grazing methods that involved 
moving seasonally in search of good pasture, leaving time for other 
pasturelands to recover. 

To remedy increasingly adverse living conditions, in 2006, the families in 
the Altai Mountain region started forming herder groups, working with 
the UNDP supported GEF financed Community-based Conservation 
of Biological Diversity in the Mountain Landscapes of Mongolias Altai 
Sayan Eco-region project, locally known as the Altai Sayan project. 

The project, executed by the Government of Mongolia from 2005 to 
2011,  provided  small  loans  and  grants  to  community  groups  in  the 
region  to  help  develop  tourism,  grow  vegetables  for  the  first  time, 
repair winter shelters and improve the quality of their milk and wool 
products. Through project support, 7,000 herders received training in 
new trades, including weaving and felt-making, dairy product process-
ing and marketing, tourism and wildlife monitoring and management. 

I think we have been able to achieve changes in herders perceptions, 
says Amangul Sakeyi, the projects social mobiliser. Through forming 
a community group and taking charge of managing a defined area of 
land, people feel much more responsible for caring for their pasture 
and wildlife resources. 

Forming a community group with other households has also helped 
individual herder families. They cooperate in sheep wool sheering mak-
ing the process much more efficient, collectively they plan rotational 
grazing and also hay making in preparation for winter months and dzud. 
The community even decided to decrease the number of livestock to 
reflect what the grasslands could support. 

They also established a hospitality ger for tourists who want to experi-
ence the nomadic life of Kazakh people, and the regions breath-taking 
vistas, wildlife and spring flowers. Horse trekking has also proven a 
success with tourists. 15 percent of tourism income is put into a com-
munity fund and the rest is divided among the households. 

Diversification of livelihoods makes the herders more resilient to ex-
ternal shocks such as dzud, and reduces pressure on pastures. We 
now have more options and different income sources, says Naranbek 
Ristan, an Akhbastau herder who is in charge of wildlife monitoring 
activities.  And  we  are  better  prepared  for  harsh  winters.  The  dzud 
impact in this community was minimal last year, which I believe is owed 
to the work of our organisation.

The  initiative  instituted  20  environment  units  within  the  local  gov-
ernment  office  to  support  the  community  groups.  Altai  and  Sayan 
conservation plans were developed through expert support from the 
project, which provided essential biodiversity information for land use 
and local development planning. 

As a result of the projects advocacy efforts, Mongolias Environmen-
tal Protection Law was amended to include clear legal provision for 
community-based natural resource management. The 64 officially reg-
istered community groups, which include 912 herder families, manage 
natural resources on land covering more than half a million hectares. 
After  the  project  ended,  the  local  government  environmental  units 
took  over  to  support  the  community  groups  and  their  conservation 
efforts.  The  Government  officially  expanded  the  overall  project  ap-
proach  to  conservation  and  livelihoods  nationwide  through  a  June 
2011 Ministerial decree. 

Photo: Midori Paxton

Naranbek Ristan, an Akhbastau herder who has 
participated in several activities funded by the project, 
including training courses on wildlife monitoring.
The Altai Mountains, which straddle Mongolia, China, 
Kazakstan, and Russia, are part of the Altai Sayan 
Ecoregion, identified as a global priority for 
conservation by WWF.

We now have more options and different 
income sources. And we are better 
prepared for harsh winters. The dzud 
impact in this community was minimal 
last year, which I believe is owing to 
our organisation. 
NARANBEK RISTAN, 
AKHBASTAU HERDER

118

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

119

HEALTH & SECURITY

Most of the Endangered giant panda's 
(Ailuropoda melanoleuca) habitat is located 
in Sichuan province. 
Photos: Sichuan Province Environmental Protection Bureau

The project has supported ecological rehabilitation planning in 
earthquake-hit areas of Sichuan.

EMERGENCY BIODIVERSITY 
CONSERVATION MEASURES 
SUPPORT RECONSTRUCTION 
IN EARTHQUAKE-HIT AREAS 
OF SICHUAN PROVINCE, 
CHINA

The 2008 Wenchuan Earthquake left more than 69,000 

people dead and millions displaced when it hit Sichuan province in 
South-west China on 12 May 2008. As well as the devastation it caused 
to human life, the 8.0-Richter scale-earthquake also caused an ecologi-
cal catastrophe. Sichuan province is one of the most important areas 
for biodiversity in China, harbouring more than 100 threatened species, 
including the Endangered giant panda. The earthquake damaged 35 
Nature Reserves covering 400,000 hectares, and an estimated 60 
percent of the pandas natural habitat. 

To support recovery and rehabilitation efforts following the earthquake, 
the Government of China, with UNDP support and GEF finance, began 
emergency biodiversity conservation measures in affected regions of 
Sichuan province. Working through the Foreign Economic Coopera-
tion Office under Sichuan Province Environmental Protection Bureau 
and Chinas Ministry of Environmental Protection, the project aimed 
to mainstream biodiversity in the recovery and reconstruction process 
and to strengthen the affected protected areas.

To inform sound decision making in the recovery process, the project 
quickly undertook a number of assessments to evaluate the damage 
caused to biodiversity and livelihoods. Within its first year, the project 
investigated impacts on 19 local communities and villages surrounding 
eight national nature reserves. Their findings were used to recommend 
a series of practical measures to improve local farmers livelihoods. The 
project also assessed damage to the eight national nature reserves 
and surveyed the extent of damage to habitats of 10 key endangered 
species, to inform conservation and rehabilitation strategies. 

The Sichuan Province Environmental Protection Bureau used these 
findings and the recommendations of the Ecological Function Re-
gionalization Plan developed by the project to update its Ecological 
Rehabilitation Plan in Sichuan Earthquake Areas. This rehabilitation 
plan has played a guiding role in reconstruction efforts made by all 
sectors  under  the  Sichuan  Government,  coordinating  stakeholders 
actions and defining their responsibilities in biodiversity conservation 
in the reconstruction.  

Sichuans draft Biodiversity Strategy and Action Plan, which guides 
conservation  and  sustainable  use  at  the  provincial  level,  was  also 
reviewed  and  strengthened  in  the  context  of  the  earthquake.  As  a 
result  of  the  updated  BSAP,  projects  to  monitor  and  conserve  the 
giant panda population and its habitats and to integrate biodiversity 
indicators into the performance system of green city construction are 
being implemented. 

The project has provided critical support to identify and monitor changes 
in environmental conditions in earthquake hit areas  from aquatic 
biodiversity to pollutants to natural vegetation that is the habitat of the 
giant panda. It supported two ecological monitoring stations in the cities 
of Dujiangyan and Mianyang. The project has updated our technology 
and equipment, expanded coverage of field monitoring and improved 
staff expertise and skills in ecological monitoring, confirms Mr. Wu, 
Deputy Director of Dujiangyan City Environmental Monitoring Station 
of Sichuan Province. The data collected by these stations have been 
used by the Government for decision-making in the reconstruction. 

Technical  guidelines  for  ecological  and  environmental  monitoring 
developed  by  the  project  have  been  used  in  Sichuan  and  also  in 
Gansu  Province,  North-west  China  where  another  earthquake  hit 
after Wenchuan.

Rehabilitation actions in 32 nature reserves affected by the earthquake 
have been guided by the Reconstruction Framework for Protected 
Areas developed by the project. The project also developed a plan for 
strengthening protected area management capacity at two national 
nature reserves, which was used to inform revitalisation efforts in other 
earthquake-damaged reserves.

The project has also updated field and office equipment in earthquake-
hit nature reserves. Twenty-one nature reserves were provided with a 
range of equipment, including wildlife-monitoring cameras. Forty infra-
red cameras provided by the project to monitor endangered species 
such as golden monkeys, takins, black bears and wild pigs... provided 
information on their population size and behaviour, which have served 
as important evidence for conservation measures, says Mr. Shen Lim-
ing deputy-director of Tangjiahe Nature Reserve.
 
Community-based Reconstruction Centres for Ecological Civilization in 
five villages established through the project have played an important 
role in helping to support and comfort local farmers who experienced 
the earthquake, raising their awareness around biodiversity conserva-
tion, improving their production techniques and increasing their family 
incomes. For example, farmers from Guanba Village tripled their honey 
production following practical training provided at the centre.

Sichuan Province Environmental Protection Bureau has made budget-
ary provisions to continue to support the affected nature reserves, in-
cluding key giant panda habitat, ensuring the sustainability of this work.

120

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

121

HEALTH & SECURITY

CONSERVING MOTHER 
NATURES MEDICINE 
CABINET IN INDIA

Aspirin derived from willow bark, digitalis from foxgloves, the 

childhood leukemia combatant, viniblastine, born of the Madagascar 
periwinkle  perhaps three of the most frequently cited examples of 
the pharmaceutical treasures unlocked from Mother Natures medicine 
cabinet. But there are thousands, ten thousands more, some already 
discovered, some waiting to be discovered, and more than a few on 
the verge of being forgotten or, due to habitat loss, climate change or 
unsustainable over-exploitation, becoming extinct.

India, where the UNDP, along with the Government of India, with GEF 
support is operating the Mainstreaming Conservation and Sustain-
able Use of Medicinal Plant Diversity in Three Indian States Project, 
is a case in point. 

The value and role of medicinal plants was detailed in the Atharva Veda 
scripts over 3,000 years ago and today, with an 11 percent annual 
global increase in the botanical and plant-derived drugs market, the 
estimated yearly turnover of the herbal industry in India is estimated 
to be Rs 8,800 crore (US$ 17.6 billion). And growing.

Over 90 percent of medicinal plants (MPs) traded in India are gathered 
in the wild, frequently by women and marginalized tribal or caste com-
munities with low incomes and insufficient capacity to sustainably meet 
or cope with the demands of an increasingly demanding mass market.    

The village of Bodmalla lies in Himalayan Uttarakhand State, which 
borders Tibet and Nepal. Uttarakhand, known as The Land of the Gods, 
due to its density of religious sites, is also an area of high biodiversity. 
The UNESCO World Heritage Site, Valley of Flowers National Park, for 
example, contains 520 species of higher plants. Such is the regions 
floral abundance that legislators have christened it the Herbal State.

Bodmalla, is one of the Projects target sites and although small (popu-
lation just 400) it serves as a microcosm of what is happening on a 
much larger scale. Since time immemorial, Bodmalla has depended on 
a shrub; Tejpat to the locals, Indian bay leaf to the layperson, 
Cinnamomum tamala to the botanist. 

Historically the community made and applied its own rules for col-
lection; only one collector per household, leaves to be gathered from 
alternate branches, only twigs to be plucked. But the resulting, moderate 
if sustainable supply, could not meet increased demand. Harvesting 
methods changed. Whole branches were ripped off making the plants 
vulnerable to fungal infection or simply killing them outright. A boom in 
production translated into loss, not just of natural resources, but of the 
harvest. With insufficient capital to invest in correct processing, much 
of the excess tejpat, which is prone to contamination if not correctly 
treated and packaged, spoiled.

Unless we learn to identify and 
document the resources, we cannot 
conserve and manage them,  
Mr. Girish Chandra Gutholiya, Forest 
Guard, Uttarakhand, known as 
The Herbal State.

The Project seeks to reverse this self-defeating trend by employing 
several strategies. Two are aimed directly at Bodmalla and the thou-
sands of other villages like it:

1. Demonstrate replicable models of in-situ and ex-situ MP conservation

2. Promote MP-related cultivation and livelihood generation.

Unless we learn to identify and document the resources, we cannot 
conserve and manage them, says Mr. Girish Chandra Gutholiya, Forest 
Guard, Uttarakhand, known as the Herbal State.

In Bodmalla, this involved gathering a Task Team comprised of State 
Forest Department staff, MP collectors, traditional healers, womens 
groups  (30  percent  involved  in  the  project  are  women)  and  other 
parties  who  were  then  exposed  to  communities  where  sustainable 
MP collection was already being practiced. The visits inspired partici-
pants. Project-supplied uniforms helped provide a sense of identity 
and purpose. Wasteland was converted into tejpat plantations, Task 
Team members compiled accounts of regional floral biodiversity that 
were  subsequently  integrated  into  Peoples  Biodiversity  Registers, 
a bio-resource database that promotes the equitable sharing of re-
source benefits and acts as proof of previous community knowledge 
to prevent bio-piracy.      

It is not only the plants that require protection. Ancestral knowledge 
is equally vulnerable both to exploitation and degeneration as socio-
cultural environments change. Traditional healers and ancient medicinal 
practices are dependent on a ready supply of ingredients and, to this 
end, the project has proactively engaged in direct cooperation such 
as assisting with medicinal plantations, sapling donations and even 
the construction of medicinal plant clinics to enable practitioners to 
keep traditional techniques alive and sustainable. But for permanent 
change, the involvement of government is essential. 

Legal rights to intellectual property (traditional knowledge) are to be 
strengthened through new Project-supported legal initiatives. A report 
on a legal mechanism to protect traditional knowledge related to MP 
cultivation,  harvest  and  sustainable  use  was  submitted  this  year,  in 
addition to a proposed policy framework for a national strategy for the 
conservation and use of medicinal plants.

Modern science and newly direct market linkages forged by the project 
to ensure equitable profit sharing, wedded to traditional knowledge 
and practice make for a formidable alliance. At the request of collec-
tors, the project, in cooperation with the Utterakhand State Medicinal 
Plant Board and the Foundation for the Revitalisation of Local Health 
Traditions, is compiling easy to read materials offering guidance on 
sustainable  collection,  meshing  traditional  practice  with  scientific 
information on tejpat regeneration. Publication is eagerly anticipated 
by locals keen to apply it themselves and the Task Team, eager to roll 
it out to other suffering MP-dependent communities.

Tejpat is currently classified by IUCN as Vulnerable meaning that it is 
likely to become Endangered unless the circumstances threatening its 
survival and reproduction improve. Here in Indias Himalayan Herbal 
State improvement is in the air. The seeds of tejpat sustainability are 
not just being sown but are already growing, ensuring that there will 
be forever green gold in these hills.  

Bartundi/Noni or Indian Mulberry (Morinda citrifolia). Often called Starvation Fruit, it has 
health benefits for cancer, infection, arthritis, asthma, hypertension and pain. 

Foxglove (Digitalis purpruea) is used as a diuretic against 
dropsy. In folk medicine it is used for fever, cold and catarrh. 
Its isolates are used in modern medicine as a heart stimulant. 

Star Anise (Illicium griffithii) is a globally significant medicinal plant found in Northeast-
ern States of India and has anti-bacterial and anti-fungal properties. 

Glory Lily (Gloriosa superba) is used by traditional healers from tribal communities 
across India for wounds, reproductive health 
and rheumatism. 

Illustrations: courtesy of UNDP India

122

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

123

HEALTH & SECURITY

A NATIONAL FRAMEWORK 
FOR SAFE USE 
OF BIOTECHNOLOGY 
IN MALAYSIA

GLOBAL WARNING 
 INVASIVE ALIEN 
SPECIES ARE 
COMING!

Photo:  aodaodaodaod/Shutterstock.com

Since scientists developed the first genetically modified plant in 

the 1980s, modern biotechnology has generated a range of potentially 
useful products  from drought and pest resistant crops to potential 
new medicines and improved fibres and fuels  as well as controversy. 
While advances in biotechnology have great potential use, they must 
be developed and used with adequate safety measures to guard bio-
diversity, the environment and human health. 

The Cartagena Protocol on Biosafety aims to ensure that countries 
safely transport, handle and use living modified organisms (LMOs), 
commonly termed genetically modified organisms (GMOs). The pro-
tocol sets out international standards of regulation to derive maximum 
benefits from biotechnology while also safeguarding biodiversity and 
human health from possible negative effects of LMOs. As an interna-
tional treaty under the Convention on Biological Diversity, countries 
are obliged to implement national legislation in accordance with the 
Protocol. 

UNDP, with GEF finance, has supported Malaysia to implement the 
Protocol. Through this Capacity Building for Implementation of Malay-
sias National Biosafety Framework project, Malaysia has successfully 
created its own fully operational national system to assess, manage 
and monitor the long-term risks posed by LMOs to biodiversity and 
human health. 

Malaysia passed a Biosafety Act in 2007 to ensure its rapidly growing 
biotechnology industry is developed safely and in accordance with the 
Cartagena Protocol. The Department of Biosafety in the Ministry of 
Natural Resource and Environment (NRE) began implementing the 
project with UNDP support soon after. 

The project has seen much success. Biosafety regulatory bodies nec-
essary for administration, risk assessment and management, decision 
making and compliance were established, and their staff trained to 
equip them with the skills needed to carry out their biosafety functions 
with efficiency and confidence. In total, the project built the capacity 
of 351 staff in areas such as regulation, detection and enforcement. 
Top international experts were hired to train staff in state of the art 
practices for GMO detection and mobile detection laboratories were 
provided for use at ports. 

The  regulatory  bodies  established  comprise  Malaysias  national  bi-
osafety framework. As a result of the projects support, these bodies are 
now fully operational and are working together to receive, administer 
and provide assessments and decisions on notifications and approvals 
for LMOs. A range of outreach activities, including workshops, seminars 
and communication materials developed by the project have built public 
awareness  of  biosafety  and  encouraged  stakeholder  participation 
throughout the project. 

Photo: Prashanth Vishwanathan/UNDP India

Water hyacinth (Eichhornia crassipes) an aquatic plant native to the Amazon basin, has done extensive 
damage to wetlands in Nepal, where it is not native and grows rapidly, invading habitats and choking water 
bodies by causing eutrophication that starves native species of oxygen and light.

Invasive alien species (IAS) are now recognized 

as one of the five main drivers of biodiversity loss. Glo-
balisation of trade, travel and transport is accelerating 
the rate at which species can move from the location in 
which they evolved to others, where they are not native 
and can cause significant convulsions. 

UNDP VS. THE ALIENS: 
TWO CASE STUDIES

In  Nepal,  local  communities  have  worked  with 
the  Conservation  and  Sustainable  Use  of  Wetlands 
Communities  project  to  remove  invasive  plants  to 
restore critical wetland areas in the Ghodaghodi Lake 
Area. Importantly, the project also piloted ways for lo-
cal communities to turn the invasive plants collected 
to good use; the pests if properly processed yield fuel, 
rich compost and fibre for making mats and other local 
handicrafts to sell. 

In this instance, the project supported skills training of 
womens groups, and facilitated their access to market, 
in collaboration with private companies, Organic Village 
and Knot Craft. Several trained womens groups have 
formed a cooperative of their own and established a 
small workshop and factory. Female members of the 
cooperative harvest water hyacinth, processing them 
for fibres and dyes, and produce various items in their 
workshop. 

As a result, the income of women and men at the project 
site has significantly increased. The project has also 
piloted the use of water hyacinth to prepare compost 
and mulch and as raw feed material for a biogas plant. 
In addition, the project has developed guidelines for 
management of invasive alien species at wetland sites. 

In  Sri  Lanka,  the Strengthening capacity to 
control the introduction and spread of alien invasive 
species  project  seeks  to  strengthen  policies  and 
legislation  for  effective  IAS  control.  The  project  is 
supporting  the  finalisation  of  Sri  Lankas  National 
IAS Policy and National IAS Strategy and Action Plan 
through stakeholder consultations. Following the prin-
ciple that prevention is better than cure, the project 
aims to enhance integrated management planning and 
action, and institute financial and technical support for 
the prevention, detection, and management of invasive 
alien species. 

124

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

125

HEALTH & SECURITY

REDUCING 
CONFLICT 
BETWEEN 
WILDLIFE AND 
COMMUNITIES

As human populations expand and natural 

habitats shrink, people and animals are increasingly coming into 
conflict  over  living  space  and  food.  From  elephants  destroying 
crops in Nepal to snow leopards killing livestock in Mongolia, human 
wildlife conflict can result in damage to crops, livestock, property 
and sometimes deaths of both people and the animals involved. If 
conservation efforts are to succeed, human wildlife conflicts must 
be  reduced.  Recognising  this,  UNDP  supported  projects  have 
implemented activities to help address this problem. 

In Nepals Western Terai, deforestation and a rising population have 
increasingly brought people into conflict with large mammals, par-
ticularly elephants and one-horned rhinos, in and around the buffer 
zones of Bardia National Park and Sukla Phanta Wildlife Reserve. 
The  UNDP  supported  GEF  financed  Western  Terai  Landscape 
Project  (WTLP)  has  worked  collaboratively  with  local  people  to 
minimise this threat through a number of initiatives. Solar electric 
fences were constructed at critical locations of the buffer zones 
to protect settlements and farms. These fences have reduced the 
vulnerability  of  5,000  households  to  crop  damage  and  human 
injury.  Where  it  was  not  possible  to  build  fences,  watch-towers 
were  constructed  to  help  warn  villagers  of  approaching  rhinos 
and elephants. To provide immediate support for damage already 
caused by wildlife, the project contributed Rs 3.6 million (about US$ 
36,500) to establish a relief fund to help affected communities in 
the protected area buffer zones. 

In addition, natural solutions promoted by the project have helped to 
both mitigate wildlife incursions and improve livelihoods. The project 
supported farmers living in areas close to the protected forested 
areas to cultivate wild mint and camomile. These high value aromatic 
and medicinal plants grow well in the region and act as a natural 
deterrent  rhinos dislike the smell of the plants, which prevents 
them from eating them and deters them from entering settlements 
and  farmlands  beyond.  The  project  provided  high  quality  seeds, 
technical knowledge, and herb processing and marketing support 
to 995 farmers to cultivate wild mint and camomile in over 100 
hectares of land in 2011. From these crops, the farmers yielded 
2,800 kilogrammes of essential oil, which they were able to sell for 
Rs. 1,200 (US$ 12) per kilogramme of wild mint oil and Rs 23,000 
(US$ 233) per kilogramme of camomile oil.

Human casualty data from Bardia National Park and Shuklaphanta 
Wildlife  Reserve  Data  show  that  the  number  of  injuries  caused  by 
wildlife  declined  between  2008  and  2012.  As  damage  caused  by 
wildlife has declined and local people have seen improvements through 
project support, the project reports that local support for protected 
areas has increased.  

In  Mongolia,  training  and  supporting  local  communities  to  become 
responsible for wildlife monitoring and management has also helped to 
reduce conflict among wildlife and people. Training in wildlife identifica-
tion and monitoring provided by the UNDP supported GEF financed 
Altai Sayan project to herders in Mongolias Altai Mountains has helped 
this community to avoid human wildlife conflict. This training enabled 
the community to better predict attacks on livestock by wildlife, such 
as snow leopards, and take precautionary measures.

Human wildlife conflict is a major challenge in Bhutan, where large 
animals live in close proximity to rural communities. To address Bhu-
tanese  farmers  concerns  over  this,  Bhutans  Nature  Conservation 
Division of the Department of Forests developed a National Human-
Wildlife Conflict Management Strategy. The strategy was developed 
through the support of UNDP Bhutan, WWF Bhutan and the Bhutan 
Trust Fund for Environmental Conservation, and provides a concrete 
basis to understand and mitigate human-wildlife conflicts in Bhutan 
focused on human welfare and poverty alleviation.

The  National  Strategy  addresses  both  crosscutting  and  species-
specific issues, proposing actions to address conflict between humans 
and carnivores (large cats, bears, dholes), wild pigs, deer, elephants 
and primates. It gathered inputs from a range of stakeholders and 80 
national and international experts to analyse the root causes of human-
wildlife conflicts and potential solutions to address them.

Based on these analyses, it proposes concrete action plans, such as 
improving herd management to reduce the vulnerability of livestock to 
kills by predators, community compensation and insurance programmes 
and implementing monitoring programmes to understand and mitigate 
conflict hotspots. The National Strategy provides a critical guide for 
action by managers, researchers, and communities to work towards 
alleviating poverty and improving livelihoods for rural Bhutanese while 
protecting the mega-fauna that characterize this Kingdom.

Photo: M. Balan

126

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

127

HAPPINESS 

& LOVE

From sacred mountains in Bhutan to sacred 
groves in India. From marine waters protected 
by traditional tabu rules in Fiji to the bright 
and colourful bird of paradise plumes worn by 
tribesmen in Papua New Guinea, the natural 
world has held strong spiritual and cultural 
significance for people all over the region for 
millennia. Our natural wonders and heritage 
provide many intangible but valuable benefits 
to humanity, including recreation, tourism, ed-
ucation, enjoyment and mental wellbeing. Our 
relationship with these wonders is particularly 
relevant in a rapidly changing world, where 
communities, including indigenous peoples, 
face profound, rapid and apparently continu-
ous changes to their societies and circumstanc-
es. This is leading in many places to the erosion 
of the values and institutions that provide social 
cohesion, adaptability and resilience. Driven 
by the priorities of countries and communities, 
UNDPs work aims to strengthen the capacity of 
people to recognize and respond to this change 
while conserving and sustainably using the 
biodiversity and ecosystems that we all de-
pend on.

Photo: Jesse Montes

HAPPINESS & LOVE

CULTURE, LIVELIHOODS, 
AND NATURE (CLAN): 
TIBETS JEWELS OF 
THE LAND

Photo: Marc Foggin

130

Tibetan nomadic pastoralists have lived in the extensive 

rangelands and mountain areas north of the Himalayas for millen-
nia, depending largely on their domestic yak and sheep for their 
livelihoods. 

With average elevations over 4000 metres above sea level, the 
Tibetan plateau is known for its harsh and unpredictable environ-
ment. The vegetative growing season is short and snow-storms can 
devastate herds of animals, both domestic and wild; in fact, snow 
can cover the grasslands during any month of the year. Yet this 
place is still known and valued as home by many Tibetan herding 
communities.

The Tibetan plateau also is home to a wide array of native ungulates 
and other wildlife, including the wild yak, white-lipped deer, kiang (or 
wild ass), Tibetan antelope, Tibetan gazelle, blue sheep and argali, as 
well as the Endangered snow leopard, Pallas cat, musk deer, black-
necked crane, saker falcon and many other species of local, national 
and global interest. The biodiversity of the Tibetan plateau is both a 
wonder to cherish and a global asset to preserve.

For the yak and shepherds living on the plateau, this extraordinary 
biodiversity has also long been a part of their cultural heritage. Their 
lives and livelihoods  and their identity  are intimately tied to the 
environment on which they depend. As such, the maintenance of 
proper ecological functioning in their grasslands and wetlands is not 
optional; it is vital.

The yak is essential for the survival of communities in the Tibetan 
plateau environment. Yaks provide milk, which can be drunk or 
transformed into butter or cheese. Yaks also are source of wool for 
making tents, fuel (yak dung), transportation, and ultimately meat. 
Without the yak, nomads would never be able to adapt to the condi-
tions of the high plateau. The wildlife is equally central in herders 
culture, as they feel that animals are like the jewels of the land and 
without them there would be a sense of sorrow and loss.

If sustainable development is meant to achieve wellbeing for people, 
then culture  which develops from the long-term sharing of 
experiences and represents the soul of a community  must also 
be considered integrally with other pillars of sustainability, including 
economy and environment.

In the case of Tibetan nomadic pastoralists, peoples livelihoods and 
their relationships with the natural environment have formed much 

of their sense of identity. By starting with community and culture 
when designing and planning initiatives for sustainable development 
 rather than simply applying development models or conservation 
models that generally assume only market-driven motivations by lo-
cal people  new synergies and pathways could emerge to support 
effective natural resource management.

Studies show that many factors bring us happiness and wellbeing 
 a sustainable livelihood combined with good health and educa-
tion, adequate living standards, involvement in decision-making and 
community, care of the environment, and cultural continuity are key. 
According to Bhutans innovative Gross National Happiness (GNH) 
Index, maintaining ecological diversity and resilience is central to 
happiness and wellbeing.

People-centred approaches to wildlife and nature conservation and 
management are already taking place in the Sanjiangyuan area 
of Qinghai Province, China, through the introduction of collabora-
tive forms of natural resource management and more generally by 
strengthening local governance. Greater participation and owner-
ship by local communities in the management of the provincial level 
protected areas system is proving very successful.

Building on a variety of grassroots projects and provincial govern-
ment initiatives, UNDP with support from GEF has recently com-
menced a large scale project entitled Strengthening the Effective-
ness of the Protected Areas System in Qinghai, China to conserve 
globally significant biodiversity. Executed by the provincial Forestry 
Department, the project specifically seeks to strengthen the pro-
tected areas system to safeguard globally significant biodiversity. 

Through enhanced management effectiveness, the protected area 
system will be able to better protect rare and threatened species as 
well as maintain healthy grasslands and wetlands, which are impor-
tant both for local resource users and for mitigating climate change 
through carbon sequestration. Piloting new models of co-manage-
ment of the protected area system, the project aims to mainstream 
biodiversity and ecosystem priorities into development and sector 
planning frameworks while strengthening critical institutional and 
management capacity. By incorporating culture and livelihoods 
into dialogue with local communities, more effective management 
and more equitable distribution of benefits from biodiversity and its 
sustainable use are envisaged.

By J Marc Foggin, Senior Research Scientist Mountain 
Societies Research Institute University of Central Asia 
Kyrgyzstan

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

131

HAPPINESS & LOVE

BIODIVERSITY 
AND ECOSYSTEMS: 
ESSENTIAL 
INGREDIENTS 
FOR HAPPINESS 

Some people use Gross National 

Products (GNPs) or Gross Domestic Products 
(GDPs)  (or  both),  but  in  Bhutan  they  have 
dispensed with that sort of thing; this small but 
beautiful and tradition-loving Himalayan nation 
is going for Gross National Happiness (GNH). 

The philosophy of GNH was formulated in 1972 
by  the  Fourth  Dragon  King    Jigme  Singye 
Wangchuck, and it rests on four pillars: promo-
tion of sustainable development; preservation 
and promotion of cultural values; conservation 
of the natural environment; and the establish-
ment of good governance. In keeping with these 
lofty goals and principles, the conservation of 
its globally significant genetic resources is a 
key priority of the Government of Bhutan today. 
Dr. Tashi Yangzome, Programme Director of the 
National Biodiversity Centre (NBC), speaks of 
this approach with a characteristically friendly 
Bhutanese smile on her face.

A  vet  by  background,  Yangzome  joined  the 
NBC    a  Centre  mandated  to  coordinate 
biodiversity  conservation  and  sustainable 
utilisation  activities  in  the  country    in  2007. 
Yangzome describes her years in practice as 
most fulfilling and her current work at NBC 
as  both  challenging  and  rewarding.  Her 
principle  motivating  factors,  she  explains  are 
the compassionate leadership of our beloved 
Kings and the strong conservation ideals that 
Bhutan upholds. The thing that excites her most 
is working hard towards an inclusive, people-
centric conservation approach. 

With her dedicated team at NBC, Yangzome 
is currently working on a bio-exploration pro-
gramme to generate revenue from conservation 
for  conservation;  implementation  of  the  Na-
goya Protocol on Access and Benefit-Sharing; 
integrated  ex  situ  and  in  situ  conservation 

132

programmes  to  benefit  farmers  as  well  as 
researchers; and establishing a science-based 
information and knowledge base that can be 
translated into policy decisions.

One intriguing project in progress is the Bhutan 
Biodiversity  Portal    a  consortium  of  differ-
ent  biodiversity  stakeholders  in  the  country 
 that aims to create a common platform for 
biodiversity-related information.

Yangzome  was  also  instrumental  in  the  im-
plementation  of  the  UNDP  supported  GEF 
financed  Integrated  Livestock  and  Crop 
Conservation  project,  which  supported  con-
servation  of  traditional  crops  and  livestock 
breeds  through  an  holistic  approach,  as  well 
as mainstreaming agro-biodiversity conserva-
tion into national policies and programmes. It 
broadened the outreach of the centre in terms 
of advocacy and education on agro-biodiversity 
conservation  by  enabling  the  participation  of 
farmers from all parts of the country.

Yangzome says with confidence that there is 
certainly strong support for maintaining the rich 
agro-biodiversity  of  Bhutan  since  it  features 
in  draft  policies  on  livestock  and  agriculture 
as well as in food and nutrition security policy.

With  the  support  of  UNDP,  Bhutan  has  also 
been  able  to  access  US$  1  million  through 
GEF for an Access and Benefit Sharing project. 
Among other objectives, the project will seek 
to spearhead a bio-exploration programme in 
Bhutan  and  generate  better  understanding 
of  the  valuation  of  the  countrys  biological 
resources.

Most  importantly,  Yangzome  hopes  that  this 
project will result in tangible benefits through 
the  strong  involvement  of  local  communities 

and create a vibrant conservation model where 
benefits are ploughed back into communities. 
Yangzome says that she is committed to devel-
oping an ABS landscape that will benefit not 
only Bhutan but also other countries that are 
seeking to do the same.

When asked about the highlight of her career, 
she  says:  The  most  satisfying  moments  are 
working with the excellent and committed team 
at NBC on strengthening biodiversity conserva-
tion and sustainable utilisation in the country. 
It has also been immensely gratifying to meet 
people from the global family who have helped 
us  with  their  expertise,  knowledge  and  who 
have shown such good-will towards my country.

The challenge that we would like to overcome 
is how to sustain our agro-biodiversity in the 
wake  of  emerging  pressures,  such  as  lack 
of farm labour, rural-urban migration, human-
wildlife  conflict,  and  rapid  urbanisation.  The 
greatest challenge, however, is to build a strong 
scientific  community  that  will  generate  data 
that  can  be  used  in  conservation  strategies 
and policy decisions. 

One key advantage of her work on biodiversity 
conservation is that the country still has large 
swathes of intact biodiversity. Bhutan publicly 
aspires to become the worlds first totally or-
ganic nation and the constitution upholds the 
maintenance of at least 60 percent of the total 
land under forest cover at all time. The figure 
currently  stands  at  just  over  70  percent  and 
this,  combined  with  spectacular  topography 
ranging from sub-tropical jungle in the lowland 
hills  to  permanent  polar-type  environments 
in the snow bound peaks over 7,000 metres 
above sea level, ensures that Bhutan, despite 
its modest size, is a treasure trove of biodiversity 
in the region. 

Close to 200 species of mammals are known 
to occur in the country, including 27 globally 
threatened species. Bhutan is also known to 
be rich in wild cats, harbouring 11 of the 36 
species  globally  recorded.  The  remarkable 
sighting of a Royal Bengal tiger at an altitude 
of  4,200  metres  above  sea  level,  in  Jigme 
Dorji  National  Park,  was  the  highest  altitude 
tiger sighting recorded among the tiger range 
countries. Bhutan is home to about 700 species 
of bird, including 18 globally threatened species.

She attributes this natural wealth to the con-
servation leadership of the Kings combined with 
political will, and a strong policy and legislative 
framework  which  provides  an  enabling  envi-
ronment  and  engenders  strong  commitment 
to ensure that it remains so. Yangzome says 
that  the  greatest  inspiration  on  biodiversity 
conservation  comes  from  the  words  of  the 
4th  Dragon  King  who  said:  Throughout  the 
centuries, the Bhutanese have treasured their 
natural environment and have looked upon it as 
the source of all life. This traditional reverence 
for nature has delivered us into the new millen-
nium with our environment still richly intact. We 
wish to continue living in harmony with nature 
and to pass on this rich heritage to our future 
generations. 

This  is  the  conservation  anthem  for  every 
Bhutanese citizen. Yangzome sings it with pride, 
determination and, yes, happiness!

Dr. Tashi Yangzome, Programme Director 
of the National Biodiversity Centre
Photo:  Midori Paxton

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

133

HAPPINESS & LOVE

TIGER MAN 
OF MALAYSIA!

Dr. Sivananthan Elaqupillay, Director at the Federal Department of 
Wildlife and National Parks and the National Project Director of the 
UNDP supported GEF financed Protected Area Financing project
Photo: Midori Paxton

The 4.5 million hectare Central Forest Spine (CFS) in 

Peninsular Malaysia is the last remaining habitat of Malayan tigers, a 
Critically Endangered species. Only an estimated 500 are left in the 
wild. Going...going...but not gone. Thanks in large part to Malaysias 
very own Tiger Man  Dr. Sivananthan Elaqupillay!

Dr. Sivas first field sites were a government-run cattle ranch in Pahang 
State and another at Tanjong Malim in Perak State. The year was 1982 
and his role was the species monitoring and research officer of the 
Department of Wildlife and National Parks (DWNP). My job, he explains 
was tracking tigers and reducing the number of cattle killed by tigers.

Siva had a local interest at heart. I considered this work as a contribu-
tion to my community, as Tanjong Malim is my hometown, says Siva, 
currently a Director at the Federal DWNP and the National Project 
Director  of  the  UNDP  supported  GEF  financed  Protected  Area 
Financing project.

In  the  1980s,  deforestation  characterized  these  areas  leaving  only 
pockets of forest remaining  each harbouring tigers and panthers  
preying on easy meals of cattle. Over 300-400 head of livestock were 
lost per year in Perak and Pahang states. Siva, with the consent of the 
Director General of DWNP and farm managers, deployed field rangers, 
developed monitoring mechanisms, advised improvements to fencing, 
moved cattle away from the forest edge and captured problem tigers 
for relocation away from settlements.

Siva is now known as the Tiger Man in Malaysia. He has been ap-
pointed by the Director General of DWNP to represent the country 
in regional and global fora for tiger conservation and heads various 
initiatives towards the national target of doubling the tiger population 
in Malaysia. He is also renowned as the Protected Area Man due to 
the wealth of knowledge and experience he has accumulated over the 
30 years of his career in the Department and through his academic 
studies, which unearthed a large number of previously unknown facts 
about the countrys protected areas. 

Prior to 1996, there were only about 10 protected areas in Peninsular 

Malaysia that were thought to be under the jurisdiction of the Federal 
Government for biodiversity conservation. Through the mandate given 
to him by the DWNP to head several protected area related projects, 
especially his research of national archives as part of the Protected 
Area Master Plan project in 1996, he revealed that there were indeed 
many more protected areas that were previously designated. But these 
had been somehow forgotten during the pre-Independence era and the 
reclassification of many of the forested and protected areas as security 
areas in the 1990s due to the communist insurgency in the country.

As a result, 40 designated protected areas covering an area of more 
than 750,000 hectares were rediscovered as already gazetted. His pas-
sion for protected area conservation led to the DWNP recommending 
Siva to pursue a PhD in the United States supported by a Malaysian 
Government scholarship.

He sees his appointment by the Government to head the Protected 
Areas Financing project, which started in 2012, as an unparalleled op-
portunity to assist the DWNP and other stakeholders to train younger 
officers to work to further improve the management effectiveness of 
the protected areas system in Peninsular Malaysia.

This project will soon be complemented by another  the Improving 
the Connectivity in the Central Forest Spine project  that starts in 
2014 under the Forestry Department to create connectivity between 
forest blocks, he says. This will link critical habitat for large migratory 
mammals, such as the Malayan tiger and Asian elephant, and will help 
to preserve critical water catchments.

Tigers feature prominently in Malaysia and in local Malay folklore. Two 
of these big cats are even part of the national emblem, depicting the 
symbol of strength. The tiger is the name of the national football team 
and the logo of a leading bank. The Hindu Goddess Durga rides on a 
tiger with unlimited power, using it to protect virtue and destroy evil. 
The tiger is in the heart of Malaysias natural and cultural heritage, 
says  Siva.  I  am  confident  that  Malaysians  will  give  their  unlimited 
support  to  save  our  national  heritage.  Protected  Areas  sustain  our 
lives and our country.

134

Photo: GEF SGP Fiji

COMMUNITY-LED 
CONSERVATION 
OF FOREST 
BIODIVERSITY IN 
FIJI

Fijis Korolevuwai district is home to Biausevu village 

with  approximately  200  hundred  residents.  Since  the 
mid-1980s, the village has been offering tourists a short 
walking tour to a nearby waterfall. Over time, this initiative 
began showing signs of becoming a classic case of natural 
capital being loved to death.

The area is an important forest and water ecosystem envi-
ronment for the island, but the track that crosses the creek 
nine times has caused vegetation loss and major erosion 
around flood-prone areas. The riverbanks were being trod-
den under well-meaning ecotourist feet, furthering erosion 
already begun by the loss of tree species along the path 
and more trees being cleared in the vicinity, ironically for 
eco-tourism development. The landscape was becoming 
increasingly stressed, barren and tired.

The Global Environment Facilitys Small Grants Programme 
(known as GEF SGP), implemented by UNDP, awards small 
grants  to  prevent  small  problems  from  growing  bigger. 
In this case, a small grant helped the Biausevu Tourism 
Committee improve the environmental management of the 
Biausevu Waterfall Tour and develop a more sustainable 
approach to managing tourism in sensitive areas.

Key activities included helping the community to identify 
the effects of logging on waterfall and creek water qual-
ity, raising their awareness of the biodiversity in the area, 
and developing a strategy to manage and minimize future 
damage on the ecosystem.
 
In  particular,  the  Biasevu  Tourism  Committee  received 
training  at  the  University  of  the  South  Pacific  (USP) 
and  the  Department  of  Forestry  (DoF)  on  sustainable 
environmental management practices and participated in 
knowledge  exchanges  on  sustainable  forestry  manage-
ment and rehabilitation, forest-based ecotourism, and best 
practice on governance for resource owners. The project 

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

135

HAPPINESS & LOVE

WITH THE ECO-NATURAL DYES 
PROGRAMME FROM THE SMALL 
GRANTS PROGRAMME, WE LEARNED 
THAT THE MAHOGANY AND 
JACKFRUIT TREES THAT GROW 
IN OUR VILLAGE ALSO HAVE 
ECONOMIC VALUE AND THAT 
WE CAN PROTECT THEM BY NOT 
CUTTING THEM DOWN AND ONLY 
TAKING THE TREE BARK AND LEAVES 
FOR BATIK DYE. 
AMBAR, BENDOSARI, SGP GRANTEE 
FROM INDONESIA

Photo: Terence Hay-Edie

also developed an Environmental Management Plan and organized 
community workshops to ensure implementation of these practices.

To tackle soil erosion and divert water away from the track and back 
into the stream, the project constructed a more sophisticated drain-
age system led by the DoF, and planted over 700 native tree and plant 
species beside the creek and waterfall to minimize water pollution. 

The results are encouraging, not just in terms of securing a valuable 
natural asset, but also by yielding other benefits. Following knowledge 
transfer between experts and the community, the project has helped 
recover  and  revive  traditional  knowledge  on  medicinal  plants  and 
sustainable  use  of  native  plant  species.  It  has  promoted  intergen-
erational communication by encouraging youths to work side by side 
with village elders. 

In  addition,  the  USP  Herbarium  Department  has  documented  wild 
plants living along the track. Visitors can not only learn about the im-
portance of the wildlife and vegetation of the area, but also participate 
in tree planting activities along the path.

The project also started a series of activities to promote sustainable 
alternative  livelihoods  to  alleviate  pressure  the  area  from  tourism, 
including  the  production  of  handicrafts  and  food  for  sale  by  local 
women and training of community members as tour guides. To date, 
the project has generated over 100 jobs including forest tour guides, 
waterfall  attendants,  nursery  attendants,  storytellers,  caterers,  tour 
coordinators and handicraft sellers. 

Most importantly, the GEF SGP project has worked with the local au-
thorities to impose a capacity limit on the number of people accessing 
the track per week to mitigate adverse environmental impacts caused 
by the excessive trampling of overcrowded tours. 

GEF SMALL GRANTS PROGRAMME: LOCAL ACTION, GLOBAL IMPACT
Launched in 1992, GEF SGP supports activities of non governmental and community-based organizations in developing coun-
tries towards climate change abatement, conservation of biodiversity, protection of international waters, reduction of the impact 
of persistent organic pollutants and prevention of land degradation while generating sustainable livelihoods. Since its creation, 
GEF SGP has provided over 18,500 grants to communities in over 128 developing countries. Funded by the Global Environment 
Facility (GEF) as a corporate programme, GEF SGP is implemented by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) 
on behalf of the GEF partnership, and is executed by the United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS).

GEF SGP has been supporting communities as champions of biodiversity conservation since its launch. Nearly 8,000 GEF SGP 
grants for biodiversity conservation awarded globally since 1992 have contributed significantly to protected area management, 
reduction of threats to threatened species, improved environmental governance, sustainable natural resource management, and 
the conservation and sustainable use of agro-biodiversity. GEF SGPs cumulative experience and results have demonstrated 
that supporting communities in their efforts to achieve more sustainable livelihoods is not only possible, but necessary to achieve 
global environmental benefits. 

136

THE SMALL GRANTS PROGRAMME 
HAS SUPPORTED US TO RESTORE 
THE WETLAND AND HELP MORE 
WOUNDED WHOOPER SWANS AND 
OTHER MIGRANT BIRDS TO RETURN 
TO BLUE SKY. 
MR. YUAN XUESHUN, 
WEIHAI WHOOPER SWAN 
PROTECTION ASSOCIATION, 
SGP GRANTEE FROM CHINA

THE SMALL GRANTS PROGRAMME HAS 
HELPED PROMOTE ENVIRONMENTALLY,  
SOCIALLY AND ECONOMICALLY-FRIEND-
LIER SUSTAINABLE AGRICULTURE, WHILE 
ENHANCING THE CONSERVATION AND 
SUSTAINABLE USE OF AGRO-BIODIVERSITY. 
THROUGH THE USE OF COMPOST AS A 
GROWTH ENHANCER, THE PRODUCE IS 
ABLE TO GROW TO ITS FULL POTENTIAL. 
VENKATA SUBBAROW NARAYANAN, CAP 
EDUCATION OFFICER, SGP GRANTEE FROM 
MALAYSIA

Photos: GEF SGP

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

137

ECOSYSTEMS QUIZ
1 2

WHAT PROPORTION OF THE 
WORLDS POPULATION DO THE 
RIVERS AND WETLANDS THAT 
ORIGINATE ON THE TIBETAN 
PLATEAU SUPPLY WITH WATER? 

HOW MUCH ARE INSECTS AND 
OTHER POLLINATORS ESTIMATED 
TO BE WORTH TO THE GLOBAL 
FOOD ECONOMY PER YEAR? A) USD 
200 MILLION, B) USD 2 BILLION, C) 
USD 200 BILLION?

WHAT IS THIS LAKE IN ASIA? 
HOW MANY PEOPLE LIVE IN AND 
AROUND THE LAKE? 

4

WHAT PROPORTION OF THE GLOBAL 
POPULATION RELIES ON FISH AS A 
MAJOR SOURCE OF PROTEIN?

ABOUT WHAT PERCENTAGE OF THE 
DRUGS USED IN THE USA TODAY 
ARE OF NATURAL ORIGIN?

3

6

WHAT PROPORTION OF THE 
WORLDS POOR PEOPLE LIVE IN 
RURAL AREAS AND DEPEND 
DIRECTLY ON BIODIVERSITY FOR 
THEIR LIVELIHOODS AND 
SURVIVAL?

5

THE ASIA PACIFIC REGION 
INCLUDES A CENTRE OF 
DIVERSITY OF WHICH OF THESE 
IMPORTANT SPECIES OF CROPS: 
RICE, EGGPLANT, SOYBEAN, 
BANANA, COCONUT? 

8

9

7

HOW MUCH ARE TOTAL GLOBAL 
ECOSYSTEM SERVICES IN 2011 
ESTIMATED TO BE WORTH?

HOW MANY NEW SPECIES ARE 
DESCRIBED EACH YEAR ON 
AVERAGE? A) 62; B) 620; C) 6,200

Ecosystems quiz photos: Luciano Mortula/Shutterstock.com; Marc Foggin; Sarah Valenti; Doungjun Roongruang; Worraket/Shutterstock.com; Kitsadakron  
Photography/Shutterstock.com; UNDP India; Bildagentur Zoonar GmbH/Shutterstock.com; Nathan B Dappen/Shutterstock.com. 

86 percent of existing species on Earth and 91 percent of species in the ocean still await description. 

of taxonomic classification and over 1.2 million species already catalogued in a central database, one estimate suggests that some 
according to one estimate.  9. C: At current rates, an average of 6,200 new species are described each year. In spite of 250 years 
market in the United States are based on plants or other natural products. 8. USD 125 trillion per year to USD 145 trillion per year 

depend directly on biodiversity for their livelihoods and survival.  7. Studies show that more than 50 percent of the drugs on the 
billion USD.  4. About 41 per cent of the worlds population. 5. All of them. 6. 70 per cent of the worlds poor live in rural areas and 
since its fisheries provide 80 percent of the protein consumed within the country.  2. One-third of the worlds population.  3. C: 200 
sition area  Some sixty floating villages are found on the lake. This area is vital for the economy and nutrition of Cambodian people, 
1 Tonle Sap Lake in Cambodia. More than 1,000,000 people live in this UNESCO Biosphere Reserve, mainly in the buffer and tran-

138

ANSWERS

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We would like to thank and recognise the many project teams and partners who 
have contributed to the projects profiled in this publication and to the publication 
itself, and to thank the Global Environment Facility (www.thegef.org). 

This book is the result of dedicated work by many people. We are very grateful to 
the photographers for contributing their beautiful photos. Thank you to everyone 
who provided material, information and advice to support the publication, including: 
Katarina Atalifo-Malo, Lat Lat Aye, Ankhbayer B, Oyuntulkhuur Bandi, Marta Barai-
bar, Bunchingiv Bazartseren, Timothy Boyle, Tan Cheng Cheng, Norng Chinda, Marita 
Cisneros, Supaporn Daophises, Adriana Dinu, Tashi Dorji, Sivananthan Elaqupillay, 
Floradema Eleazar, Thomas Enters, Jamison Ervin, Marc Foggin, Pek Chuan Gan, 
Janette Garcia, Carsten Germer, Mahtab Haider, Cherie Hart, Terence Hay-Edie, 
Alamgir Hossain, Aminath Ibrahim, Srinivasan Iyer, Gulnajam Jamy, Ashish John, 
Gordon Johnson, Houman Jowkar, Chimeg Junai, Mehdi Kamyab, Nagulendran 
Kangayatkarasu, Sameer Karki, Asfaazam Kasbani, Vijay Prasad Kesari, Akihito 
Kono,  Pramod  Krishnan,  Iwan  Kurniawan,  Chaode  Ma,  Henrieta  Martonakova, 
Vinamra Mathur, Sovanna Nhem, Karen Nielsen, Htun Paw Oo, Ruchi Pant, Charles 
Paxton, Kimberly Paxton, Karma Rapten, Caroline Petersen, Chaode Ma, Norzilla 
Mohamed,  Mike  Moser,  Ali  Nazaridoust,  Keiko  Nomura,  Hari  Ramalu  Ragavan,  
Saeful Rachman, Floyd Robinson, Doungjun Roongruang, Prashanthi S, Joel Scriven, 
Nik Sekhran, Leylanaz Shajii, Darshan Shankar, Mr Song, Chhum Sovanny, P.S. 
Sodhi, Paul Steele, Grace Tena, Saw Doh Wah, Sonam Wang, Sonam Wangchuk, 
Shimpy Wadhwa, Yoko Watanabe, Mina Weydahl, Tashi Yangzome, Celina Yong. 
We are very grateful to Cathy Maize, Wallaya Pinprayoon, Noparat Uathamthaworn 
and Sirintharat Wannawong for support. The compilers and contributors are deeply 
grateful to all those who have contributed to the achievements of UNDP supported 
GEF financed projects in Asia and the Pacific. 

Biodiversity for Sustainable Development

139

THEME INTRODUCTION PHOTOS:

Home: Travelling nomads and their yak herd criss-cross the hills of the Sanjiangyuan National Nature Reserve on 
the Tibetan Plateau, China. Nomadic herders have lived in the high mountain landscapes of Central and North Asia 
for millennia, relying on pasture to graze their livestock for their main livelihood. Photo: Kieran Dodds.
 
Food and Water: Traditional Intha fisherman, Inle Lake, Myanmar. Photo: happystock/Shutterstock.com.
 
Work and Money: Women of the stilt village in Kompong Phluk on the Tonle Sap lake in Cambodia generate 
household income from guiding tourists through the flooded forest. Photo: Midori Paxton.
 
Health and Security: Women clearing invasive water hyacinth in Jeypore village, coastal Odisha, India. Water 
hyacinth contaminates water, reduces soil fertility, spreads diseases and blocks waterways and causes water logging. 
Twice a month, 70 women volunteers clean out the water hyacinth that grows in water bodies in Jeypore village. As a 
result of their efforts, the water quality has improved. Today, the villagers use the pond for duck farming, and fishing. 
Photo: Prasanth Vishwanathan/UNDP India.
 
Happiness and Love: Prayer flags rustle in the breeze above Phajoding Monastery on the outskirts of Jigme 
Dorji National Park, Bhutan. For centuries a strong religious and cultural ethos based on Buddhism and respect for 
all forms of life has provided a safe refuge for the extraordinary biodiversity found within this Himalayan Kingdom. 
Photo: Jesse Montes.

Cover photo: Sylvia sooyoN/Shutterstock.com. Bajau people in Semporna, Sabah, Malaysia. For most of their history 
the Bajau people, an indigenous group of the Southeast Asian seas, have lived a nomadic life at sea.
 
Published by the Asia-Pacific Regional Centre
United Nations Development Programme
Bangkok
Thailand
 
Compilation and editing: Midori Paxton, Sarah Valenti, Hugh Gordon and Penny Stock.
 
Contributors: Ana Maria Currea, Joseph DCruz, Marc Foggin, Sutharin Koonphol, Gary Lewis, Karma Lodey Rapten, 
Jessie Mee, Johan Robinson, Nik Sekhran, Doley Tshering.
 
Design: Bleho Media
 
Printing: Clung Wicha Press
 
Citation: UNDP. 2014. Biodiversity for Sustainable Development: Delivering Results for Asia and the Pacific.
 
ISBN: 
 
Copyright  UNDP, October, 2014
 
All rights reserved. This publication or parts of it may not be reproduced, stored by means of any system or transmitted, 
in any form or by any medium, whether electronic mechanical, photocopied, recorded or of any other type, without the 
prior permission of the United Nations Development Programme. 

140

Photo:  Andy Luck

