Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

Overview

Many forms of atmospheric pollution affect human health
and the environment at levels from local to global. These
contaminants are emitted from diverse sources, and some
of them react together to form new compounds in the air.
Industrialized nations have made important progress toward
controlling some pollutants in recent decades, but air quality
is much worse in many developing countries, and global
circulation patterns can transport some types of pollution
rapidly around the world. In this unit, discover the basic
chemistry of atmospheric pollution and learn which human
activities have the greatest impacts on air quality.

Air pollution. Source: National Park Service

Sections:
1. Introduction
2. Chemicals in Motion
3. Primary Air Pollutants
4. Secondary Air Pollutants
5. Aerosols
6. Smog
7. Acid Deposition
8. Mercury Deposition
9. Controlling Air Pollution
10. Stratospheric Ozone
11. Air Pollution, Greenhouse Gases, and Climate Change
12. Major Laws and Treaties
13. Further Reading

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-1-

www.learner.org

1. Introduction
The first week of December 1952 was unusually cold in London, so residents burned large quantities
of coal in their fireplaces to keep warm. Early on December 5, moisture in the air began condensing
into fog near the ground. The fog mixed with smoke from domestic fires and emissions from factories
and diesel-powered buses. Normally the fog would have risen higher in the atmosphere and
dispersed, but cold air kept it trapped near the ground. Over the next four days, the smog became so
thick and dense that many parts of London were brought to a standstill.
Public officials did not realize that the Great Smog was the most deadly air pollution event on record
until mortality figures were published several weeks afterward. Some 4,000 people died in London
between December 5-9 of illnesses linked to respiratory problems such as bronchitis and pneumonia,
and the smog's effects caused another 8,000 deaths over the next several months. Samples showed
that victims' lungs contained high levels of very fine particles, including carbon material and heavy
metals such as lead, zinc, tin, and iron.
Air pollution was not news in 1952London's air had been famously smoky for centuriesbut the
Great Smog showed that it could be deadly. The event spurred some of the first governmental actions
to reduce emissions from fuel combustion, industrial operations, and other manmade sources.
Over the past half-century, scientists have learned much more about the causes and impacts of
atmospheric pollution. Many nations have greatly reduced their emissions, but the problem is far from
solved. In addition to threatening human health, air pollutants damage ecosystems, weaken Earth's
stratospheric ozone shield, and contribute to global climate change (Fig. 1).

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-2-

www.learner.org

Figure 1. Air pollution on the Autobaun in Germany, 2005

Courtesy Zakysant. Wikimedia Commons, GNU Free Documentation License.

Understanding of pollutants is still evolving, but we have learned enough to develop emission control
policies that can limit their harmful effects. Some major pollutants contribute to both air pollution and
global climate change, so reducing these emissions has the potential to deliver significant benefits.
To integrate air pollution and climate change strategies effectively, policy makers need extensive
information about key pollutants and their interactions.
This unit describes the most important types of pollutants affecting air quality and the environment. It
also summarizes some widely used technical and policy options for controlling atmospheric pollution,
and briefly describes important laws and treaties that regulate air emissions. For background on
the structure and composition of the atmosphere and atmospheric circulation patterns, see Unit 2,
"Atmosphere"; for more on global climate change, especially the role of CO2, see Unit 2 and Unit 12,
"Earth's Changing Climate."

2. Chemicals in Motion
The science of air pollution centers on measuring, tracking, and predicting concentrations of key
chemicals in the atmosphere. Four types of processes affect air pollution levels (Fig. 2):

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-3-

www.learner.org

 Emissions. Chemicals are emitted to the atmosphere by a range of sources. Anthropogenic

emissions come from human activities, such as burning fossil fuel. Biogenic emissions are
produced by natural functions of biological organisms, such as microbial breakdown of
organic materials. Emissions can also come from nonliving natural sources, most notably
volcanic eruptions and desert dust.

 Chemistry. Many types of chemical reactions in the atmosphere create, modify, and destroy

chemical pollutants. These processes are discussed in the following sections.

 Transport. Winds can carry pollutants far from their sources, so that emissions in one
region cause environmental impacts far away. Long-range transport complicates efforts
to control air pollution because it can be hard to distinguish effects caused by local versus
distant sources and to determine who should bear the costs of reducing emissions.

 Deposition. Materials in the atmosphere return to Earth, either because they are directly
absorbed or taken up in a chemical reaction (such as photosynthesis) or because they are
scavenged from the atmosphere and carried to Earth by rain, snow, or fog.

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-4-

www.learner.org

Figure 2. Processes related to atmospheric composition

Courtesy United States Climate Change Science Program (Illustrated by P.
Rekacewicz).

Air pollution trends are strongly affected by atmospheric conditions such as temperature, pressure,
and humidity, and by global circulation patterns. For example, winds carry some pollutants far from
their sources across national boundaries and even across the oceans. Transport is fastest along
east-west routes: longitudinal winds can move air around the globe in a few weeks, compared to
months or longer for air exchanges from north to south (for more details see Unit 2, "Atmosphere").
Local weather patterns also interact with and affect air pollution. Rain and snow carry atmospheric
pollutants to Earth. Temperature inversions, like the conditions that caused London's Great Smog in
1952, occur when air near the Earth's surface is colder than air aloft. Cold air is heavier than warm
air, so temperature inversions limit vertical mixing and trap pollutants near Earth's surface. Such
conditions are often found at night and during the winter months. Stagnation events characterized
by weak winds are frequent during summer and can lead to accumulation of pollutants over several
days.
To see the close connections between weather, climate, and air pollution, consider Los Angeles,
whose severe air quality problems stem partly from its physical setting and weather patterns. Los

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-5-

www.learner.org

Angeles sits in a bowl, ringed by mountains to the north and east that trap pollutants in the urban
basin. In warm weather, cool sea breezes are drawn onshore at ground level, creating temperature
inversions that prevent pollutants from rising and dissipating. The region's diverse manufacturing and
industrial emitters and millions of cars and trucks produce copious primary air pollutants that mix in its
air space to form photochemical smog (Fig. 3).

Figure 3. Smog over Los Angeles

Courtesy United States Environmental Protection Agency.

Scientists can measure air pollutants directly when they are emittedfor example, by placing
instruments on factory smokestacksor as concentrations in the ambient outdoor air. To track
ambient concentrations, researchers create networks of air-monitoring stations, which can be ground-
based or mounted on vehicles, balloons, airplanes, or satellites.
In the laboratory, scientists use tools including laser spectrometers and electron microscopes to
identify specific pollutants. They measure chemical reaction rates in clear plastic bags ("smog
chambers") that replicate the smog environment under controlled conditions, and observe emission of
pollutants from combustion and other sources.
Knowledge of pollutant emissions, chemistry, and transport can be incorporated into computer
simulations ("air quality models") to predict how specific actions, such as requiring new vehicle
emission controls or cleaner-burning fuels, will benefit ambient air quality. However, air pollutants
pass through many complex reactions in the atmosphere and their residence times vary widely, so it

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-6-

www.learner.org

is not always straightforward to estimate how emission reductions from specific sources will impact air
quality over time.

3. Primary Air Pollutants
Primary air pollutants are emitted directly into the air from sources. They can have effects both
directly and as precursors of secondary air pollutants (chemicals formed through reactions in the
atmosphere), which are discussed in the following section.
Sulfur dioxide (SO2) is a gas formed when sulfur is exposed to oxygen at high temperatures during
fossil fuel combustion, oil refining, or metal smelting. SO2 is toxic at high concentrations, but its
principal air pollution effects are associated with the formation of acid rain and aerosols. SO2
dissolves in cloud droplets and oxidizes to form sulfuric acid (H2SO4), which can fall to Earth as acid
rain or snow or form sulfate aerosol particles in the atmosphere. Associated impacts are discussed
below in Section 5, "Aerosols," and Section 7, "Acid Deposition."
Nitrogen oxides (NO and NO2, referred together as NOx) are highly reactive gases formed when
oxygen and nitrogen react at high temperatures during combustion or lightning strikes. Nitrogen
present in fuel can also be emitted as NOx during combustion. Emissions are dominated by fossil
fuel combustion at northern mid-latitudes and by biomass burning in the tropics. Figure 4 shows the
distribution of NOx emissions to the atmosphere in 2006 as determined by satellite measurements of
atmospheric NO2 concentrations.
In the atmosphere NOx reacts with volatile organic compounds (VOCs) and carbon monoxide to
produce ground-level ozone through a complicated chain reaction mechanism. It is eventually
oxidized to nitric acid (HNO3). Like sulfuric acid, nitric acid contributes to acid deposition and to
aerosol formation.

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-7-

www.learner.org

Figure 4. Satellite observations of tropospheric NO2, 2006

Courtesy Jim Gleason, USA and Pepijn Veefkind, KNMI, National Aeronautics and
Space Administration.

Carbon monoxide (CO) is an odorless, colorless gas formed by incomplete combustion of carbon
in fuel. The main source is motor vehicle exhaust, along with industrial processes and biomass
burning. Carbon monoxide binds to hemoglobin in red blood cells, reducing their ability to transport
and release oxygen throughout the body. Low exposures can aggravate cardiac ailments, while high
exposures cause central nervous system impairment or death. It also plays a role in the generation of
ground-level ozone, discussed below in Section 4.
Volatile organic compounds (VOCs), including hydrocarbons (CxHy) but also other organic chemicals
are emitted from a very wide range of sources, including fossil fuel combustion, industrial activities,
and natural emissions from vegetation and fires. Some anthropogenic VOCs such as benzene are
known carcinogens.
VOCs are also of interest as chemical precursors of ground-level ozone and aerosols, as discussed
below in Sections 4 and 5. The importance of VOCs as precursors depends on their chemical
structure and atmospheric lifetime, which can vary considerably from compound to compound. Large
VOCs oxidize in the atmosphere to produce nonvolatile chemicals that condense to form aerosols.
Short-lived VOCs interact with NOx to produce high ground-level ozone in polluted environments.
Methane (CH4), the simplest and most long-lived VOC, is of importance both as a greenhouse gas
(Section 11) and as a source of background tropospheric ozone. Major anthropogenic sources of
methane include natural gas production and use, coal mining, livestock, and rice paddies.

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-8-

www.learner.org

4. Secondary Air Pollutants
Secondary pollutants form when primary pollutants react in the atmosphere. Table 1 summarizes
common forms of atmospheric reactions.

Table 1. Chemical kinetics in the atmosphere.

Type of reaction

Process

Notation

Bimolecular

Three-body

Photolysis

Thermal decomposition

Two reactants combine to
produce two products.
Two reactants combine to form
one new product. A third, inert
molecule (M) stabilizes the end
product and removes excess
energy.
Solar radiation photon breaks a
chemical bond in a molecule
A molecule decomposes by
collision with an inert molecule
(M)

A + B fi

 C + D

A + B + M fi AB + M

A + hn  fi

 B + C

A + M fi

 B + C

For reactions to take place, molecules have to collide. However, gases are present in the atmosphere
at considerably lower concentrations than are typical for laboratory experiments or industrial
processes, so molecules collide fairly infrequently. As a result, most atmospheric reactions that occur
at significant rates involve at least one radicala molecule with an odd number of electrons and
hence an unpaired electron in its outer shell. The unpaired electron makes the radical unstable and
highly reactive with other molecules. Radicals are formed when stable molecules are broken apart, a
process that requires large amounts of energy. This can take place in combustion chambers due to
high temperatures, and in the atmosphere by photolysis:
Nonradical + hn  fi
Radical formation initiates reaction chains that continue until radicals combine with other radicals to
produce nonradicals (atoms with an even number of electrons). Radical-assisted chain reactions in
the atmosphere are often referred to as photochemical mechanisms because sunlight plays a key
role in launching them.
One of the most important radicals in atmospheric chemistry is the hydroxyl radical (OH), sometimes
referred to as the atmospheric cleanser. OH is produced mainly through photolysis reactions that
break apart tropospheric ozone, and is very short-lived. It is consumed within about one second
by oxidizing a number of trace gases like carbon monoxide, methane, and nonmethane VOCs

 radical + radical

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-9-

www.learner.org

(NMVOCs). Some of these reactions eventually regenerate OH in continuous cycles, while others
deplete it.
Since OH has a short atmospheric lifetime, its concentration can vary widely. Some anthropogenic
emissions, such as carbon monoxide and VOCs, deplete OH, while others such as NOx boost OH
levels. Measuring atmospheric OH is difficult because its concentration is so low. Long-term trends
in OH concentrations are uncertain, although the prevailing view is that trends over the past decades
have been weak because of compensating influences from carbon monoxide and VOCs on the one
hand and NOx on the other hand. Since OH affects the rates at which some pollutants are formed and
others are destroyed, changes in OH levels over the long term would have serious implications for air
quality.
Ground-level ozone (O3) is a pernicious secondary air pollutant, toxic to both humans and vegetation
(Fig. 5). It is formed in surface air (and more generally in the troposphere) by oxidation of VOCs and
carbon monoxide in the presence of NOx. The mechanism is complicated, involving hundreds of
chemically interactive species to describe the VOC degradation pathways. A simple schematic is:
VOC + OH fi
An important aspect of this mechanism is that NOx and OH act as catalyststhat is, they speed up
the rate of ozone generation without being consumed themselves. Instead they cycle rapidly between
NO and NO2, and between OH and HO2.

 HO2 + other products  HO2 + NO fi

 O3+ M

 OH + NO2  NO2 + hn  fi

 + O  O + O2 + M fi

Figure 5. Ozone damage to plant leaves

Courtesy United States Environmental Protection Agency.

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-10-

www.learner.org

This formation mechanism for ozone at ground level is totally different from that for ozone formation
in the stratosphere, where 90 percent of total atmospheric ozone resides and plays a critical role
in protecting life on Earth by providing a UV shield (for details see Unit 2, "Atmosphere"). In the
stratosphere ozone is produced from photolysis of oxygen (O2 + hn  fi
M fi
photons needed to dissociate molecular oxygen are depleted by the ozone overhead.

 O + O, followed by O + O2 +
 3 + M). This process does not take place in the troposphere because the strong (< 240 nm) UV

5. Aerosols
In addition to gases, the atmosphere contains solid and liquid particles that are suspended in the air.
These particles are referred to as aerosols or particulate matter (PM). Aerosols in the atmosphere
typically measure between 0.01 and 10 micrometers in diameter, a fraction of the width of a human
hair (Fig. 6). Most aerosols are found in the lower troposphere, where they have a residence time of
a few days. They are removed when rain or snow carries them out of the atmosphere or when larger
particles settle out of suspension due to gravity.

Figure 6. Size comparisons for aerosol pollution

Courtesy United States Environmental Protection Agency.

Large aerosol particles (usually 1 to 10 micrometers in diameter) are generated when winds blow
sea salt, dust, and other debris into the atmosphere. Fine aerosol particles with diameters less
than 1 micrometer are mainly produced when precursor gases condense in the atmosphere. Major
components of fine aerosols are sulfate, nitrate, organic carbon, and elemental carbon. Sulfate,

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-11-

www.learner.org

nitrate, and organic carbon particles are produced by atmospheric oxidation of SO2, NOx, and VOCs
as discussed above in Section 3. Elemental carbon particles are emitted by combustion, which is also
a major source of organic carbon particles. Light-absorbing carbon particles emitted by combustion
are called black carbon or soot; they are important agents for climate change and are also suspected
to be particularly hazardous for human health.
High concentrations of aerosols are a major cause of cardiovascular disease and are also suspected
to cause cancer. Fine particles are especially serious threats because they are small enough to be
absorbed deeply into the lungs, and sometimes even into the bloodstream. Scientific research into
the negative health effects of fine particulate air pollution spurred the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency to set limits in 1987 for exposure to particles with a diameter of 10 micrometers or less, and in
1997 for particles with a diameter of 2.5 micrometers or less.
Aerosols also have important radiative effects in the atmosphere. Particles are said to scatter light
when they alter the direction of radiation beams without absorbing radiation. This is the principal
mechanism limiting visibility in the atmosphere, as it prevents us from distinguishing an object from
the background. Air molecules are inefficient scatterers because their sizes are orders of magnitude
smaller than the wavelengths of visible radiation (0.4 to 0.7 micrometers). Aerosol particles, by
contrast, are efficient scatterers. When relative humidity is high, aerosols absorb water, which
causes them to swell and increases their cross-sectional area for scattering, creating haze. Without
aerosol pollution our visual range would typically be about 200 miles, but haze can reduce visibility
significantly. Figure 7 shows two contrasting views of Acadia National Park in Maine on relatively
good and bad air days.

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-12-

www.learner.org

Figure 7. Haze pollution, Acadia National Park, Maine

Courtesy NESCAUM, from hazecam.net.

Aerosols have a cooling effect on Earth's climate when they scatter solar radiation because some of
the scattered light is reflected back into space. As discussed in Unit 12, "Earth's Changing Climate,"
major volcanic eruptions that inject large quantities of aerosols into the stratosphere, such as that
of Mt. Pinatubo in 1991, can noticeably reduce average global surface temperatures for some time
afterward.
In contrast, some aerosol particles such as soot absorb radiation and have a warming effect. This
means that estimating the net direct contribution to global climate change from aerosols requires
detailed inventories of the types of aerosols in the atmosphere and their distribution around the globe.
Aerosol particles also influence Earth's climate indirectly: they serve as condensation nuclei for cloud
droplets, increasing the amount of radiation reflected back into space by clouds and modifying the
ability of clouds to precipitate. The latter is the idea behind "cloud seeding" in desert areas, where
specific kinds of mineral aerosol particles that promote ice formation are injected into a cloud to make
it precipitate.
Aerosol concentrations vary widely around the Earth (Fig. 8). Measurements are tricky because
the particles are difficult to collect without modifying their composition. Combined optical and mass
spectrometry techniques that analyze the composition of single particles directly in an air flow,
rather than recovering a bulk composition from filters, have improved scientists' ability to detect and
characterize aerosols (footnote 1).

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-13-

www.learner.org

Figure 8. Total ozone mapping spectrometer (TOMS) aerosol index of smoke and dust
absorption, 2004

Courtesy Jay Herman, NASA Goddard Space Flight Center.

One important research challenge is learning more about organic aerosols, which typically account
for a third to half of total aerosol mass. These include many types of carbon compounds with diverse
properties and environmental impacts. Organic aerosols are emitted to the atmosphere directly by
inefficient combustion. Automobiles, wood stoves, agricultural fires, and wildfires are major sources in
the United States. Atmospheric oxidation of VOCs, both anthropogenic and biogenic, is another major
source in summer. The relative importance of these different sources is still highly uncertain, which
presently limits our ability to assess anthropogenic influence and develop strategies for reducing
concentrations.

6. Smog
Smog is often used as a generic term for any kind of air pollution that reduces visibility, especially in
urban areas. However, it is useful to distinguish two broad types: industrial smog and photochemical
smog.
Events like the London smog of 1952 are often referred to as industrial smog because SO2 emissions
from burning coal play a key role. Typically, industrial smogalso called gray or black smog
develops under cold and humid conditions. Cold temperatures are often associated with inversions
that trap the pollution near the surface (see Section 2, "Chemicals in Motion," above). High humidity

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-14-

www.learner.org

allows for rapid oxidation of SO2 to form sulfuric acid and sulfate particles. Events similar to the 1952
London smog occurred in the industrial towns of Liege, Belgium, in 1930, killing more than 60 people,
and Donora, Pennsylvania, in 1948, killing 20. Today coal combustion is a major contributor to urban
air pollution in China, especially from emissions of SO2 and aerosols (footnote 2).
Air pollution regulations in developed countries have reduced industrial smog events, but
photochemical smog remains a persistent problem, largely driven by vehicle emissions.
Photochemical smog forms when NOx and VOCs react in the presence of solar radiation to
form ozone. The solar radiation also promotes formation of secondary aerosol particles from
oxidation of NOx, VOCs, and SO2. Photochemical smog typically develops in summer (when solar
radiation is strongest) in stagnant conditions promoted by temperature inversions and weak winds.
Photochemical smog is a ubiquitous urban problem in the developed world and often blankets large
populated regions such as the eastern United States and western Europe for extended periods in
summer.
Ozone and aerosols are the two main health hazards of photochemical smog. Ozone is invisible, but
aerosol particles scatter sunlight as discussed above in Section 5, and are responsible for the whitish
haze associated with smog. Because ozone is created in the atmosphere, concentrations are often
higher downwind of urban areas than in the urban areas themselves. Figure 9 shows counties in the
United States that currently fail to comply with the national standard for ozone levels over an 8-hour
period (nonattainment areas). These cover much of California and the eastern United States on a
regional scale.

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-15-

www.learner.org

Figure 9. Nonattainment and maintenance areas in the U.S. 8-hour ozone standard

Courtesy United States Environmental Protection Agency.

7. Acid Deposition
Acid rain was first identified in the 19th century, when English pharmacist Robert Angus Smith
measured high acidity levels in rain falling over industrial regions of England and much lower levels
in less-polluted areas near the coast. However, this pattern did not receive sustained attention until
biologists began to notice sharp declines in fish populations in lakes in Norway, the northeastern
United States, and Canada in the 1950s and 1960s. In each case researchers found that acid
precipitation was altering lake chemistry. These findings spurred research into the causes of acid
rain.
Pure water has a pH value of 7 (neutral), but rainwater falling in the atmosphere always contains
impurities. The atmosphere contains natural acids including CO2 (a weak acid); nitric acid produced
naturally from NOx emitted by lightning, fires, and soils; and sulfuric acid produced by the oxidation
of sulfur gases from volcanoes and the biosphere. It also contains natural bases, including ammonia
(NH3) emitted by the biosphere and calcium carbonate (CaCO3) from suspended soil dust. CO2

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-16-

www.learner.org

alone at natural levels (280 parts per million volume) would result in a rain pH of 5.7. Taken together,
natural contaminants produce natural rain with pH values ranging from about 5 to 7 (recall that the pH
scale is logarithmic, so one pH unit represents a factor of 10 difference in acid H+ concentration).
Acid rain refers to precipitation with pH values below 5, which generally happens only when large
amounts of manmade pollution are added to the atmosphere. As Figure 10 shows, acid deposition
takes place throughout the eastern United States and is particularly severe in the industrial Midwest
due to its concentration of coal-burning power plants. Tall power plant stacks built to protect local air
quality inject SO2 and NOx at high altitude where winds are strong, allowing acid rain to extend more
than a thousand miles downwind and into Canada.

Figure 10. Hydrogen ion concentration

Courtesy National Atmospheric Deposition Program/National Trends Network, http://
nadp.sws.uluc.edu.

The main components of acid rain worldwide are sulfuric acid and nitric acid. As discussed above in
Section 3, these acids form when SO2 and NOx are oxidized in the atmosphere. Sulfuric and nitric
acids dissolve in cloudwater and dissociate to release H+:
HNO3 (aq) fi

- + H+

 NO3

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-17-

www.learner.org

 SO4

2- + 2H+

+). However, the benefit of this neutralization is illusory because NH4

H2SO4(aq) fi
Human activity also releases large amounts of ammonia to the atmosphere, mainly from agriculture,
and this ammonia can act as a base in the atmosphere to neutralize acid rain by converting H+ to the
+ releases its
ammonium ion (NH4
H+ once it is deposited and consumed by the biosphere. The relatively high pH of precipitation in the
western United States is due in part to ammonia from agriculture and in part to suspended calcium
carbonate (limestone) dust.
Acid rain has little effect on the environment in most of the world because it is quickly neutralized by
naturally present bases after it falls. For example, the ocean contains a large supply of carbonate ions
2-), and many land regions have alkaline soils and rocks such as limestone. But in areas with
(CO3
little neutralizing capacity acid rain causes serious damage to plants, soils, streams, and lakes. In
North America, the northeastern United States and eastern Canada are especially sensitive to acid
rain because they have thin soils and granitic bedrock, which cannot neutralize acidity.
High acidity in lakes and rivers corrodes fishes' organic gill material and attacks their calcium
carbonate skeletons. Figure 11 shows the acidity levels at which common freshwater organisms can
live and reproduce successfully. Acid deposition also dissolves toxic metals such as aluminum in soil
sediments, which can poison plants and animals that take the metals up. And acid rain increases
leaching of nutrients from forest soils, which weakens plants and reduces their ability to weather other
stresses such as droughts, air pollution, or bug infestation.

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-18-

www.learner.org

Figure 11. Acid tolerance ranges of common freshwater organisms

Courtesy United States Environmental Protection Agency.

In addition to making ecosystems more acidic, deposition of nitrate and ammonia fertilizes
ecosystems by providing nitrogen, which can be directly taken up by living organisms. Nitrogen
pollution in rivers and streams is carried to the sea, where it contributes to algal blooms that deplete
dissolved oxygen in coastal waters. As discussed in Unit 8, "Water Resources," nutrient overloading
has created dead zones in coastal regions around the globe, such as the Gulf of Mexico and the
Chesapeake Bay. The main sources of nutrient pollution are agricultural runoff and atmospheric
deposition.
Acid rain levels have decreased and acid rain impacts have stabilized in the United States since
SO2 and NOx pollution controls were tightened in 1990 (see Section 12, "Major Laws and Treaties,"
below). However, acid deposition is in large part a cumulative problem, as the acid-neutralizing
capacity of soils is gradually eroded in response to acid input, and eventual exhaustion of this acid-
neutralizing capacity is a trigger for dramatic ecosystem impacts. Continued decrease in acid input
is therefore critical. Figure 12 compares nutrient cycling in a pristine Chilean forest and in a forest
impacted by acid deposition.

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-19-

www.learner.org

Figure 12. Impact of acid rain on forest nutrient cycles

 Martin Kennedy, University of California-Riverside.

8. Mercury Deposition
Mercury (Hg) is a toxic pollutant whose input to ecosystems has greatly increased over the past
century due to anthropogenic emissions to the atmosphere and subsequent deposition. Mercury is
ubiquitous in the environment and is unique among metals in that it is highly volatile. When materials
containing mercury are burned, as in coal combustion or waste incineration, mercury is released to
the atmosphere as a gas either in elemental form, Hg(0) or oxidized divalent form, Hg2+. The oxidized
form is present as water-soluble compounds such as HgCl2 that are readily deposited in the region
of their emission. By contrast, Hg(0) is not water-soluble and must be oxidized to Hg2+ in order to be
deposited. This oxidation takes place in the atmosphere on a time scale of one year, sufficiently long
that mercury can be readily transported around the world by atmospheric circulation. Mercury thus is
a global pollution problem.
Deposition of anthropogenically emitted mercury to land and ocean has considerably raised mercury
levels in the biosphere. This accumulation is evident from sediment cores that provide historical
records of mercury deposition for the past several centuries (Fig. 13). Ice core samples from
Antarctica, Greenland, and the western United States indicate that pre-industrial atmospheric mercury

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-20-

www.learner.org

concentrations ranged from about 1 to 4 nanograms per liter, but that concentrations over the past
150 years have reached as high as 20 ng/L (footnote 3).

Figure 13. Mercury in sediment profiles from straits south of Norway

Courtesy United Nations Environment Programme (adapted from Geological Survey of
Norway).

Once deposited, oxidized mercury can be converted back to the elemental form Hg(0) and re-emitted
to the atmosphere. This repeated re-emission is called the "grasshopper effect," and can extend
the environmental legacy of mercury emissions to several decades. The efficacy of re-emission
increases with increasing temperature, which makes Hg(0) more volatile. As a result mercury tends to
accumulate to particularly high levels in cold regions such as the Arctic where re-emission is slow.
Divalent mercury deposited to ecosystems can be converted by bacteria to organic methylmercury,
which is absorbed easily during digestion and accumulates in living tissues. It also enters fishes'
bodies directly through their skin and gills (Fig. 14). U.S. federal agencies and a number of states
have issued warnings against consuming significant quantities of large predatory fish species such
as shark and swordfish, especially for sensitive groups such as young children and women of
childbearing age (footnote 4).

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-21-

www.learner.org

Figure 14. Conceptual biogeochemical mercury cycle

Mercury interferes with the brain and central nervous system. The expression "mad as a hatter" and
the Mad Hatter character in Lewis Carroll's Alice in Wonderland are based on symptoms common
among 19th-century English hat makers, who inhaled mercury vapors when they used a mercurous
nitrate solution to cure furs. Many hatters developed severe muscle tremors, distorted speech,
and hallucinations as a result. Sixty-eight people died and hundreds were made ill or born with
neurological defects in Minamata, Japan in the 1950s and 1960s after a chemical company dumped
mercury into Minamata Bay and families ate fish from they bay. Recently, doctors have reported
symptoms including dizziness and blurred vision in healthy patients who ate significant quantities of
high-mercury fish such as tuna (footnote 5).
Developed countries in North America and Europe are largely responsible for the global build-up of
mercury in the environment over the past century. They have begun to decrease their emissions over
the past two decades in response to the recognized environmental threat. However, emissions in
Asia have been rapidly increasing and it is unclear how the global burden of mercury will evolve over
the coming decades. Because mercury is transported on a global scale, its control requires a global
perspective. In addition, the legacy of past emissions through re-emission and mercury accumulation
in ecosystems must be recognized.

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-22-

www.learner.org

9. Controlling Air Pollution
Thanks to several decades of increasingly strict controls, emissions of most major air pollutants
have declined in the U.S. and other industrialized countries since the 1970s. Figure 15 shows the
aggregate decrease in U.S. emissions since 1970. This trend occurred even as economic activity
and fuel consumption increased. The reductions came about because governments passed laws
limiting allowable pollution levels and required the use of technologies to reduce emissions, such as
scrubbers on power plant smokestacks and catalytic converters on vehicles.

Figure 15. U.S. Economic Growth and Criteria Pollutant Emissions, 1970-2006

Courtesy United States Environmental Protection Agency.

This decrease in emissions has demonstrably reduced levels of the four principal primary pollutants:
carbon monoxide, nitrogen dioxide, sulfur dioxide, and lead. Air quality standards for these four
pollutants were frequently exceeded in the U.S. twenty years ago but are hardly ever exceeded now.
Progress in reducing the two principal secondary pollutants, ozone and particulate matter, has been
much slower. This is largely due to nonlinear chemistry involved in the generation of these pollutants:
reducing precursor emissions by a factor of two does not guarantee a corresponding factor of two
decrease in the pollutant concentrations (the decrease is often much less, and there can even be
an increase). In addition, advances in health-effects research have generated constant pressure for
tougher air quality standards for ozone and fine aerosols.

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-23-

www.learner.org

In contrast to improvements in developed countries, air pollution has been worsening in many
industrializing nations. Beijing, Mexico City, Cairo, Jakarta, and other megacities in developing
countries have some of the dirtiest air in the world (for more on environmental conditions in
megacities, see Unit 5, "Human Population Dynamics"). This situation is caused by rapid population
growth combined with rising energy demand, weak pollution control standards, dirty fuels, and
inefficient technologies. Some governments have started to address this problemfor example,
China is tightening motor vehicle emission standardsbut much stronger actions will be required to
reduce the serious public health impacts of air pollution worldwide.

10. Stratospheric Ozone
Earth's stratospheric ozone layer, which contains about 90 percent of the ozone in the atmosphere,
makes the planet habitable by absorbing harmful solar ultraviolet (UV) radiation before it reaches
the planet's surface. UV radiation damages cells and causes sunburn and premature skin aging
in low doses. At higher levels, it can cause skin cancer and immune system suppression. Earth's
stratospheric ozone layer absorbs 99 percent of incoming solar UV radiation.
Scientists have worked to understand the chemistry of the ozone layer since its discovery in the
1920s. In 1930 British geophysicist Sydney Chapman described a process in which strong UV
photons photolyze oxygen molecules (O2) into highly reactive oxygen atoms. These atoms rapidly
combine with O2 to form ozone (O3) (Fig. 16). This process is still recognized as the only significant
source of ozone to the stratosphere. Research and controversy have focused on identifying
stratospheric ozone sinks.

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-24-

www.learner.org

Figure 16. Ozone production

Courtesy National Aeronatics and Space Administration.

Ozone is produced by different processes in the stratosphere, where it is beneficial, and near the
Earth's surface in the troposphere, where it is harmful. The mechanism for stratospheric ozone
formation, photolysis of O2, does not take place in the troposphere because the strong UV photons
needed for this photolysis have been totally absorbed by O2 and ozone in the stratosphere. In
the troposphere, by contrast, abundance of VOCs promotes ozone formation by the mechanism
described above in Section 4. Ozone levels in the stratosphere are 10 to 100 times higher than what
one observes at Earth's surface in the worst smog events. Fortunately we are not there to breathe
it, though exposure of passengers in jet aircraft to stratospheric ozone has emerged recently as a
matter of public health concern.
To explain observed stratospheric ozone concentrations, we need to balance ozone production and
loss. Formation of ozone in the stratosphere is simple to understand, but the mechanisms for ozone
loss are considerably more complicated. Ozone photolyzes to release O2 and O, but this is not an
actual sink since O2 and O can just recombine to ozone. The main mechanism for ozone loss in the

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-25-

www.learner.org

natural stratosphere is a catalytic cycle involving NOx radicals, which speed up ozone loss by cycling
between NO and NO2 but are not consumed in the process.
The main source of NOx in the troposphere is combustion; in contrast, the main source in the
stratosphere is oxidation of nitrous oxide (N2O), which is emitted ubiquitously by bacteria at the
Earth's surface. Nitrous oxide is inert in the troposphere and can therefore be transported up to the
stratosphere, where much stronger UV radiation enables its oxidation. Nitrous oxide emissions have
increased over the past century due to agriculture, but the rise has been relatively modest (from 285
to 310 parts per million by volume) and of little consequence for the ozone layer.
In 1974 chemists Sherwood Roland and Mario Molina identified a major threat to the ozone layer:
rising atmospheric concentrations of manmade industrial chemicals called chlorofluorocarbons
(CFCs), which at the time were widely used as refrigerants, in aerosol sprays, and in manufacturing
plastic foams. CFC molecules are inert in the troposphere, so they are transported to the
stratosphere, where they photolyze and release chlorine (Cl) atoms. Chlorine atoms cause catalytic
ozone loss by cycling with ClO (Fig. 17).

Figure 17. Chlorine-catalyzed ozone depletion mechanism

Eventually chlorine radicals (Cl and ClO) are converted to the stable nonradical chlorine reservoirs
of hydrogen chloride (HCl) and chlorine nitrate (ClNO3). These reservoirs slowly "leak" by oxidation
and photolysis to regenerate chlorine radicals. Chlorine is finally removed when it is transported to the
troposphere and washed out through deposition. However, this transport process is slow. Concern

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-26-

www.learner.org

over chlorine-catalyzed ozone loss through the mechanism shown in Figure 17 led in the 1980s to the
first measures to regulate production of CFCs.
In 1985 scientists from the British Arctic Survey reported that springtime stratospheric ozone levels
over their station at Halley Bay had fallen sharply since the 1970s. Global satellite data soon showed
that stratospheric ozone levels were decreasing over most of the southern polar latitudes. This
pattern, widely referred to as the "ozone hole" (more accurately, ozone thinning), proved to be
caused by high chlorine radical concentrations, as well as by bromine radicals (Br), which also trigger
catalytic cycles with chlorine to consume ozone.
The source of the high chlorine radicals was found to be a fast reaction of the chlorine reservoirs
HCl and ClNO3 at the surface of icy particles formed at the very cold temperatures of the Antarctic
wintertime stratosphere and called polar stratospheric clouds (PSCs). HCl and ClNO3 react on PSC
surfaces to produce molecular chlorine (Cl2) and nitric acid. Cl2 then rapidly photolyzes in spring to
release chlorine atoms and trigger ozone loss.
Ozone depletion has worsened since 1985. Today springtime ozone levels over Antarctica are less
than half of levels recorded in the 1960s, and the 2006 Antarctic ozone hole covered 29 million
square kilometers, tying the largest value previously recorded in 2000 (Fig. 18). In the 1990s ozone
loss by the same mechanism was discovered in the Arctic springtime stratosphere, although Arctic
ozone depletion is not as extensive as in Antarctica because temperatures are not as consistently
cold.

Figure 18. Antarctic ozone hole, October 4, 2004

Courtesy National Aeronautics and Space Administration.

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-27-

www.learner.org

Rowland and Molina's warnings about CFCs and ozone depletion, followed by the discovery of the
ozone hole, spurred the negotiation of several international agreements to protect the ozone layer,
leading eventually to a worldwide ban on CFC production in 1996 (for details see Section 12, "Major
Laws and Treaties," below). CFCs have lifetimes in the atmosphere of 50-100 years, so it will take
that long for past damage to the ozone layer to be undone.
The Antarctic ozone hole is expected to gradually heal over the next several decades, but the
effects of climate change pose major uncertainties. Greenhouse gases are well known to cool
the stratosphere (although they warm the Earth's surface), and gradual decrease in stratospheric
temperatures has been observed over the past decades. Cooling of the polar stratosphere promotes
the formation of PSCs and thus the release of chlorine radicals from chlorine reservoirs. The question
now is whether the rate of decrease of stratospheric chlorine over the next decades will be sufficiently
fast to stay ahead of the cooling caused by increasing greenhouse gases. This situation is being
closely watched by atmospheric scientists both in Antarctica and the Arctic.

11. Air Pollution, Greenhouse Gases, and Climate Change
Air pollutants are major contributors to climate change. This connection is well known to scientists,
although it has not yet permeated environmental policy. Figure 19 shows global climate forcing for the
year 2000, relative to 1850, caused by different observed perturbations to the Earth system. Climate
forcing from a given perturbation is defined as the mean resulting imbalance between energy input
and energy output per unit time and unit area of Earth's surface (watts per square meter or W/m2),
with all else remaining constant, including temperature. A positive radiative forcing means a decrease
in energy output and hence a warming, shown as red bars in Fig. 19. Negative radiative forcing,
shown as blue bars in Fig. 19, means a decrease in energy input and hence a cooling. (For more on
climate forcing see Unit 12, "Earth's Changing Climate.")
Figure 19 shows that a large number of perturbation agents have forced the climate since 1850.
CO2 is the single most important agent, but many other agents are also important and together exert
greater influence than CO2.

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-28-

www.learner.org

Figure 19. Climate forcings (W/m2): 18502000

Courtesy James E. Hansen, NASA Goddard Institute for Space Studies.

Among the major greenhouse gases in Figure 19 are methane and tropospheric ozone, which
are both of concern for air quality. Light absorption by black carbon aerosol particles also has a
significant warming effect. Taken together these three agents produce more radiative forcing than
CO2. Reductions in these air pollutants thus would reap considerable benefit for climate change.
However, air pollutants can also have a cooling effect that compensates for greenhouse warming.
This factor can be seen in Figure 19 from the negative radiative forcings due to non light-absorbing
sulfate and organic aerosols originating from fossil fuel combustion. Scattering by these aerosols
is estimated by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) to have a direct radiative
forcing of -1.3 W/m2, although this figure is highly uncertain. Indirect radiative forcing from increased
cloud reflectivity due to anthropogenic aerosols is even more uncertain but could be as large as -1 W/
m2.
Scattering aerosols have thus masked a significant fraction of the warming imposed by increasing
concentrations of greenhouse gases over the past two centuries. Aerosol and acid rain control
policies, though undeniably urgent to protect public health and ecosystems, will reduce this masking
effect and expose us to more greenhouse warming.
Influence also runs the other way. Global climate change has the potential to magnify air pollution
problems by raising Earth's temperature (contributing to tropospheric ozone formation) and increasing
the frequency of stagnation events. Climate change is also expected to cause more forest fires and
dust storms, which can cause severe air quality problems (Fig. 20).

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-29-

www.learner.org

Figure 20. Fire plumes over Southern California, October 26, 2003

Courtesy National Aeronautics and Space Administration.

The link between air pollution and climate change argues for developing environmental policies that
will yield benefits in both areas. For example, researchers at Harvard University, Argonne National
Laboratory, and the Environmental Protection Agency estimated in 2002 that reducing anthropogenic
methane emissions by 50 percent would not only reduce greenhouse warming but also nearly halve
the number of high-ozone events in the United States. Moreover, since methane contributes to
background ozone levels worldwide, this approach would reduce ozone concentrations globally. In
contrast, reducing NOx emissionsthe main U.S. strategy for combating ozoneproduces more
localized reductions to ozone (footnote 6).
Finally, let us draw the distinction between stratospheric ozone depletion and climate change,
since these two problems are often confused in the popular press. As summarized in Table 2, the
causes, processes, and impacts of these two global perturbations to the Earth system are completely
different, but they have some links. On the one hand, colder stratospheric temperatures due to
increasing greenhouse gases intensify polar ozone loss by promoting PSC formation, as discussed in
Section 9. On the other hand, CFCs are major greenhouse gases, and stratospheric ozone depletion
exerts a slight cooling effect on the Earth's surface.

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-30-

www.learner.org

Table 2. Comparison of stratospheric ozone depletion and global warming

Ozone depletion

Global warming

Location

Stratosphere

Causative pollutant

Process

Ozone-depleting substances
(NO, CFCs)
Catalytic ozone loss reactions

Troposphere (stratosphere
actually cools)
Greenhouse gases (CO, CH, NO,
tropospheric ozone)
Trapping of infrared radiation
emitted by Earth's surface

12. Major Laws and Treaties
The first international treaty to protect the ozone layer was signed in 1987. The Montreal Protocol on
Substances That Deplete the Ozone Layer has been amended several times since then in response
to new scientific information, and it has been ratified by 190 countries. Under it industrialized
countries phased out production of several classes of ozone-depleting substances by 1996, and
developing countries are to follow suit by 2010. An international fund created under the protocol helps
developing nations find substitutes for ozone-depleting substances. The World Bank estimates that
reductions under the Montreal Protocol through 2003 have avoided up to 20 million cases of cancer,
130 million cases of eye cataracts, and severe damage to ecosystems from increased UV radiation
reaching Earth's surface (footnote 7).
When nations began to negotiate agreements on reducing greenhouse gases to slow global climate
change, many experts believed that the problem could be addressed through a framework similar to
the Montreal Protocola treaty that set timetables for phasing out harmful emissions, with technical
aid to help developing countries comply. But climate change has proved to be a considerably harder
problem for negotiators, for several reasons. These negotiations are discussed in Unit 12, "Earth's
Changing Climate."
The Clean Air Act (CAA) sets out a comprehensive set of national standards for controlling air
pollutants that are considered harmful to public health and the environment in the United States.
Under the CAA the Environmental Protection Agency is directed to establish National Ambient Air
Quality Standards (NAAQS) limiting major air pollutants to levels that will protect public health,
including the health of sensitive groups such as children, the elderly, and people with respiratory
illnesses. NAAQS are set based on input from scientific advisory committees, and the act specifically
directs EPA not to consider costs in setting NAAQS, although states can consider costs when they
develop their plans for meeting the standards.
EPA has established NAAQS for six "criteria pollutants": SO2, NO2, lead, carbon monoxide,
particulate matter less than 10 micrometers and less than 2.5 micrometers (PM-10 and PM-2.5),
and ozone. States and counties that fail to achieve these standards are required to develop plans

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-31-

www.learner.org

for bringing their air quality into compliance. The CAA also defines major pollution sources, based
on their emission levels, and establishes rules governing when new emission sources can be built in
polluted areas.
The CAA has been amended several times since its passage in 1970 to tighten standards and
institute new controls that reflect advances in scientific understanding of air pollution. The law
has achieved some notable successes: for example, it has reduced U.S. automobile emissions
considerably from pre-1970 levels, through mechanisms such as phasing out use of leaded gasoline
and requiring car manufacturers to install catalytic converters. These devices treat car exhaust in
several stages to reduce NOx and oxidize unburned hydrocarbons and carbon monoxide (Fig. 21).

Figure 21. Catalytic converter mounted in a car's exhaust system

Courtesy Wikimedia Commons. Public Domain.

A set of CAA amendments passed in 1990 has produced significant cuts in SO2 emissions through
what was then a new approach to reducing air pollution: capping the total allowable amount of
pollution emitted nationally and then allocating emission rights among major sources (mainly coal-
burning electric power plants and industrial facilities). Emitters that reduced pollution below their
allowed levels could sell their extra pollution allowances to higher-emitting sources. This approach
let sources make reductions where they were cheapest, rather than requiring all emitters to install
specific pieces of control equipment or to meet one standard at each location. Some companies cut
emissions by installing controls, while others switched to low-sulfur coal or other cleaner fuels.

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-32-

www.learner.org

U.S. SO2 emissions have fallen by roughly 50 percent since emissions trading was instituted, and
the program is widely cited as an example of how this approach can work more effectively than
technology mandates. However, some proposals for emissions trading are more controversial
specifically, whether it is a safe approach for cutting toxic pollutants such as mercury. Opponents
argue that letting some large sources continue to emit such pollutants could create dangerous "hot
spots" that would be hazardous to public health, and that the only safe way to control hazardous
pollutants like mercury is to require specific reductions from each individual source.

13. Further Reading
C.T. Driscoll et al., Acid Rain Revisited: Advances in Scientific Understanding Since the
Passage of the 1970 and 1990 Clean Air Act Amendments, Hubbard Brook Research Foundation,
Science Links Publication, vol. 1. no. 1 (2001), http://www.hubbardbrook.org/hbrf/publications/
Acid_Rain_Revisited.pdf.
Daniel Jacob, Introduction to Atmospheric Chemistry (Princeton University Press, 1999). An
overview of the field that shows how to use basic principles of physics and chemistry to describe a
complex system such as the atmosphere.
Peter H. McMurry, Marjorie F. Shepherd, and James S. Vickery, eds., Particulate Matter Science
for Policy Makers: A NARSTO Assessment (Cambridge University Press, 2004). Scientific
information about particulate emissions and their impacts, produced by a North American consortium
for atmospheric research in support of air quality management.
National Research Council, Air Quality Management in the United States (Washington, DC:
National Academies Press, 2004). A Congressionally mandated study of how well major U.S. air
quality laws have worked from a scientific and technical perspective, and ways in which they could be
strengthened.

Footnotes

1. Daniel M. Murphy, "Something in the Air," Science, March 25, 2005, pp. 18881890.
2. National Academies of Science, Urbanization, Energy, and Air Pollution in China: The
Challenges Ahead (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2004), p. 3.
3. U.S. Geological Survey, "Glacial Ice Cores Reveal A Record of Natural and Anthropogenic
Atmospheric Mercury Deposition for the Last 270 Years," June 2002, http://toxics.usgs.gov/pubs/
FS-051-02/.
4. For the latest version, see U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, "Fish Advisories," http://
www.epa.gov/waterscience/fish/.

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-33-

www.learner.org

5. Jane M. Hightower and Dan Moore, "Mercury Levels in High-End Consumers of Fish,"
Environmental Health Perspectives, Vol. 111., No. 4, April 2003, pp. 604608; Eric Duhatschek,
"Charity Games in Quebec Will Help Kids," The Globe and Mail, October 8, 2004, p. R11.
6. Arlene M. Fiore et al., "Linking Ozone Pollution and Climate Change: The Case for Controlling
Methane," Geophysical Research Letters, Vol. 29, No. 19 (2002), pp. 2528.
7. World Bank, "The World Bank and the Montreal Protocol," September 2003,
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTMP/214578-1110890369636/20489383/
WBMontrealProtocolStatusReport2003.pdf.

Glossary

acid rain : Rainfall with a greater acidity than normal.
aerosols : Liquid or solid particles that are suspended in air or a gas. Also referred to as particulate
matter.
ambient : Surrounding, encircling.
carbon monoxide : Odorless, colorless gas that interferes with the delivery of oxygen in the blood
to the rest of the body. It is produced as a result of incomplete burning of carbon-containing fuels
including coal, wood, charcoal, natural gas, and fuel oil. Depending on the amount inhaled, this
gas can impede coordination, worsen cardiovascular conditions, and produce fatigue, headache,
weakness, confusion, disorientation, nausea, and dizziness. Very high levels can cause death.
chlorofluorocarbons : Any of several organic compounds composed of carbon, fluorine, chlorine, and
hydrogen. They were formerly used widely in industry, for example as refrigerants, propellants, and
cleaning solvents.
hydroxyl radical : The neutral form of the hydroxide ion, often referred to as the "detergent" of the
troposphere because it reacts with many pollutants, often acting as the first step to their removal.
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) : Established in 1988 by two United Nations
organizations to assess the risk of human-induced climate change.
Montreal Protocol on Substances That Deplete the Ozone Layer : A 1987 international agreement,
subsequently amended in 1990, 1992, 1995, and 1997, that establishes in participating countries a
schedule for the phaseout of chloroflourocarbons and other substances with an excessive ozone-
depleting potential.
National Ambient Air Quality Standards : Standards established by the EPA and required by The
Clean Air Act (last amended in 1990) for pollutants considered harmful to public health and the
environment.

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-34-

www.learner.org

nitrogen oxides : A group of highly reactive gases, all of which contain nitrogen and oxygen in varying
amounts. Many of the nitrogen oxides are colorless and odorless. However, one common pollutant,
nitrogen dioxide (NO2), along with particles in the air, can often be seen as a reddish-brown layer
over many urban areas.
nonattainment areas : Defined by The Clean Air Act as a locality where air pollution levels persistently
exceed National Ambient Air Quality Standards, or that contributes to ambient air quality in a nearby
area that fails to meet standards.
ozone : A triatomic molecule consisting of three oxygen atoms. Ground-level ozone is an air pollutant
with harmful effects on the respiratory systems of animals. On the other hand, ozone in the upper
atmosphere protects living organisms by preventing damaging ultraviolet light from reaching the
Earth's surface.
particulate matter (PM) : The sum of all solid and liquid particles suspended in air, many of which are
hazardous.
photolysis : A chemical process by which molecules are broken down into smaller units through the
absorption of light.
primary air pollutants : Pollutants that are pumped into our atmosphere and directly pollute the air.
Examples include carbon monoxide from car exhausts and sulfur dioxide from the combustion of coal
as well as nitrogen oxides, hydrocarbons, and particulate matter (both solid and liquid).
radical : Atomic or molecular species with unpaired electrons on an otherwise open shell
configuration. These unpaired electrons are usually highly reactive, so radicals are likely to take part
in chemical reactions.
secondary air pollutants : Pollutant not directly emitted but forms when other pollutants (primary
pollutants) react in the atmosphere. Examples include ozone, formed when hydrocarbons (HC) and
nitrogen oxides (NOx) combine in the presence of sunlight; NO2, formed as NO combines with oxygen
in the air; and acid rain, formed when sulfur dioxide or nitrogen oxides react with water.
smog : A kind of air pollution; the word "smog" is a combination of smoke and fog. Classic smog
results from large amounts of coal burning in an area and is caused by a mixture of smoke and
sulphur dioxide.
sulfur dioxide : A colorless, extremely irritating gas or liquid (SO2), used in many industrial processes,
especially the manufacture of sulfuric acid. In the atmosphere it can combine with water vapor to form
sulfuric acid, a major component of acid rain.
volatile organic compounds : Organic chemical compounds that have high enough vapour pressures
under normal conditions to significantly vaporize and enter the atmosphere.

Unit 11 : Atmospheric Pollution

-35-

www.learner.org

