PACIFIC COOPERATIVE STUDIES UNIT  
UNIVERSITY OF HAWAI`I AT MANOA  

Dr. David C. Duffy, Unit Leader 

Department of Botany  

3190 Maile Way, St. John #408  

Honolulu, Hawaii 96822 

Technical Report 140  

HAWAIIAN HOARY BAT INVENTORY IN 

NATIONAL PARKS ON HAWAI`I, MAUI AND MOLOKA`I 

April 2007 

Heather R. Fraser1 

Vanessa Parker-Geisman1 

George R. Parish, IV1

1. Pacific Cooperative Studies Unit (University of Hawai`i at Manoa), NPS Inventory and
Monitoring Program, Pacific Island Network, PO Box 52, Hawai`i National Park, HI 96718

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

List of Tables......................................................................................................iii 
List of Figures ....................................................................................................iii 
Abstract ...............................................................................................................1 
Introduction.........................................................................................................2 
Methods ...............................................................................................................3 
Study Area .....................................................................................................3 
Selection of Survey Points and Transects .....................................................5 
Survey Methods.............................................................................................8 
Results...............................................................................................................10 
Hawai`i Volcanoes National Park.................................................................13 
Pu`uhonua o Honaunau National Historical Park.........................................15 
Kaloko-Honokohau National Historical Park ................................................16 
Pu`ukohola Heiau National Historic Site ......................................................17 
Kalaupapa National Historical Park .............................................................18 
Haleakala National Park ..............................................................................19 
Discussion.........................................................................................................20 
Acknowledgments ............................................................................................23 
Literature Cited .................................................................................................24 

ii 

LIST OF TABLES 

Table 1.  Proportion of sites occupied (Psi) by Hawaiian hoary bats during 

inventories in national parks on the island of Hawai`i .........................10 

LIST OF FIGURES 

Figure 1.  High and low elevation repeat survey points established in Hawai`i 

Volcanoes National Park.......................................................................6 

Figure 2.  Repeat survey points established in Pu`uhonua o Honaunau National 

Historical Park, Kaloko-Honokohau National Historical Park, and 
Pu`ukohola Heiau National Historic ......................................................7 
Figure 3.  Hawaiian hoary bat evening activity patterns during surveys from April 
to July 2005 in national parks on the island of Hawai`i .......................11 
Figure 4.  Hawaiian hoary bat monthly activity patterns during surveys from April 
to July 2005 in national parks on the island of Hawai`i .......................11 
Figure 5.  Hawaiian hoary bat feeding buzzes detected during surveys from April 
to July 2005 in native, mixed, non-native, and other vegetation types in 
national parks on the island of Hawai`i ...............................................12 

Figure 6.  All Hawaiian hoary bat feeding buzzes detected during surveys from 

April to July 2005 in various habitats in national parks on the islands of 
Hawai`i, Maui, and Moloka`i................................................................12 

Figure 7.  Map of Hawai`i Volcanoes National Park on the island of Hawai`i.  

Repeat survey points visited and incidental bat detections are shown, 
as well as tracks surveyed throughout the park ..................................14 

Figure 8.  Map of Pu`uhonua o Honaunau National Historical Park on the island 
of Hawai`i.  Repeat survey points visited and incidental bat detections 
are shown, as well as tracks surveyed throughout the park................15 

Figure 9.  Map of Kaloko-Honokohau National Historical Park on the island of 

Hawai`i.  Repeat survey points visited and incidental bat detections are 
shown, as well as tracks surveyed throughout the park......................16 

Figure 10.  Map of Pu`ukohola Heiau National Historic Site on the island of 

Hawai`i.  Repeat survey points visited and incidental bat detections are 
shown, as well as tracks surveyed throughout the park......................17 
Figure 11.  Map of Kalaupapa National Historical Park on the island of Moloka`i.  

Locations of incidental bat detections are shown, as well as tracks 
surveyed throughout the park .............................................................19 

Figure 12.  Map of Haleakala National Park on the island of Maui.  Locations of 

incidental bat detections are shown, as well as tracks surveyed 
throughout the park.............................................................................20 

iii  

 

ABSTRACT 

Because bats are often the only native terrestrial mammals on geographically isolated 
island systems, they are critical to the biodiversity of mammalian fauna.  The endemic 
Hawaiian hoary bat (Lasiurus cinereus semotus) is the only extant species of bat found in 
the Hawaiian Islands.  The objectives of the Hawaiian hoary bat inventory were to 
determine presence/no detection of bats in national parks and adjacent areas on the 
islands of Hawai`i, Maui, and Moloka`i, assess distribution of bats in these national 
parks, and make general associations between bats and selected habitats and elevations.  
We used acoustic detection systems, along with visual observations, to accomplish these 
objectives.  Through repeat surveys of points established in Hawai`i Volcanoes National 
Park, we found that bats occupied 33% of study sites from April to July 2005.  In 
addition, we found that bats occupied 44% of sites established on the west side of 
Hawai`i Island in Kaloko-Honokohau National Historical Park, Pu`ukohola Heiau 
National Historic Site, and Pu`uhonua o Honaunau National Historical Park.  Since we 
were only able to do a brief survey of Haleakala National Park and Kalaupapa National 
Historical Park, we did not calculate site occupancy proportions for these parks.  Results 
of our survey show that from April to June, Hawaiian hoary bats are most active 40-60 
minutes after sunset, but they begin to emerge earlier in July.  Furthermore, they appear 
to be opportunistic and forage in a variety of habitats, including native and non-native 
forests and shrublands, along roads and trails, and over areas of fresh/brackish water and 
open ocean. 

1  

 

INTRODUCTION 

As the only extant terrestrial mammal native to Hawai`i, the Hawaiian hoary bat 
(Lasiurus cinereus semotus) is important to the biodiversity of vertebrate fauna in this 
highly isolated island ecosystem.  Ancient Hawaiians called this solitary and elusive bat 
`Ope`ape`a, or half-leaf, as its wings resembled the half-leaf remaining on a taro stalk 
after the top half has been removed for cooking (Pukui and Elbert 1986).  The Hawaiian 
hoary bat is one of three subspecies including Lasiurus cinereus cinereus of North 
America and the South American subspecies, Lasiurus cinereus villosissimus (Tomich 
1974).  Although the Hawaiian hoary bat was listed as an endangered species in 1970, 
and is presently protected by both federal and state laws (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 
1970), current information regarding natural history and population status of this bat is 
scarce, resulting in incomplete and sometimes conflicting reports.   
Population estimates for the Hawaiian hoary bat have ranged from hundreds (Altonn 
1960) to thousands of individuals (Tomich 1974), but these numbers are based on 
anecdotal and incomplete data.  To date, researchers know very little about population 
numbers and yearly trends for this species (Fullard 1989; Tuttle 1995).  Menard (2001) 
suggests that abundance and distribution patterns may fluctuate according to season and 
altitude on the island of Hawai`i.  Based on visual and audio observations of flying bats, 
she noted that during the non-breeding period from September to March, Hawaiian 
hoary bats were marginally more common in the eastern highlands of the Hakalau Forest 
National Wildlife Refuge (three sites ranging from 1604 m to 1890 m elevation, mean 
July minimum temperatures 8-10C), than during the breeding period from April to 
August when bats seem to shift into the lowlands of the island (20 sites ranging from 0 to 
1,280 m, mean July minimum temperatures 11-20C).  This occurrence of bats in the 
lowlands from April to August agrees in part with Tomich (1986a), who noted that 
during those months Hawaiian hoary bats were regularly seen at sites from 300 m to 
790 m elevation along the Hamakua Coast on the northern section of Hawai`i Island.  
However, in apparent contrast to the high occurrence of bats that Menard reported from 
April to August at coastal sites, Tomich (1986a) considered bats as scarce at the coast 
from May through August.  Contradicting observations by both Menard and Tomich, 
Jacobs (1994) found no evidence of altitudinal or regional migration at foraging sites 
distributed over a broad altitudinal and geographical range on the island of Hawai`i 
during a study from February to August in 1992. 
Sightings of the Hawaiian hoary bat have occurred from sea level to as high as 4,115 m at 
the summit crater of Mauna Loa Volcano (Tomich 1974).  They have been observed 
flying and/or resting in a wide variety of both native and non-native vegetation types and 
landscapes (Tomich 1986b; Kepler and Scott 1990; Jacobs 1994; Reynolds et al. 1998; 
Menard 2001).  L. cinereus semotus is typically a solitary foliage roosting bat, but some 
bats will use man-made structures and rock crevices (Tomich 1974).  Furthermore, it is 
unclear to what extent this subspecies uses lava tubes.  On 2 August 1977, Fujioka and 
Gon (1988) observed 16 bats flying around an overhanging ledge of a collapsed lava tube 
on the island of Hawai`i, and others have found bat remains in lava tubes on Hawai`i and 
Maui (Tomich 1974).   

2  

 

The Hawaiian hoary bats ability to adapt to various habitats combined with limited and 
inconsistent information has made associating it with particular habitat types very 
difficult.  As a result, it is not possible to designate critical roosting and foraging habitat 
for this subspecies, so even the most basic management strategies are difficult to 
implement (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 1998).  The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service 
(1998) developed a Recovery Plan for the Hawaiian Hoary Bat, which aims to downlist 
this subspecies.  However, this can only happen after populations on the island of 
Hawai`i are stable or increasing for at least five consecutive years.  Threats to this species 
remain unclear, but habitat loss, pesticide use, predation (Tuttle 1995), and roost 
disturbance are issues to consider when developing management and monitoring 
strategies.     
The three main objectives of the Hawaiian hoary bat inventory were to: 1) Determine 
presence/no detection of bats in national parks and adjacent areas on the islands of 
Hawai`i, Maui, and Moloka`i, 2) assess distribution and relative activity levels of bats in 
these national parks, and 3) suggest general associations between bats and selected 
habitats and elevations.  Results of the Hawaiian hoary bat inventory will be used as a 
tool in development of a long-term monitoring protocol for these bats in the Pacific 
Island Network (PACN). 

METHODS 

Study Area 
Historically found on all the main Hawaiian Islands, Hawaiian hoary bat populations 
appear to be highest on Hawai`i and Kaua`i (Tomich 1974).  We conducted intensive bat 
surveys in four national parks on the island of Hawai`i: Hawai`i Volcanoes National Park 
(HAVO), Pu`uhonua o Honaunau National Historical Park (PUHO), Kaloko-Honokohau 
National Historical Park (KAHO), and Pu`ukohola Heiau National Historic Site (PUHE).  
Although we did not systematically survey the Ala Kahakai National Historic Trail 
(ALKA), parts of the trail pass through all four parks on Hawai`i.  In addition, we 
surveyed Kalaupapa National Historical Park (KALA) on Moloka`i and Haleakala 
National Park (HALE) on Maui.  In and around all parks, surveys included areas of 
variable vegetation cover.  Maps showing points and transects surveyed and vegetation 
types are shown in the results section.  However, vegetation classifications vary slightly 
between parks, or were not identified such as in PUHE and KALA, since GIS layers are 
currently not standardized.     

Hawai`i Volcanoes National Park 
Established on the island of Hawai`i in 1916, HAVO is approximately 134,679 ha in size, 
extending from sea level to 4,169 m elevation.  It encompasses the summits and rift zones 
of two of the worlds most active volcanoes, Kilauea and Mauna Loa, and includes the 
newly acquired Kahuku addition on the Southwest Rift Zone of Mauna Loa, as well as 
nearly 13,354 ha of rain forest in the `Ola`a Tract.  The park, largely surrounded by 
natural areas and lightly populated rural areas, has only minimal development within its 
boundaries.  

3  

 

Since 1983, Kilauea has been continuously erupting, while Mauna Loas last eruption 
occurred in 1984.  In addition to geological processes and volcanic activity, scientists and 
visitors alike recognize HAVO for its unique flora and fauna.  Seven ecological zones, 
including seacoast, lowland forest, mid-elevation woodland, rain forest, upland forest, 
subalpine, and alpine, are found within the park and harbor distinct plant and animal 
communities.  Other natural features contributing to the parks bio-diversity are cave 
ecosystems, anchialine pools, and wetlands.  

Pu`uhonua o Honaunau National Historical Park 
PUHO, on the island of Hawai`is western side, is located makai, or seaward, of 
Honaunau and is 74 ha in size.  This park is located at the shoreline of Mauna Loa 
Volcano and is mostly coastal in nature.  Brackish fishponds and wetlands, anchialine 
pools, springs, a cliff, and coastal strand communities are found in the park.  Towards the 
southern border there is a stretch of coastal dry forest of mostly alien species, including 
opiuma (Pithecellobium dulce), koa haole (Leucaena leucocephal), and kiawe (Prosopis 
pallida). 

Kaloko-Honokohau National Historical Park 
Located on the shoreline of the Hualalai Volcano on western Hawai`i Island, KAHO is 
469 ha in size with almost half of this area in marine waters.  Natural resources include 
coral reefs, beaches and rocky shores, anchialine pools, two man-made brackish 
fishponds with associated wetlands, former dryland forest, and bare lava fields.   

Pu`ukohola Heiau National Historic Site 
PUHE, another coastal national park located on the western side of Hawai`i Island, sits 
on a bluff overlooking Kawaihae Harbor in South Kohala.  Because it lies on the leeward 
side of the island and tends to receive little precipitation, the park and surrounding land 
are arid with little vegetation. In the rainy season, two streams flow in the park and 
converge to reach the ocean only when flow is high.  On its north side, PUHE borders a 
small boat harbor with commercial shipping facilities, while the southern edge of the park 
abuts Samuel M. Spencer County Park.  A county road runs just inside the northeastern 
boundary line and the western coastal boundary borders a shallow harbor partially 
enclosed by a stone breakwater.  Of the parks nearly 35 ha, 25 ha are federally controlled 
and 10 ha remain non-federal.  A stream, which originates outside the park, feeds a small 
wetland area, providing habitat for Palemon debilis (glass shrimp) and many freshwater 
plants. 

Kalaupapa National Historical Park 
Located on the island of Moloka`i, KALA is roughly 4,370 ha in size.  The Kalaupapa 
Peninsula, adjacent cliffs and valleys, and submerged lands and waters out to 400 m from 
shore make up the park.  Sea cliffs, narrow valleys, a volcanic crater, rain forest, 
lavatubes, caves, and offshore islands and waters are all present within park boundaries.  
Kauhako Crater, formed by a remnant volcanic rim rising over 137 m, contains a crater 
lake more than 244 m deep, while Waikolu Valley contains the only perennial stream in 

4  

 

the park.  Through cooperative agreements, the National Park Service manages almost all 
of this land.   
Hawaiian people inhabited the Kalaupapa peninsula and valleys for hundreds of years, 
before the settlement at Kalawao was established in 1866.  Many surviving Hansen's 
disease patients still live in the community of Kalaupapa, on the leeward side of the 
peninsula.   

Haleakala National Park 
Originally designated as part of Hawai`i National Park in 1916, HALE was established as 
a separate entity in 1961.  The park is located on east Maui and rises from sea level, at 
Ka`apahu and `Ohe`o, westward to the summit of Mount Haleakala (3,055 m).  HALE 
encompasses 12,215 ha, of which 10,003 ha are designated as wilderness.  It is exposed 
to both moist windward tradewinds, where slopes may receive 305 cm of annual rainfall, 
and drier leeward air.  The Summit District of the drier west side of the park is comprised 
of Haleakala Crater, portions of its outer slopes, and the upper ends of the Kaupo and 
Koolau gaps.  The wetter Kipahulu District includes Kipahulu, Kuiki and Kaumakani 
planezes, upper Hana rain forest, `Ohe`o/Puhilele coastal areas, and the new Ka`apahu 
addition.  HALE contains a number of natural ecosystems, including alpine cinder desert, 
sub-alpine shrublands, sub-alpine grasslands, montane bogs and lakes, rain forests, mesic 
forest, and coastal strand.  The park also contains the `Ohe`o stream ecosystem, which is 
a natural riparian habitat with its entire length inside national park boundaries.   

Selection of Survey Points and Transects 
Non-random fixed survey points and transect locations were determined based on the size 
of each park, accessibility and safety, and potential suitability of habitat for roosting 
and/or foraging bats (i.e., forested areas along roads and trails, areas of high insect 
density, and/or locations of previous bat observations).  Survey areas were limited to the 
parks and immediate vicinities.   
Because of its large size, limited accessibility, and extremes in elevation, we established 
24 survey points in HAVO, with 12 high elevation points (between 1,005 m and 2,011 
m) and 12 low elevation points (sea level to 1,005 m).  Points were spaced a straight-
line distance of 2,500 m apart.  We distributed points along Hilina Pali Road, Chain of 
Craters Road, Crater Rim Drive, Highway 11, and Mauna Loa Strip Road (Figure 1). 

 

For the smaller parks (PUHE, KAHO, PUHO), surveys were conducted at points within 
park boundaries and in immediately surrounding areas.  We spaced survey points in these 
parks 800 m apart.  We surveyed PUHO from points located along the 1871 Trail, the 
Great Wall shoreline, and on Highway 160.  We conducted surveys in KAHO at points 
placed along trails and boundary lines, at the adjacent Honokohau Harbor, the Aimakapa 
and Kaloko Fishponds, and near the visitors center.  A central point was located within 
park boundaries at PUHE, the smallest of the west Hawai`i parks, on an overlook 
between the heiau and the newly constructed visitors center, and additional points were 
distributed throughout the surrounding vicinity (Figure 2).  

5  

 

Figure 1.   High and low elevation repeat survey points established in Hawai`i Volcanoes National Park on the island of Hawai`i 
during Hawaiian hoary bat surveys from April to August 2005. 

 

6 

 

Figure 2.   Repeat survey points established in Pu`uhonua o Honaunau National Historical Park (PUHO), Kaloko-Honokohau 
National Historical Park (KAHO), and Pu`ukohola Heiau National Historic Site (PUHE) on the west side of Hawai`i Island during 
Hawaiian hoary bat surveys from April to August 2005. 

 

7 

 

Surveys of KALA (Figure 11) and HALE (Figure 12) were limited due to time and 
budget constraints; however, we surveyed sections of major trails and roads in late-
May/early-June 2005.  We selected survey areas in these parks based upon accessibility 
and safety, previous bat sightings by park staff, and habitat characteristics (i.e., areas near 
freshwater, possible foraging and/or roosting habitat, and shelter from the strong year-
round winds in KALA).   

Survey Methods 
We conducted acoustic surveys for L. cinereus semotus in these national parks between 
April and July of 2005.  Visual observations were important to locate flying bats during 
sunset and early-morning surveys, but we focused primarily on using acoustic detection 
equipment.  We used ultrasonic detectors to determine the presence or absence of 
echolocating bats at fixed points and along transects and to listen for feeding activity.   
Handheld Mini-III ultrasonic bat detectors (Ultra Sound Advice, U.K.) were used to 
convert bat echolocation calls into clicks that are audible to human ears.  One limitation 
of using bat detectors is the difficulty in distinguishing multiple species of bats; however, 
because only one species of bat is present in the Hawaiian Islands, this was not a 
constraint.  Following methods used by Jacobs (1994), the Mini-III detectors were set to 
30 kHz, which is the peak foraging echolocation frequency used by the Hawaiian hoary 
bat (Belwood and Fullard 1984).  Surveys began one half-hour before sunset and 
continued for two hours post sunset, ensuring that periods of greatest evening bat activity 
were monitored (Menard 2001).  Occasionally, we did surveys for one hour before 
sunrise, to account for possible morning activity at selected sites (Reynolds et al. 1998).   
Acoustic detections were categorized as passes (single or multiple low repetition clicks) 
or buzzes (rapidly repeating clicks which occur more frequently as the bat approaches a 
prey item), which indicate feeding (Fullard 1989; Jacobs 1993; Cabrera 1996).  We did 
not attempt to capture the number of passes or feeding buzzes/unit time, we simply 
recorded presence/absence of a bat and presence/absence of a feeding buzz.  In order to 
make general suggestions regarding habitat associations (i.e., areas where hoary bats 
were observed foraging), we relied on the detection of feeding buzzes.  Because it is not 
possible to differentiate between several passes by one bat or single passes by several 
bats (Fenton 1970; British Columbia Resources Inventory Committee 1998; Johnston 
2002), direct population density estimates are not feasible (Thomas and West 1989; 
British Columbia Resources Inventory Committee 1998; Johnston 2002).  In addition to 
audio detections, we recorded visual observations and attempted to count individuals only 
when sufficient light permitted.   
Locations of bats detected visually or aurally, as well as transects and points visited, were 
recorded with a Garmin 76C GPS unit using the Universal Transverse Mercator, North 
American Datum 1983, zone 5Q.   

Repeat Surveys 
Repeat surveys were conducted at all fixed points in four national parks (HAVO, KAHO, 
PUHE, and PUHO) on the island of Hawai`i.  This allowed for continued monitoring of 
specific sites within each park over several months.  We visited each point on at least six 

8 

 

separate occasions over a 14-week period from mid-April to late-July, with at least one 
week between visits.  We surveyed each point both acoustically and visually, depending 
on available sunlight, for 15 minutes.  Random visit order was used to reduce temporal 
effects on detection probabilities (Jacobs 1994; Reynolds et al. 1998).  Bat presence/no 
detection was recorded along with notes regarding feeding buzzes, habitat, number of 
bats identified, mode of detection (visual or aural), weather variables, and time of 
detection.  Presence/no detection data collected in the Hawai`i Island parks during repeat 
surveys were analyzed using program PRESENCE (Hines and MacKenzie 2004).  
Because few species are so conspicuous that they are always detected when present at a 
site, the probability that a site is actually occupied may be underestimated (i.e., naive 
estimate).  Therefore, through analysis of detection histories from repeatedly surveyed 
sites, the probability of detecting the species is determined, which then allows researchers 
to generate an unbiased estimate of the proportion of sites occupied (Psi) (MacKenzie et 
al. 2002).  We used a single season output model for data analysis with program 
PRESENCE, which assumes that all parameters are constant across sites and no changes 
are occurring to the state of occupancy to any sites during the sampling season.  

Non-Repeat Surveys 
In order to provide more thorough survey coverage of important selected areas and to 
supplement park distribution records, we conducted non-repeat surveys in all parks 
between February and July.  These surveys included one-time visits to selected points and 
transects that were traveled by foot or by a slowly moving vehicle (<24 km/h).  Transects 
were generally selected along trails and roads that could be safely walked at night.  
Random stops (5-20 minutes duration) were made in open areas along these transects and 
in areas believed to be potentially suitable for roosting/foraging bats.  We report 
information collected through non-repeat surveys as incidental sightings. 
 
Data from this inventory for all six national were entered into NPSpecies - the National 
Park Service Biodiversity Database available at 
https://science1.nature.nps.gov/npspecies/web/main/start 
 

 

9 

 

RESULTS 

We detected various levels of Hawaiian hoary bat activity in or around all national parks 
on the islands of Hawai`i, Maui, and Moloka`i, during summer surveys in 2005.  Based 
on repeat visits to 24 HAVO survey points, we estimate that 33% (Psi = 0.3343, naive 
estimate = 0.25, detection probability = 0.2089) of our study sites were occupied by bats.  
Because the parks on the west side of Hawai`i Island are small in size, we pooled 
presence/no detection data from all 19 repeat points distributed across PUHO, PUHE, and 
KAHO for analysis and found that bats occupied 44% (Psi = 0.4362, naive estimate = 
0.368421, detection probability = 0.2668) of these points (Table 1).  Because we did not 
have repeat survey points established in KALA and HALE, we did not calculate the 
proportion of sites occupied by hoary bats in these parks. 

Table 1.   Proportion of sites occupied (Psi) by Hawaiian hoary bats during inventories 
in national parks on the island of Hawai`i.  Surveys were done between April and July 
2005.  Standard Errors for Psi and detection probabilities are shown in ( ). 

Park 

 

No. 
Sites 

 

HAVO 

24 

PUHO 
KAHO 
PUHE 

19 

No. 

Sampling 
Occasions 

 

6 

6 

Naive 

Estimate 

 

0.25 

Psi 

 

Detection 
Probability 

 

Variance-
Covariance 

Matrix 

Psi 

p 

0.3343 

(0.137309) 

0.2089 

(0.084191) 

0.0189 
-0.0059 

-0.0059 
0.0071 

0.368421 

0.4362 

(0.141766) 

0.2668 

(0.082477) 

0.0201 
-0.0045 

-0.0045 
0.0068 

 
In general, we detected a peak in bat activity approximately 40-60 minutes after sunset in 
HAVO, as well as in PUHO and KAHO (Figure 3), during surveys from April to July 
2005.  When comparing monthly bouts of bat activity in these parks, we found that 
Hawaiian hoary bats emerged later (40-60 minutes post-sunset) from April to June, but 
began to appear much earlier in the evening (20-25 minutes post-sunset) during July 
(Figure 4).  We heard feeding buzzes in native and mixed (native/non-native) vegetation 
types in HAVO, but predominately non-native areas in PUHO and mixed or other areas 
of KAHO (Figure 5).  Although bats used both native and mixed vegetation in HAVO, all 
of these feeding buzzes occurred in forested habitat.  This was similar for HALE and 
KALA, where we detected all feeding buzzes along forested edges.  We detected bats 
foraging over bare lava and coastal shrub at PUHO, but most often we observed them 
foraging over the open ocean.  At KAHO we detected bats foraging over areas of open 
fresh/brackish ponds, as well as shrubland (Figure 6).  

10 

 

s
n
o
i
t
c
e
t
e
D

 
f
o
 
r
e
b
m
u
N

 
l
a
t
o
T

14

12

10

8

6

4

2

0

HAVO
PUHO & KAHO

-20

0

20

60

80
40
Minutes from Sunset

100

120

140

 

Figure 3.   Hawaiian hoary bat evening activity patterns during surveys from April to 
July 2005 in national parks on the island of Hawai`i.  Total number of bat detections is 
given in 20-minute intervals relative to sunset, where zero equals sunset. 

t
e
s
n
u
S
 
r
e
t
f

 

A
s
e
t
u
n
M

i

70

60

50

40

30

20

10

0

HAVO
PUHO/KAHO

APRIL

MAY

JUNE

JULY

MONTH

 

Figure 4.   Hawaiian hoary bat monthly activity patterns during surveys from April to 
July 2005 in national parks on the island of Hawai`i.  The average time of bat detections 
is represented as minutes after sunset, where zero equals sunset. 

11 

 

10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

HAVO
PUHO
KAHO

 

Native

Mixed

Non-native

Other

Vegetation Type

 

s
e
z
z
u
b
g
n
d
e
e
f
 
f
o

i

 
r
e
b
m
u
N

 

Figure 5.   Hawaiian hoary bat feeding buzzes detected during surveys from April to July 
2005 in native, mixed, non-native, and other (i.e., fresh/brackish water, open ocean, and 
bare lava) vegetation types in national parks on the island of Hawai`i.  

 

s
e
z
z
u
b
g
n
d
e
e
f
 
f
o

i

 
r
e
b
m
u
N

7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

Bare Lava

PUHO KAHO HAVO HALE

KALA

Shrub

Forest

Fresh/Brackish Water
Open Ocean

Habitat Type

 

Figure 6.   All Hawaiian hoary bat feeding buzzes detected during surveys from April to 
July 2005 in various habitats in national parks on the islands of Hawai`i, Maui, and 
Moloka`i.  

12 

 

Hawai`i Volcanoes National Park 
In HAVO, we recorded 17 bat detections during 10 of 41 survey nights.  Of these, nine 
detections occurred at high elevation repeat survey sites along Mauna Loa Strip Road, 
while two detections occurred along Highway 11 (points High-8 and Low-1), and the 
remaining six were incidental sightings also recorded at high elevation points (Figure 7).  
Point High-1 was surrounded by dominant ohia and mamane trees, while High-2 was 
dominated by koa with moderate stature native trees sub-dominating.  At High-3, koa and 
mamane dominated, whereas koa and ohia were dominant at High-4.  All incidental 
sightings occurred in high elevation areas (above 1,005 m) with koa and 
koa/mamane/manele (Sapindus saponaria) dominant trees.  Bats detected at points Low-
1 and High-8 occurred in ohia dominant areas.  Detections began as early as 1912 h and 
were heard as late as 2023 h, but we detected most echolocation calls before 2000 h.  We 
heard only three feeding buzzes while surveying HAVO.  These occurred at Waldrons 
Ledge overlook, where an edge is created by ohia (Metrosideros polymorpha) and faya 
(Myrica faya) trees growing along the side of Kilauea Caldera, and at points High-1 and 
High-3 between mid-May and early-June. 
Other areas surveyed in and near HAVO included Devastation Trail, Escape Road, 
`Ainahou Ranch, Halape Shelter area, Keahou Shelter area, `Apua Point, and Wright 
Road where it leads to the `Ola`a Tract.  We surveyed each of these areas once between 
March and July, with the exception of `Ainahou Ranch, which we surveyed on two 
separate occasions.  We did not detect bats in any of these areas.  However, Kathleen 
Misajon (pers. comm.) reportedly disturbed a Hawaiian hoary bat roosting under the 
eaves of the `Ainahou Ranch house on 18 April 2005 at approximately 1100 h.  

13 

 

Figure 7.   Map of Hawai`i Volcanoes National Park on the island of Hawai`i.  Repeat survey points ((cid:122)) visited and incidental bat 
detections ((cid:83)) observed during Hawaiian hoary bat surveys from April to July 2005 are shown, as well as tracks surveyed throughout 
the park. 

 

14 

 

Pu`uhonua o Honaunau National Historical Park 
We observed bat activity during 10 of 11 survey nights in this park.  On 22 April 2005, 
we recorded nine bats foraging between 10-40 m offshore from point PUHO-4.  This was 
the greatest number of individual bat sightings from any park during the survey.  We 
recorded most bat detections in areas of non-native vegetation.  These detections were 
heard most often between points PUHO-4 and PUHO-5 along ecotones where koa haole 
and tree legumes create edges with the ocean.  We detected numerous feeding buzzes in 
many areas along the 1871 Trail, but they occurred most often along the southern portion 
of the trail and at points PUHO-4 and PUHO-5.  Of 22 total detections, we recorded 11 
from repeat survey points, while additional incidental bat detections were recorded in the 
main visitor parking lot, along the 1871 Trail, over barren lava, and among coconut trees 
near the visitors center (Figure 8).  We detected bat activity at each repeat point at least 
once during the survey.  

Figure 8.  Map of Pu`uhonua o Honaunau National Historical Park on the island of 
Hawai`i.  Repeat survey points ((cid:122)) visited and locations of incidental bat detections ((cid:83)) 
observed during Hawaiian hoary bat surveys from April to July 2005 are shown, as well 
as tracks surveyed throughout the park. 

 

15 

 

Kaloko-Honokohau National Historical Park 
Between March and July, we detected bats on only four of 15 survey nights in KAHO.  
At least two bats were foraging above the Kaloko fishpond (KAHO-1) on 21 April 2005.  
Additionally, a detection at repeat survey point KAHO-7 occurred on 24 May 2005 near 
the Kaloko Harbor, when a single bat pass was observed.  We also detected bat activity 
near the KAHO canoe house (inland/strand forest) and along Highway 19 near the park 
boundary (Figure 9).  With the exception of one late-May detection, all bat activity in this 
park occurred in April.  

Figure 9.   Map of Kaloko-Honokohau National Historical Park on the island of Hawai`i.  
Repeat survey points ((cid:122)) visited and locations of incidental bat detections ((cid:83)) observed 
during Hawaiian hoary bat surveys from April to July 2005 are shown, as well as tracks 
surveyed throughout the park. 

 

16 

 

Pu`ukohola Heiau National Historic Site 
We surveyed PUHE on 12 separate nights between March and July.  Although we 
detected a brief feeding buzz on 26 May 2005 in the parking lot of the neighboring 
Samuel M. Spencer County Park, we did not detect bats here in additional surveys.  
Furthermore, no bats were detected at any of the repeat survey points established in 
PUHE, nor were any incidental detections made anywhere within park boundaries 
(Figure 10).  The map for this park does not show vegetation classifications, as GIS 
layers are not currently available.  Reports from an adjacent landowner (near point 
PUHE-2) suggest that bats were more common in the area approximately 5 years ago 
(Stew Dela Cruz, pers. comm.), but that recent sightings have been very rare.  However, 
members of park staff indicate that hoary bats are active at dawn near the park 
maintenance shed during winter months (Bernard Gomes, pers. comm.).  We did not find 
any bats active in this area during two early morning surveys in July.  
 

Figure 10.   Map of Pu`ukohola Heiau National Historic Site on the island of Hawai`i.  
Repeat survey points ((cid:122)) visited and locations of incidental bat detections ((cid:83)) observed 
during Hawaiian hoary bat surveys from April to July 2005 are shown, as well as tracks 
surveyed throughout the park. 

 

17 

 

Kalaupapa National Historical Park 
During our time visit to this park in June 2005, we detected bats on only one night within 
park boundaries.  Additionally, we heard a second detection, including a feeding buzz, 
just outside of KALA at the Pala`au State Park picnic area (Figure 11).  Both detections 
occurred in forested areas on 9 June 2005, approximately one hour prior to sunrise.  
These detections were about twenty minutes apart and within roughly 200 m of each 
other.  The map for this park does not show vegetation classifications, as GIS layers are 
not currently available.   
We did not detect any bats on the peninsula itself.  Heavy winds year round would seem 
to discourage bat activity there.  A brief survey of Waihanau Valley resulted in no bat 
observations, and we were unable to explore other valleys due to time constraints.  Aside 
from seasonal sources of freshwater in these valleys resulting from periods of heavy 
rains, the only source of freshwater on the peninsula is the lake at the bottom of Kauhako 
Crater.  We surveyed the crater area for a single night (1830-2000 h) from two points; 
one mid-way down the trail to the crater lake and one approximately 25 m above the lake.  
Both of these areas seemed suitable for bat activity, due to their proximity to fresh water, 
shelter from winds, and intact canopy cover; however, we did not detect any bats at these 
locations.     
Little information was available regarding previous sightings or evidence of bats within 
this park, but previous reports by park staff indicate that bats are active at dusk and dawn 
during the spring season at the summit of the Kalaupapa Trail.  We also interviewed 
several long-term residents, but they had no knowledge of bats on the Kalaupapa 
peninsula. 

18 

 

 

Figure 11.   Map of Kalaupapa National Historical Park on the island of Moloka`i.  
Locations of incidental bat detections ((cid:83)) observed during Hawaiian hoary bat surveys 
in June 2005 are shown, as well as tracks surveyed throughout the park.  

Haleakala National Park 
Time constraints restricted surveys to a small area of this park over a six-night period.  
We did nighttime surveys of the Hosmers Grove (2,100 m) area, which is predominantly 
shrubland, on 31 May and 2 June 2005, as well as a morning survey on 3 June 2005.  
During these surveys, we observed bat activity on only 31 May (Figure 12), when we 
detected five feeding buzzes along the southern edge of Hosmers Grove.  
From 3 June to 5 June 2005, we conducted dusk and dawn surveys in the Kipahulu 
maintenance yard and bunkhouse area, but we did not detect any bats.  We extended this 
survey to the open area of the adjacent campground, areas of semi-forested pastureland 
north of the bunkhouse and maintenance yard, and along the Pipiwai Trail.  A single 
detection was made along the Pipiwai Trail in a mixed forest/grassland area down-trail 
from Kapaha Farm at approximately 1945 h on 4 June 2005. 

 

19 

 

Figure 12.   Map of Haleakala National Park on the island of Maui.  Locations of 
incidental bat detections ((cid:83)) observed during Hawaiian hoary bat surveys in late May 
and early June 2005 are shown, as well as tracks surveyed in the park.  

 

DISCUSSION 

The main objective of this survey was to determine presence of L. cinereus semotus 
within six national parks of the Hawaiian Islands.  With the exception of PUHE, we 
observed Hawaiian hoary bats demonstrating varying degrees of activity within 
boundaries of all Hawaiian national parks that we surveyed.  Due to the difficulty in 
capturing these bats and locating roosting sites, we relied on bat echolocation activity to 
determine areas occupied by Hawaiian hoary bats.  Oliveira (1998) suggests that bats 
detected at sunset are likely to be roosting nearby, and since most echolocation calls were 
heard early in the evening (within an hour after sunset), it may be possible that important 
roosting habitat exists in close proximity to areas where Hawaiian hoary bats were 
detected.   
In regards to seasonality and timing of detections during this study, we recognized earlier 
mean emergence times for bats in all Hawai`i Island national parks beginning in July.  
This is consistent with a study by Kepler and Scott (1990) who recorded Hawaiian hoary 
bats flying earlier in the evening between August and December.  They attribute this 
earlier emergence to fledging juveniles that are just beginning to forage on their own.  

20 

 

These young bats are most likely less efficient at finding and capturing food and therefore 
need more time to feed and meet nightly energy requirements.  Likewise, Jacobs (1994) 
also suggested that an observed increase in Hawaiian hoary bat activity at some sites on 
the island of Hawai`i during September and October 1992 might be a result of fledging 
young of the year. 
Another goal of this survey was to investigate possible habitat associations that exist 
between Hawaiian hoary bats and native, non-native, and mixed vegetation types, as well 
as forest edges, ponds, open ocean, and barren areas.  Because we selected our study sites 
primarily in areas of accessible roads or trails, we detected bats most often along forest 
edges and openings.  This supports finding by Reynolds et al. (1998), who observed 57% 
of Hawaiian hoary bat detections in the Puna District of Hawai`i Island along forest edges 
and open areas of roads they surveyed, as well as reports by Kepler and Scott (1990), 
who suggested that bats occur most often along mesic forest edges, rather than in the 
forests themselves.  Because Lasiurines typically forage along wooded edges (Barbour 
and Davis 1969), ecotones created by roads and ocean edges may provide important 
foraging habitat for this subspecies in Hawai`i.  However, our results, as well as 
Reynolds et al. (1998), are likely biased due to site selection, as bats may simply be more 
visible along edges.   
In previous Hawaiian hoary bat surveys, Kepler and Scott (1990) recorded only 19% of 
bat observations from native vegetation, while roughly 64% were recorded in areas of 
exotic vegetation.  This differed from a study by Jacobs (1994) associating these bats 
most often with areas of native vegetation.  During our summer surveys in 2005, almost 
all bat detections in HAVO occurred along Mauna Loa Strip Road in areas of native 
forest, especially among koa and ohia.  This high occurrence of bats in upland forested 
areas makes sense, as Lasiurine bats are typically obligate foliage-roosting species that 
use a variety of trees (Shump and Shump 1982, Kepler and Scott 1990) and forage along 
wooded edges.  These areas may be better suited for roosting and/or foraging (i.e., 
sufficient canopy cover for roosting and/or forest edges providing successful foraging 
opportunities), while coastal and lower elevation areas of the park may be unsuitable due 
to windy and barren conditions with only low shrubby vegetation.   
Although we did not detect any bats in PUHE, we observed bats in PUHO and KAHO 
using a variety of vegetation types including non-native vegetation and areas of open 
water.  Areas upslope from PUHE and KAHO are mostly open and covered by old, 
barren lava flows and grasses.  This may explain a lack in consistency of bat activity in 
these areas, as bats may have to travel greater distances to find adequate canopy cover for 
roosting.  However, areas near PUHO provide more vegetation coverage to perhaps better 
meet Hawaiian hoary bat roosting or foraging requirements.  The abundance of bats at 
PUHO, combined with the consistency of sightings and feeding buzzes, seems to indicate 
important foraging grounds.   
It is important to note the difficulties we encountered when attempting to associate these 
bats with particular habitats.  Our small sample size and inconsistencies in vegetation 
classifications across parks did not permit for meaningful statistical analyses.  Thus, it 
seems that Hawaiian hoary bats may be opportunistic and flexible in selecting foraging 
habitat, but development of a uniform habitat classification system, more thorough 
survey coverage of these areas during different seasons, and larger sample sizes are 

21 

 

necessary before significant comparisons can be made.  Further studies regarding prey 
availability should also be considered before making conclusions linking Hawaiian hoary 
bats to certain habitats.    
Additional surveys in KALA and HALE will be important to better establish distribution 
patterns and changes in bat activity in these national parks.  Our surveys at the summit 
area in HALE did not reveal any bat detections.  However, previous observations of bat-
like activity observed during a seabird radar study (Bob Day, pers. comm.) suggest that 
they are widely distributed here.  Furthermore, HALE Resource Management staff has 
reported seeing bats near the summit fence, Hosmer Grove, and Kaupo Gap, as well as 
finding several specimens near the south slope fence of the park between 1986 and 1993 
(Cathleen Bailey, pers. comm.), also suggesting that Hawaiian hoary bats are active in the 
park.  Although we heard a few feeding buzzes in forested areas of HALE and KALA, 
we could not draw meaningful conclusions about these parks, as our findings resulted 
from very limited surveys.  In KALA, areas of particular interest for future surveys 
include the Kauhako Crater area, the valleys of Waihanau, Wai`ale`ia, and Waikolu, and 
the forested areas of Kalawao.  These areas provide intact non-native canopy cover and 
adequate protection from the strong winds.  Further detections along the Kalaupapa Trail 
may also provide more insight about bat activity within park boundaries.    
Finally, by providing information on the detectability of L. cinereus semotus, we were 
able to calculate site occupancy estimates for hoary bats in the national parks of Hawai`i.  
Species are sometimes recorded as absent when they are, in fact, present but not detected 
for a variety of reasons (MacKenzie et al. 2002), which may include seasonal and 
temporal activities.  Previous Hawaiian hoary bat surveys have not considered 
detectability, which may have lead to low estimates of site occupancy.  In our surveys of 
the national parks on the island of Hawai`i (HAVO, PUHE, KAHO, PUHO) we used 
detection/no detection histories of repeated site surveys to estimate species detectability 
and thus a more accurate estimate of the probability that an area is occupied (Mackenzie 
et al. 2002; Wintle et al. 2004).  In HAVO, our naive estimate of site occupancy differed 
from the corrected estimate by only 8%.  Similarly, the corrected site occupancy estimate 
for PUHO/PUHE/KAHO was only 7% greater than the naive estimate.  These numbers 
may seem slight; however, as more repeat points are established and continuously visited, 
differences between naive and corrected site occupancy estimates will likely be more 
significant.  
Further knowledge of bat presence and foraging activity within national park areas will 
aid in future management and monitoring of this species.  Baseline information provided 
from this inventory will help us to identify and select long-term monitoring sites and 
methodologies for assessing changes in bat activity.  Further surveys of HALE and 
KALA, as well as areas in the recently acquired Kahuku addition in HAVO, should be 
completed to add to our knowledge of distribution and activity of Hawaiian hoary bats in 
the national parks of Hawai`i.  In addition, future studies should address temporal and 
seasonal issues, prey availability, and land use or cover. 

22 

 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We thank David Duffy, Unit Leader: the Pacific Cooperative Studies Unit (PCSU). This 
project was carried out under a cooperative agreement between the National Park 
Service, Pacific Island Network and the the Pacific Cooperative Studies Unit, University 
of Hawaii at Manoa (Task Agreement No. CA 8012-AO-001). We would like to thank 
the numerous staff and volunteer members from all national parks in Hawai`i that helped 
with data collection and provided us with information regarding Hawaiian hoary bat 
observations.  We also appreciate guidance and comments made throughout development 
and implementation of the Hawaiian hoary bat inventory by Marcos Gorresen and Frank 
Bonaccorso (USGS).  Finally, we would like to extend our gratitude to Stew Dela Cruz 
for talking story about bats and allowing us to access his property. 

23 

 

LITERATURE CITED 

Altonn, H. 1960. Rare isle bat isnt a belfry dweller.  Honolulu Star-Bulletin, April 17, 

p.2. 

Barbour, R. W., and W. H. Davis. 1969. Bats of America. The University Press of 

Kentucky, Lexington. 

Belwood, J. J., and J. H. Fullard. 1984. Echolocation and foraging behavior in the 

Hawaiian hoary bat, Lasiurus cinereus semotus. Canadian Journal of Zoology 62: 
2113-2120.  

British Columbia Resources Inventory Committee. 1998. Inventory methods for bats: 
standard components for British Columbias biodiversity No. 20. Version 2.0. 
Ministry of Environment, Lands, and Parks. Resources Inventory Branch for the 
Terrestrial Ecosystems Task Force Resources Inventory Committee. Victoria, 
B.C. 

Cabrera, T. H. 1996. Occurrence of the Hawaiian hoary bat in koa/ohia montane wet 

forest on the island of Hawaii. Pacific Science 50: 102. 

Fenton, M. B. 1970. A technique for monitoring bat activity with results obtained from 
different environments in southern Ontario.  Canadian Journal of Zoology 48: 
847-851. 

Fujioka, K. K., and S. M. Gon. 1988. Observations of the Hawaiian bat (Lasiurus 

cinereus semotus) in the districts of Ka`u and South Kona, Island of Hawaii. 
Journal of Mammalogy 69: 369-371. 

Fullard, J. H. 1989. `Ope`ape`a: Hawaiis elusive native bat. Bats 7: 10-13. 
Hines, J., and D. MacKenzie. 2004. Program PRESENCE. Software to estimate patch 

occupancy rates and related parameters. US Geological Survey, Patuxent Wildlife 
Research Center. 

Jacobs, D. S. 1993. Character release in the endangered Hawaiian hoary bat, Lasiurus 

cinereus semotus.  Ph.D. Dissertation, Univ. of Hawaii, Honolulu. 

Jacobs, D. 1994. Distribution and abundance of the endangered Hawaiian hoary bat, 

Lasiurus cinereus semotus. Pacific Science 48: 193-200. 

Johnston, D. 2002. Data collection protocol: Yuma bat (Myotis yumanensis). Wetlands 

Regional Monitoring Program Plan. San Jose, California. 7 pp. 

Kepler, C. B., and J. M. Scott. 1990. Notes on distribution and behavior of the 

endangered Hawaiian hoary bat (Lasiurus cinereus semotus), 1964-1983. Elepaio 
50: 59-64. 

MacKenzie, D. I., J. A. Nichols, G. B. Lachman, S. Droege, J. A. Royle, and C. A. 

Langtimm. 2002. Estimating site occupancy rates when detection probabilities are 
less than one. Ecology 83: 2248-2255. 

Menard, T. 2001. Activity patterns of the Hawaiian hoary bat (Lasiurus cinereus 

semotus) in relation to reproductive time periods. M. S. Thesis, University of 
Hawaii, Honolulu. 

24 

 

Oliveira, M. C. 1998. Anabat System Practical Guide: Survey Techniques, Collection and 

Characterization of Reference Bat Echolocation Calls, Common Field Problems 
and Problem Solving. Department of Natural Resources, Queensland, Australia. 
Pukui, M. K., and S. H. Elbert. 1986. Hawaiian Dictionary: Hawaiian-English, English-
Hawaiian: Revised and Enlarged Edition. University of Hawaii Press, Honolulu. 

Reynolds, M. H., B. M. B. Nielsen, and J. D. Jacobi. 1997/1998. Surveys of the Hawaiian 

hoary bat in the District of Puna, Hawai`i Island. `Elepaio 57: 153-157. 

Shump, K. A., Jr., and A. U. Shump. 1982. Lasiurus cinereus. Mammalian Species 185: 

1-5.  

Thomas, D. W., and S. D. West. 1989. Sampling methods for bats. U.S. Forest Service. 

Gen. Tech. Rep. PNW243.  

Tomich, P. Q. 1974. The Hawaiian hoary bat, daredevil of the volcanoes. National Parks 

and Conservation Magazine 48: 10-13. 

Tomich, P. Q. 1986a. Endangered species info system, Species workbook. Part I-Species 

Distribution and Part 2-Species biology. Prepared for U.S. Fish and Wildlife 
Service. Available at U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Ecological Services, 
Honolulu. 

Tomich, P. Q. 1986b. Mammals in Hawaii, 2nd edition. Bishop Museum Press, 

Honolulu, HI. 

Tuttle, M. D. 1995. The little-known world of hoary bats. Bats 13: 3-6.  
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 1970. Conservation of endangered species and other fish 

or wildlife. Fed. Reg. 35: 16047-16048. 

U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 1998. Recovery plan for the Hawaiian hoary bat. U.S. 

Fish and Wildlife Service. Portland, OR.  

Wintle, B. A., M. A. McCarthy, K. M. Parris, and M. A. Burgman. 2004. Precision and 
bias of methods for estimating point survey detection probabilities. Ecological 
Applications 14: 703-712. 

 

25 

