National Park Service
U.S. Department of the Interior

Wayside Exhibits

a guide to developing outdoor interpretive exhibits

NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | HARPERS FERRY CENTER | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009

National Park Service
U.S. Department of the Interior

Wayside Guide

Divided into three main sections listed below, the Guide defines 
the medium, illustrates standards and stages of work, and lists 
webpages for more in-depth tools and information. 

3-4 Foreword

What it is, who its for, and how to use it.

524 Section A The Wayside Medium: An Overview

A look at the strengths and limitations of the wayside medium,  
including tips for park managers

2561 Section B Wayside Development
6278 Section C Wayside Production

Planning, design, writing, and graphics acquisition

Production, installation, and maintenance

7980 Index

8184 Appendix

A list of webpages included throughout the Wayside Guide

NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | HARPERS FERRY CENTER | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009

Foreword

 Wayside Guide

What is the Wayside Guide?
The Wayside Guide is an overview of the National Park Service 
(NPS) wayside exhibit standards and work process. The Guide 
emphasizes best practices and good examples of site-specific 
outdoor interpretation based on visitor-use data. Waysides may 
appear simple in form and function, but their development can 
be complex. 

This Guide is not a complete how-to manual. It is a supplement 
to professional-level knowledge and skills for graphic design, 
interpretive writing, research, and other disciplines.

Goal

The purpose of this Guide is to provide information and tools for preparation, 
participation, and management of a wayside project.

Who Benefits?

Parks
Park superintendents will be better able to scope a project when fully informed 
of the wayside process. Budgets and schedules are more accurate when based 
on a clear understanding of the work, the level of staff participation, and 
additional assistance needed. Park staff will be better prepared to participate 
in, communicate, and manage the additional workload.

Park Partners
Many park partners request NPS assistance in developing wayside exhibits. 
With the exception of the National Park Service brand, park partners and other 
non-NPS organizations are encouraged to use the Wayside Guide. Partners are 
encouraged to build on these standards and develop their own Section D. 

Harpers Ferry Center 
Media specialists can work more efficiently and effectively when all team 
members have a good understanding of the process. Media specialists will use 
the Guide to orient new staff and project teams, and as course material for 
workshops and training on the wayside process.

Contractors
Contractors will understand the expectations of the NPS and benefit from 
improved efficiency when all team members have a good understanding of the 
process. Project delays can be costly. Waysides, unlike exhibits and films, are 
a relatively low-cost medium. A better informed project team will minimize 
contract modifications and delays.

Visitors
Visitors who experience poor-quality wayside exhibits may choose to avoid the 
medium entirely. Conversely, a visitor who has had an enriched experience 
from compelling, high-quality waysides, will come to expect the same in other 
locations. Improving all waysides will increase the active use and high level of 
visitor-expectation for the medium as a whole. 

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 3

Foreword

 Wayside Guide

How Does It Work?
The Wayside Guide is designed to support teams of media 
specialists and park managers with wayside development and 
production. It is organized around two work process charts that 
outline major stages of work and supporting activities. Each 
activity is illustrated in a double-sided page, or pages. Not 
everyone on the team needs to read the entire document. Use 
the Guide a-page-at-a-time, or in its entirety.

Send comments and questions about the Guide to  
betsy_ehrlich@nps.gov or call 304-535-6200.

A Brief Look

Use Section A and the Work Process Charts for basic information about 
waysides and the work process. Use this section to help the project team, and 
stakeholders, understand the nature of the wayside medium.

In-Depth

Use select pages from Section B and C throughout a project for team 
meetings and new assignments, to help contractors understand expectations, 
and to prepare for the next steps in a project. Use these sections to help team 
members understand how their work contributes to the whole. 

Web Links

Some principles of wayside development are more timeless; technologies and 
tools are rapidly evolving. Links to more frequently-changing information are 
provided as webpages. Use these to download supporting PDF documents, or 
watch videos. Use the Appendix to find all the webpages listed in the Guide.

Navigation

Use the Contents Pages and Index to navigate through the Guide.

Sidebars

Look for sidebars highlighting the major roles of key project personnel, what 
to expect, and other notes of interest.

Printing the Guide

The Guide is designed to be printed in color, double-sided, on 812x11 paper 
with room for a binding or three-ring hole punch on the left side. The work 
process charts are designed to print on 11x17 paper.

The Harpers Ferry Center website 
offers downloadable tools and 
documents on all aspects of media 
development. 
www.nps.gov/hfc

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 4

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 5

Wayside GuideSection             The Wayside MediumAWhat is a wayside exhibit, who is the target audience, and what makes a good wayside opportunity? Section A answers these questions, provides foundation information for wayside developers, and includes advice for park managers.National Park ServiceU.S. Department of the InteriorSection  A

 Wayside Guide | The Wayside Medium: An Overview

Contents

7 Site-Specific Interpretation

11 L

ow-Profile Interpretive Waysides

17

23

U

pright Orientation Waysides

A

dvice for Park Managers

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 6

Section  A

 Wayside Guide | Site-Specific Interpretation

Kenai Fjords National Park, low-profile

Site-Specific Interpretation
An effective wayside exhibit enhances a direct and meaningful 
connection between visitors and the landscape. The wayside 
audience is outside experiencing a place first-hand. They may 
be focused on any number of things. A wayside must attract 
and focus attention on the site, not on the wayside. If the first 
wayside they encounter is disappointing visitors may not stop  
at others.

Erie Canalway National 
Heritage Corridor, upright

Two Types of Waysides
Most national parks use two types of waysides, Low-profile exhibits (above)
give site-specific interpretation about features that visitors can readily see. 
Upright waysides (left) typically inform visitors about an area or a trail. Both 
styles are described in greater detail beginning on page 11. 

Four Key Factors
1 Significant Feature
2 Site-specific Graphic
3 Visitor Access
4 Regular Maintenance

What Makes a Good Wayside Opportunity?
Four key factors lead to successful wayside exhibits: a significant landscape 
feature with a well-documented story; at least one compelling, site-specific, 
reproducible-quality graphic that illuminates the story; a safe, accessible 
place for visitors; and routine maintenance of the site and the sign. There are 
many media options for reaching park visitors. If the right conditions do not 
exist for wayside exhibit experiences, consider another medium.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 7

Section  A

 Wayside Guide | Site-Specific Interpretation

Western end of the 1825 
Erie Canal in Buffalo

1 Significant Landscape Feature
What intangible meanings are associated with this specific terrain? What is 
the unique significance of this place and why should someone care? Within 
the first three-second glance at a wayside, visitors should see a connection to 
the landscape. Some landscapes have obvious features (above). More subtle 
landscapes (below) require graphics that direct viewers attention to things 
less obvious.

Pea Ridge
National Military Park

2 Site-Specific Graphics
Finding or developing compelling, site-specific graphics that tell the story is 
key to a successful wayside exhibit. Historic images placed on the landscape 
where the original photographer stood make a powerful and immediate 
connection for visitors. When photos are lacking, illustrations like the one 
shown above can tell the story.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 8

Section  A

 Wayside Guide | Site-Specific Interpretation

WWII Valor in the Pacific
National Monument

Fort Donelson
National Battlefield

3 Visitor Access and Safety
Place wayside exhibits in the front-country (not wilderness areas) along 
pathways, trails, and vehicle pull-outs. Consider landscape plans and the 
space needed to give visitors a comfortable, safe, and accessible area to 
gather without disrupting the flow of foot-traffic (above right) or spilling into 
automobile or bike traffic. Standard waysides provide little benefit to visitors 
with visual impairments. Plan to make the information available through 
alternative methods like audio programs (above left).

Harpers Ferry
National Historic Park

Harpers Ferry
National Historic Park

4 Regular Maintenance
Most waysides are designed to be permanent. Panel materials last 225 years 
averaging about 5 years before replacement is necessary. At a minimum, 
waysides require cleaning twice a year and regular inspections for vandalism 
or weathering. Vista clearing and trail maintenance may also be needed to 
keep the view open and the site safe. If waysides have tactile elements or 
Braille, they need more frequent inspections and cleaning.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 9

Section  A

 Wayside Guide | Site-Specific Interpretation

When NOT To Use a Wayside
Even if the conditions outlined on the previous pages have been met, creating 
a wayside may still not be a good idea.

Intrusion on the Landscape
Waysides impact the landscape. In natural areas they are an artificial 
intrusion. In historic areas they are a modern intrusion. Using too many 
waysides creates clutter and overwhelms visitors.

Sensitive Sites 
Waysides call attention to themselves and to the places they interpret. Using 
waysides to direct attention to sensitive areas (e.g., archaeological remains 
or nesting sites) may not be a good idea. Digging holes to install a wayside or 
hard-surfacing a trail may not be advisable in some areas.

Complex Stories
Waysides do not tell complex or dynamic stories well. Multiple geologic events, 
activities that cover vast expanses of terrain well beyond the view, and 
complex human interactions may best be addressed by other media.

Site-Specific Media
Ranger-guided tours, trail brochures, audio tours, and other new technologies 
are options for site-specific interpretation and orientation. They offer features 
like multiple languages, audio description for visitors with visual impairments, 
longer narrative and quotations. They also require a different maintenance 
regime. What they do not offer is the large-format compelling graphic 
communication that is the strength of the wayside medium. 

Visitors listen to an audio 
tour of Picketts charge 
in Gettysburg National 
Military Park

A word of caution about multiple media: it is difficult to read and listen at the 
same time. Visitors may choose to listen to an audio message, and also want 
to enjoy and read the wayside exhibits. Coordinate site-specific media to take 
advantage of the strengths of each medium and provide redundancy to give 
access to the widest range of people.

Viewing scopes can 
help visitors see distant 
landscapes.

Interpretive Media Selection
Selecting the right media is as much art as science. There is rarely one 
way to achieve a goal. Involving media specialists in key decisions is highly 
recommended. Each situation has its own mix of factors to consider.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/ip-media-select.htm

Evaluations and Visitor Use Studies
Understand your audience. Consider interviews and/or focus groups of 
potential visitors to find out what information they need and want to know, 
and how to present it in a meaningful, interesting, and cost-effective way. 
Consider using temporary panel materials in portable bases for evaluation. 
Plan for persons with disabilities to ensure inclusion in the wayside program.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/evaluate.htm

Foundations of Interpretation
This free on-line course provides an introduction to the foundations of 
interpretation. It answers the question What is Interpretation?
http://www.eppley.org/index.php?main_page=index&cPath=40

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 10

Section  A

 Wayside Guide | Low-Profile

36 x24 in-ground mount, Dayton Aviation Heritage NHP

Captioning the Landscape
The low-profile wayside exhibit is a caption on the landscape. 
It is not designed to stand alone any more than a caption for  
a photograph is intended to be read by itself. It is incomplete 
until it is placed within the environment it is meant to interpret. 
The best low-profile wayside illuminates what visitors see.

What Makes an Effective Low-Profile Wayside?
A specific landscape feature should drive the content and focus. If done well, 
waysides, like lightning bolts on the landscape, cause thundering moments 
of Aha! in the visitor. The combination of compelling graphics, title, and 
text designed into the landscape illuminates and enhances what the visitor 
is seeing, experiencing, or passing by. This is what makes an effective 
interpretive wayside exhibit.

The next four pages show key elements of effective low-profile wayside 
exhibits.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 11

24 x 24, City of Rocks NR

6 x 12 plant ID wayside
Haleakala NP

Section  A

 Wayside Guide | Low-Profile

Haleakala National Park

Compelling Graphics
Waysides are a graphic medium. The main image should tell the story. As 
shown above, the graphic can tell a story by singling out and highlighting a 
particular landscape feature. Wayside layouts differ from book or magazine 
layouts, which rely more on text. Primarily visual, wayside exhibits rely on 
bold graphics that, with the landscape, convey focus and meaning.

Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania 
National Military Park

Did You Know?
Attention span at a 
wayside is relatively short, 
3045 seconds on average.

Direction of View
The waysides low angle and position channel visitors attention in a specific 
direction. The low-profile wayside should align the intended direction of the 
visitors attention, the wayside panel, and the landscape feature as shown 
above.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 12

Section  A

 Wayside Guide | Low-Profile

Golden Spike  
National Historic Site

These two waysides show 
two different ideas about 
the significance of the last 
spike.

How Many?
How many waysides are appropriate? Trying to interpret everything significant 
could spawn a dense forest of waysides. Too many waysides can dilute each 
interpretive opportunity and compromise the experience. Too few might 
shortchange the visitor. The best waysides make one point and one point only 
and blend harmoniously with the setting. 

Upper Delaware
Scenic and Recreational River

Illustrations and Diagrams
By using transparent or cutaway views, illustrations and diagrams peel back 
landscape surfaces, show how structures are built (above), or reveal how 
things work. A birds-eye view enlarges the viewers perspective. A micro-view 
brings the focus up close.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 13

Section  A

 Wayside Guide | Low-Profile

New Bedford Whaling NHP

Badlands NP

Compelling Titles
A compelling title grabs the visitor. It is not a subject title. Candle-Making 
in New Bedford or Geology of Badlands are subject titles for the examples 
above. Compelling interpretive titles go beyond the subject matter at hand. 
They provide a hook into the meanings and significance of the subject. Titles 
may contrast with the landscape or main graphic to create tension, and 
interest, between the two as shown in the Badlands example.

Interpretive Text
Few people come to parks for the express purpose of reading. Wayside text 
should succinctly illuminate the terrain with meaning and significance. Write 
the first sentence so the audience will want to know more. Focus on the 
physical feature first. Some of the subject matter may be fiendishly complex. 
That is where concise expression becomes an enjoyable challenge. Be active, 
not passive. Use first-person quotes. Use common language; avoid jargon. Do 
not use adjectives that tell visitors what to think. Avoid preaching. Answer the 
question, So what?

A wayside exhibit audience 
is not captive. If they read 
something predictable, 
academic, or jargon-ridden 
they may pass by.

Quotations
First-person quotes spoken at, or about, a specific site, add credibility and 
power to the story. Quotes are presented differently than narrative text. They 
represent a different voice.

De Soto NM

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 14

Section  A

 Wayside Guide | Low-Profile

Mount Rainier National Park

Chain of Volcanoes

On a clear day several snow-covered summits appear to line up in the 
distance beyond the Tatoosh Range. All are large, active volcanoes that 
line the western edge of North America from Northern California to 
Southern British Columbia. This chain of volcanoes, part of the Pacific 
Ring of Fire, is growing above the collision zone of oceanic and 
continental plates.         

National Park Service
U.S. Department of the Interior

The 1980 eruption of Mount 
St. Helens displayed the power of 
Cascade volcanoes. The effects were 
catastrophic, but much larger 
eruptions have occurred in the past.

With large populations nearby, 
Mount Rainier is potentially dangerous 
because its huge volumes of snow and 
ice could generate deadly lahars.

Nineteen major volcanoes appear 
in a chain of fire from northern 
California to British Columbia.

Mount Rainier  erupted 1859; 
steam eruptions 1894-95

Mount St. Helens   
erupted 1980-86

Mount Adams  small 
eruptions 1,000 years ago

Mount Hood  eruptions 
about 200 years ago

Goat Rocks

Castle Peak

Pinnacle Peak

Plummer Peak

Mount Adams

Mount St. Helens

Mount Rainier NP

Label the Landscape
Waysides should identify significant features. They need to answer the 
question, What am I looking at? To give names can be useful, but to explain 
why features are relevant adds value. This example highlights the peaks 
visible on the horizon and their place in the larger Pacific ring of fire.

Tactile model, Timpanogos Cave NM

Tactile model, WWII Valor in the Pacific NM

Models and 3D Elements
Tactile models give visitors with visual impairments access to ideas and 
information. They also increase the range of an exhibits appeal, engage 
people with different learning styles, and add emphasis to the story. Tactile 
elements can be mounted to a flat panel as shown above left, or they can be 
stand-alone or separate structures as shown above right. 

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 15

Section  A

 Wayside Guide | Low-Profile

The low-profile angle 
is 45 degrees

Common Sizes
The following examples are common panel sizes. Choose panel sizes based 
on graphic and written content, and location. Be consistent in size and shape 
throughout a site or park.

42 x 24 This size is appropriate for high-quality panoramic images, main text of 

no more than 100 words, stories with side-bar or secondary graphics and 
captions or longer quotes, and for bilingual waysides.

36 x 24 This is the most common size. It has room for a large graphic, 75-100 words 

of main text, small inset graphics, and short captions or labels.

24 x 24 This size works well when there is a single simple graphic with 75 words of 

text and one or two short captions or labels.

6 x 12

Trailside exhibits are low to the ground and 
most often used as identification panels for 
plants or architectural features. They require 
a single simple graphic, short title, and 25 
words of text.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 16

Section  A

 Wayside Guide | Upright

36 x 48 upright, 
Zion National Park

Upright Orientation Waysides
What sets uprights apart from low-profile waysides is that they 
do not direct a visitors attention to a specific landscape feature 
within view. They introduce a trail or an area suitable for a 
day-hike. They are placed at a pedestrians decision point and 
provide orientation, safety, and site significance. They are part 
of a wayfinding system that may include signs, brochures, and 
other media.

What Makes an Effective Orientation Wayside?
Like low-profile waysides, orientation waysides are a graphic medium that 
must attract the pedestrian en route. They should answer the natural 
questions related to a safe, comfortable, and meaningful experience. They 
should help visitors decide whether to invest the time and energy required 
to reach the destination described. The balance between orientation and 
interpretation depends on the nature and complexity of the site or trail. 

36 x 48

24 x 36

The next four pages show some of the key elements of effective upright 
orientation wayside exhibits.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 17

36 x 48 upright, Bandelier National ParkCommon SizesMost upright orientation waysides are 36w x 48h. Smaller panels are generally 24w x 36h.Section  A

 Wayside Guide | Upright

Haleakala National Park

Everglades National Park

Decision-Making Information
Why is this trail here and what is there to see? Do I have the time, endurance, 
or proper gear to comfortably and safely set out on this journey? Is the trail 
accessible for wheelchairs? Can I bring my dog, my bike, or my fishing rod? 
If I follow the trail, will I be able to find my way back to my car? These are 
questions people may have before heading out. Maybe they stopped at the 
visitor center first; maybe they did not. The orientation wayside is strategically 
placed along the natural flow of pathways at the point where the decision to 
explore, or not to explore, is made. Too soon in the visit, and a person may 
not be ready to consider all the details of a trail, or experience. Too late and 
they may have already left without enough water.

Orientation and Site Significance
A careful balance of site significance and need-to-know orientation information 
makes upright waysides successful. Generally the upright orientation panel 
is a large panel (36 wide by 48 high), but studies have shown that visitors 
view them for only 3040 seconds. The examples above combine a compelling 
image with minimal interpretive text and a simple map with orientation and 
safety information to invite people to pause, but not linger, at the trailhead.

Rules and Safety Information
The orientation wayside is an important opportunity to reinforce basic rules, 
safety, and orientation information before someone heads out into the park. 
Waysides must attract their audience through compelling graphic presentation. 
They are not required reading. A long list of do not symbols or Code of 
Federal Regulations may not reach many visitors. Present rules and safety 
information in the context of what visitors really care abouttheir experience.  
Consider presenting safety information as a interpretive opportunity.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 18

for more than two million years. But because Lassens dome was built 
27,000 years ago, this glacial notch was formed in more recent times. 
The last glacial episode here was 11,000 to 8,000 years ago.

Section  A

 Wayside Guide | Upright

Lassen Peak

You Are Here

Lassen Volcanic National Park

B. F. Loomis 

First Signs | J U N E   0 9 ,   1 9 1 4
We stopped to take...pictures...of...steam...coming out of the crater....Millford said he 
heard or felt a slight rumbling...he shouted, Look there!....We saw huge columns of smoke 
ascending...500 feet above the mountain....The sight was fearfully grand....To say we were 
excited is putting it mildly.

Wayside Maps
Wayside maps work differently than other park maps because they are fixed in 
place and cannot be turned around or carried away for further reference. They 
often work better when oriented in the direction of view, meaning that north 
is not always at the top. Wayside maps should provide only the necessary 
information to help people get from where they are (You Are Here) to point B. 
At point B, additional trail signs or trail guides may be necessary. If a trail is 
short and simple, a map may not even be needed.

24 X 24 INCHES | 40% OF ACTUAL SIZE | JUNE 2004 | LASSEN VOLCANIC NATIONAL PARK | Wayside Exhibit 18

you are

0.9 mile

from the top

36 x 48 upright orientation 
bulletin case, and brochure 
dispenser, City of Rocks 
National Reserve

Bases and Ancillaries
Wayside exhibits are on duty even when the visitor center is closed. In this 
example above, the orientation wayside is placed next to the bulletin case 
and brochure dispenser to serve as a kind of visitor center information desk 
for the after-hours visitor. Clusters of waysides, bulletin cases, and other 
hardware like fee boxes or brochure dispensers can create a sense of focus 
and destination for self-guiding visitors. They can stand alone at a road-side 
pull-out, or be placed near a visitor center as this example shows. Keep in 
mind, all visitors including those with sight impairments, and consider media 
options for after-hours visitors.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 19

Section  A

 Wayside Guide | Upright

Obed Wild and Scenic River

Great Basin National Park

Great Basin National Park

Kiosks
Clusters of wayside panels, rules and safety information, bulletin cases, 
brochure boxes, trash cans, and recycling bins are often grouped in a kiosk 
arrangement with, or without, a roof. Some have lighting to make them useful 
after dark. Often, the design of the kiosk matches surrounding architectural 
structures, as in the three examples shown above. Standard panel mounting 
hardware can be used on custom kiosks to reduce initial and life-cycle costs.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 20

Section  A

 Wayside Guide | Upright

Zion National Park

Example of a 12 x 12 
park regulations sign

Bulletin Cases
Use bulletin cases for frequently changing information. Seasonal notices, 
short-term trail closures, weekly or monthly interpretive programs, or other 
temporary messages are appropriate for a bulletin case. Information that does 
not change for six months or more should be posted in a durable sign material 
(see example at left). Avoid placing small-print documents in a bulletin case. 
Text smaller than 36 point will be difficult to read. Postings can fade quickly 
and may need to be changed frequently or printed with UV-resistant inks 
to maintain contrast and legibility. Rules and safety information should be 
legible and clear. If a bulletin case is necessary, consider the space needed for 
postings, and choose an appropriate bulletin case size. 

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 21

Section  A

 Wayside Guide | Upright

Wayfinding Beyond the Wayside
The elements of wayfinding include a series of visual, editorial, and 
environmental cues for visitors to navigate and experience a park. Orientation 
waysides are one of several wayfinding media.

Directional and Orientation Signs
Orientation waysides work best with a good sign system. A common pitfall 
when developing orientation waysides is a lack of consistency between signs 
(left), maps, and orientation information. For example, a map label that says 
Canyon Visitor Center should match the sign on the building that also says 
Canyon Visitor Center. This may seem obvious, but it is an easy mistake to 
make when the park staff refer to a site, building, or trail by a common name 
that differs from its formal name.

National Park Service Sign Program
The National Park Service UniGuide Sign Standards include over 600 pages 
specifying the design and fabrication of a wide range of sign types, including 
trail signs.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/uniguide.htm

Park Publications and Trail Guides
Park-produced trail guides or site bulletins are another wayfinding tool. Site 
bulletins (left), park newspapers, NPS Unigrid brochures, and other park 
publications can provide longer narratives and more detailed portable maps. 
They can expand upon safety and regulatory information. And they can be 
printed in Braille or large print text for visitors with sight impairments.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/pubs/

National Park Service Maps
The Harpers Ferry Center cartographic website contains park maps (those 
published in the NPS Unigrid brochures), special map collections, and map 
resources and information like starter map files and recreation symbols.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/carto/index.htm

Other Wayfinding Media
New technologies like GPS-based, hand-held devices (left) can help a self-
guiding visitor with a lot of information via audio and small-screen video. 
None of these devices provide the large format graphic that a wayside exhibit 
does. Some of these devices and new technologies can be used in concert 
with waysides to provide an audio component including audio description for 
visitors with sight impairments, and translations for those who do not read 
English.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 22

Section  A

 Wayside Guide | For Park Managers

Advice for Park Managers
Wayside exhibits can be a relatively inexpensive medium on a 
per-unit basis if the project is handled properly and false starts 
are kept to a minimum. Here are the key factors to help you 
keep your project in budget and on schedule.

Work with Foundation Documents
Review the General Management Plan, Long-Range Interpretive Plan, Historic 
Structures Report, and other foundation documents with your project team. 
These plans match appropriate media with the message, describe desired 
interpretive opportunities, and provide important reference for wayside 
projects. They help the project team focus on specific visitor experience goals 
and avoid trying to tell all park stories in a single medium.

Assign a Project Lead
Make sure it is clear who is responsible for managing the project within the 
park. Also make sure the team leader has authority and skills to assemble a 
team; monitor project agreements and contracts; build consensus; enforce 
deadlines; consolidate review comments; comply with the requirements 
and limitations of project funding; and coordinate work among resource 
management, law-enforcement, maintenance, and interpretation. This is a 
significant workload.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 23

National  Park  Service
U.S.  Department  of  the  Interior

Catoctin  Mountain  Park
Long-Range  Interpretive  Plan

Implementation Plan

 

   4

2013 

2008 

2010 

Facilities

Website

 

 

   4 

  4

2007

2007

2011 

Long-Term 
2012 

 
Tasks 

Short-Term 
2009 

Out years (6 & 7)
2014 
2015

Actions, divided into annual, achievable steps are reproduced in the Annual Implementation Plan (AIP) (DO-6, page 6).
The measure of success of any plan is the extent to which it is implemented. Initial implementation of strategies needs to be 
both realistic and flexible. The charts on the following pages outline an initial blueprint for the parks interpretive programs. 
Because funding opportunities and priorities often change, park management may need to adjust the implementation 
strategies to adapt to changing conditions.
The park interpretive staff and key park partners should meet each year to draft an Annual Implementation Plan (AIP) for 
each new fiscal year based on funding opportunities and coordination with other projects.
Catoctin Mountain Park Interpretive Media  Non-Personal Services
Make alterations to the visitor center based on an Exhibit 
Schematic Proposal for new exhibits.
Change the websites link to the park map to go directly to the 
map, not its welcome page.
Adjust the statistics pages so that data can be kept on which of 
the sites pages are used most.
Add a photo gallery to the parks website, and add site/camp 
slide shows to the parks website.
Write PMIS statement for video podcasts
Add flash files with education curriculum materials, Junior 
Ranger activities, etc.
Upgrade the sites nature and science page to include research 
results.
Look for partners, contractors, other staff, or volunteers to 
assist in website maintenance. 
Identity/Orientation Signs
Arrange for NPS Sign Program staff to visit the park to survey 
existing sign conditions, and provide a conditions plan that 
proposes a location for each new sign that is recommended.
Design a parkwide sign plan that identifies the park as a unit 
of the National Park System and provides orientation for all 
visitors, whether they enter the park in a vehicle or on foot.
Secure funding and implement the parkwide sign plan as 
described in the National Park Service UniGuide Sign Standards. 
The standards include park identity, motorist guidance, and 
visitor information signs. All NPS arrowhead logos should be 
updated to the new style.
Wayside Exhibits
Request funding and for a parkwide wayside exhibit proposal, 
a wayside exhibit plan, and production. 
Once funding is secured for the proposal stage, arrange for a 
HFC wayside exhibit planner to visit the park andalong with 
the park staffdevelop a parkwide Wayside Exhibit Proposal.
Once funding is secured for the wayside planning stage, let a 
contract through HFC to plan, design, and prepare production-
ready files for all the newly proposed wayside exhibits.
Once funding is secured for the wayside production stage, let a 
contract through HFC to produce and ship the final panels and 
bases to the park (for park maintenance to install).
52  I  national park Service

Cost estimates for interpretive media can be provided by Harpers Ferry Center in a separate document; call (304) 535-5050 to request estimates.

   4

   4 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

   4

   4

 

 

   4 

 

 

   4 

   4 

   4

 

 

 

 

   4

   4

 

   4

 

   4

   4

   4

   4

Section  A

 Wayside Guide | For Park Managers

Dedicate Staff Time
How much time should be dedicated to the project? At a minimum, every 
project will require team members to participate in the initial site visit and to 
assemble various resource packages. But that is just the beginning. Your staff 
will need time to review and prepare consolidated comments on concepts, text 
drafts, map and illustration roughs, graphic layout proposals, and production 
proofs. Maintenance staff will need time to inspect, assemble, and install 
panels and bases. Some installations may require landscaping, vista clearing, 
building accessible pads, or other site preparation.

Consider Park and NPS Resources
What does the park have to contribute to the wayside project? Is there a well-
managed graphic collection? Is there existing artwork? Providing draft text, 
primary source material, custom photography, GIS data, or landscape design 
services may shorten the project schedule, save money, and help ensure a 
better final product. This also requires significant time.

Avoid Discrimination
There are no laws that require waysides in National Parks. There are laws 
that require accessibility for all programs. A collection of wayside exhibits 
is considered a program. Avoid discrimination and make sure your wayside 
program is accessible to all visitors.

Understand Wayside Contracts
There is no one-stop shopping for wayside exhibits. Wayside projects 
generally require working with one or more contractors. These may include 
cartographers, illustrators, and fabricators. Unlike many firms that plan and 
design museum exhibits or signs, the contractors who specialize in waysides 
are typically few in number and small in size. It is important to respect 
established schedules. Avoiding delays will also reduce cost overruns and 
ensure a smoother work process.

Know the Approval Process Up Front
Decide who will review each stage of the project, resolve differences of 
opinion, and consolidate written comments. Do this before the project starts. 
As the project progresses, the cost of changes increases. Reviewers who have 
not been involved throughout the project can cause delays, confusion, and 
add significantly to costs. If you plan to involve reviewers outside the park, 
consider inviting them to the project start-up meeting. If you want visitor 
input, plan for the evaluation process in the budget and schedule.

Ensure Compliance
Make sure staff from interpretation, maintenance, resources management, 
law-enforcement, and other divisions and the accessibility coordinator, are 
involved. Obtain compliance with regulatory and policy guidelines.

Take Pride in Ownership
Are there funds for staff or volunteers to do regular maintenance, repair, and 
vista-clearing? Wayside exhibits are a relatively low-maintenance medium, but 
they do require routine inspection, periodic cleaning, repair, and replacement. 
It is important that this responsibility be clearly assigned. For parks working 
with Harpers Ferry Center, project files are archived at the Center. If not, 
select a secure location to store production files. When its time to replace a 
damaged or worn panel, youll need these files to get the job done.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 24

National Park Service
U.S. Department of the Interior

Wayside Guide

Section             Wayside Development

B

The Wayside Exhibit Development Process chart that begins this Section 
outlines five major stages of work. This section details the development 
process, highlighting for each stage the major roles, common pitfalls, case 
studies, and recommendations for review and approval.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 25

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Wayside Development

Contents

Wayside Exhibit Development Process Chart

Project Startup

Site Analysis

Project Proposal

Research and Graphic Acquisition

Wayside Exhibit Plan

41 Design with a Grid
42 Wayside design: How is It Different?
43 Case Studies
47 Common Pitfalls in Wayside Design
48 Writing for Wayside Exhibits
49 Common Pitfalls in Wayside Writing
50 Examples of Good Wayside Writing
52 Tools and Resources for Wayside Writers
53 Wayside Exhibit Plan Review and Approval

Creating New Illustrations

Creating New Maps

Models and Tactile Elements

Final Wayside Plan

27

28

30

34

38

40

54

56

58

60

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 26

Wayside Exhibit Development Process

Summary Chart	(For	more	detailed	requirements	see	http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides)

Project Startup

Site Analysis

Project Proposal

Wayside Exhibit Plan

Final Wayside Plan

Project Startup focuses on preparing a solid 
foundation for all work that follows, ensuring 
that the project is logically structured and 
its goals are understood and realistically 
attainable. Project lead, team members, and 
stakeholders are identified and their roles 
defined.

Wayside exhibit planners and designers 
work with the park staff and subject-matter 
experts to evaluate potential exhibit sites 
and determine exhibit purposes and content 
based on site-specific features, events, and 
park primary themes. 

A proposal document is prepared using 
the Wayside Exhibit Planner Database. 
The Proposal identifies the projects scope 
including cost estimates, schedule, and other 
pertinent project data.

Guided by the Proposal, reference material, 
and graphics package, the planner will 
research each exhibit topic and work with 
the designer to develop draft wayside exhibit 
design layouts that are compiled into a 
Wayside Exhibit Plan for review and approval. 

Assemble final text, photos, maps, diagrams, 
and art for parks final review and approval 
prior to production. Any changes to exhibit 
elements should be minor at this stage of 
exhibit review.

Project Startup 

Site Analysis

Project Proposal 

Draft Wayside Exhibit Plan

Final Wayside Exhibit Plan

Establish the project team
	 Identify	the	project	lead,	subject-matter	

experts,	project	reviewers,	park	partners,	and	
media	specialists.	

Review foundation documents 
	 Gather	and	review	General	Management	

Plans,	Long-Range	Interpretive	Plans,	Historic	
Structures	Reports,	and	other	guiding	
documents

Conduct startup meeting 
	 Review	what	makes	an	effective	wayside,	the	
work	process,	accessibility	requirements,	panel	
and	base	material	choices,	resources	gathered,	
and	team	roles	and	responsibilities.

Analyze wayside exhibit sites
	 Visit	potential	exhibit	sites	with	park	staff	and	

subject-matter	experts.

	 Identify	site-specific	significance	and	meaning,	

and	relevant	graphic	materials.

List potential wayside exhibit sites and subjects

	 Identify	each	exhibits	purpose,	orientation,	

Conduct Front-End Evaluation

Establish the funding and any time restrictions

panel	size,	and	site	conditions.

	 Develop	thumbnail	sketches	to	facilitate	

discussions	and	agreement.

	 Photograph	exhibit	sites	and	site-specific	

Develop a Project Management strategy

features.

Prepare proposal
	 Document	the	selected	exhibit	locations	and	
purposes,	panel	and	base	selections,	and	map	
and	graphic	needs.

	 Create	site	map	of	wayside	locations.
	 Refine	thumbnail	sketches.
	 Develop	detailed	cost	estimate.

Proposal review, revision, and approval
	 Submit	Proposal,	cost	estimate,	and	project	

agreement	for	review	and	approval.

	 Park	staff,	including	maintenance,	review	the	

Proposal	to	confirm	all	decisions.

Reference and graphics package
	 Based	on	the	approved	Wayside	Proposal,	

identify,	gather,	and	organize	reference	and	
graphic	materials.

Begin Research
	 Identify	resource	materials	and	bibliographies
	 Gather	potential	site-specific	graphic	resources
	 Develop	a	graphics	notebook	containing	

potential	graphics	for	use	when	evaluating	
exhibit	sites	during	the	site	visit.

Plan the site visit

Gather Reference and Graphic Material
	 Based	on	site	discussion,	gather	graphic	source	

materials	relevant	to	wayside	content.

Conduct close-out meeting 
	 Review	thumbnails	and	graphic	direction	for	

the	waysides.	

	 Review	revised	schedule,	budget,	and	next	

steps.

	 Summarize	decisions	made	and	any	

outstanding	issues.	

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 27

Develop Wayside Exhibit Plan
	 Read	and	review	references	and	graphics.
	 Organize	the	content,	establish	hierarchy.
	 Prepare	draft	interpretive	exhibit	text.
	 Create	draft	maps.
	 Draw	sketches	of	new	art.
	 Draw	sketches	of	tactile	elements.
	 Create	draft	layouts.

Wayside Exhibit Plan review and approval

Procure approved graphics and use-rights
	 Secure	use-rights	for	the	life	of	the	wayside	and	

document	use-rights	agreements.
	 Acquire	high-resolution	graphics.

Develop original art
	 Develop	detailed	sketches.
	 Place	detailed	sketches	in	layout	and	adjust	

both	for	fit,	legibility,	size,	margins,	bleed.

	 Develop	final	art	and	get	high-resolution	scan.

Create maps
	 Use	wayside	Map	Guidelines	and	starter	map	

files	to	create	actual-size	digital	maps.

Procure second-language translations

Procure tactile elements

Complete editorial review and make all text 
changes to exhibit layouts
	 Place	second-language	text	in	layouts.

Place all final graphics in layouts
	 Final	approved	art.
	 Final	approved	maps.
	 Final	high-resolution	photos.
	 Detail	position	of	tactile	elements.

Final Wayside Exhibit Plan review and approval
	 Make	any	minor	final	adjustments.
	 Secure	final	approval	to	go	into	production.

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Project Startup

Wayside Exhibit Development Process

Project 
Startup 

Site 

Analysis

Project 
Proposal 

Draft 
Plan

Final 
Plan

You are here

Project Startup
The first few steps of a journey are crucial because they set 
the direction, pace, and quality of the trip. Several steps listed 
here can help ensure a successful wayside project. Work done 
in this first phase will establish a strategy for funding, phasing, 
and managing the people and resources necessary to develop 
wayside exhibits. 

Get Started
Gather Foundation Documents
General Management Plans, Long-Range Interpretive Plans, Historic 
Structures Reports, and other planning documents help the project team focus 
on specific visitor experience goals, and understand relevant park policies 
and operations. See examples, and find more information about Long-Range 
Interpretive Plans on this webpage.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/ip-lrip.htm 

Pick a Strong Team
Find and assess subject-matter expertise. Select experienced media 
specialists. Decide on a project lead and determine the responsibilities of each 
team member. Consider how park partners, contractors, and media specialists 
may contribute. Use this white paper to learn about the many skills needed for 
a successful wayside team.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-team.htm

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 28

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Project Startup

Before the site visit, the 
park staff should look for 
potential wayside locations 
and site-specific resources. 
Analyze visitor flow and 
accessibility issues.

Cost Estimating
For help with cost 
estimating for NPS 
projects call Harpers 
Ferry Center at  
304-535-5050.

Define the Scope
Identify wayside needs based on the strengths of the medium. Work with 
subject-matter experts to select potential wayside sites. Think about what 
is significant, visible, and accessible in the park. Consider visitor experience 
goals and what is known about the targeted audience. Will bilingual waysides 
be required? Understand accessibility requirements. Evaluate the function and 
condition of existing wayside exhibits. Use the Wayside Guide Section A and 
the following resources to define the scope of your project.

Interpretive Media Selection
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/ip-media-select.htm

Checklist To Evaluate Your Wayside Exhibits
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-process-evaluate.htm

Plan for Accessibility
Review the requirements for programmatic accessibility. Choose methods 
and options for site-specific interpretation and orientation. Refer to the 
accessibility rules and recommendations on this webpage, including 
Department of Interior Section 504 Guidelines for Federally-Assisted Park
and Recreation Programs and Activities
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/accessibility/index.htm

Conduct Front-End Evaluation
Learn the characteristics of the targeted audience. Find out what visitors 
want to know. What questions do they have? What sites do they find most 
compelling? What important sites do they avoid and why? See examples, and 
get more information on the following webpage.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/evaluate.htm 

Establish the Funding
Develop an initial cost estimate for your project and identify a funding source. 
Understand the limitations and requirements of the funds. This webpage has 
current information about wayside cost estimating.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-cost-estimating.htm

Develop a Project Management Strategy
Decisions about funding, schedules, roles and responsibilities, communication 
channels, and project goals should be carefully determined early on, and be 
clearly documented in a work plan or other appropriate project agreement. 
Decide how partner agencies will be recognized before the project gets 
underway, both to manage expectations and to meet NPS policies.

Begin Research
Find graphics, objects, artwork, and any maps that may be needed for 
potential waysides. It is helpful to make copies and put all these images in a 
notebook, sorted by wayside locations, before the site visit. Be sure to record 
source information, including copyright and date.

Review Secondary Sources
What sources provide a good overview to the content? For project team 
members new to the subject, secondary sources, like books, magazine articles, 
or videos, can establish a working foundation. Also review the relevant history 
section of Historic Structures Reports or Historic Resource Studies.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 29

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Site Visit

Wayside Exhibit Development Process

Project 
Startup 

Site 

Analysis

Project 
Proposal 

Draft 
Plan

Final 
Plan

You are here

Site Analysis
The site visit is key to developing successful wayside exhibits. 
Travel to each wayside location. Choose the best site for each 
wayside based on considerations listed below. The success of 
each individual wayside exhibit is directly related to how well 
these elements work together. 

Major Roles
Park Interpreter
shares interpretive 
goals for the project, 
hosts and guides the 
wayside team.

Wayside Planner
documents potential 
content, base and 
panel options. Drafts 
focused, achievable 
purpose statements.

Wayside Designer
explores potential 
graphics, develops 
thumbnail roughs, 
and takes site photos, 
records GPS data.   

Startup Meeting
Invite all stakeholders to an initial meeting. Review the strengths and 
limitations of the wayside medium and the wayside development process. 
Review the goals of the project, the budget and schedule, and clarify team 
roles. Review the day-to-day site visit schedule, including time to visit local 
museums and historical societies, and to meet with relevant subject-matter 
experts. Review the graphic and content resources available like quotes, 
drawings, photos, or other sources for the team to keep in mind on the site.

Site-by-Site 
Observe Visitors
Observe and note how visitors use, or ignore, any existing waysides or signs. 
Note the use patterns at overlooks and on designated trails, unplanned social 
paths, or tour roads. Are visitors with disabilities avoiding or unable to use 
current waysides?

Identify the View
Select views that enhance the opportunity for visitors to make meaningful 
connections to the landscape. Note the landscape feature that is the point of 
focus. Match the direction of view with potential graphics. Take a compass 
reading and note the site on a map.

Establish the Message
Work for consensus on what exactly is the appropriate interpretive message 
for each site. Each wayside must be linked specifically to something people 
can see at the site. Note the relevant interpretive themes at each location.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 30

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Site Visit

What To Expect 
Plan to spend about 
one hour per wayside 
exhibit. A week is 
generally enough time 
to conduct a thorough 
site visit for a medium-
sized project of 20 
to 40 waysides.

Review Graphics
What photos, illustrations, maps, or other images tell the story? It is helpful 
to have an initial selection of graphics during the site visit. Look for images 
that convey meanings, provoke thought, or elicit curiosity about the site. As 
in the example above, look for graphics that match the view from the planned 
wayside location.

Check Site Conditions
Evaluate each location for safety, accessibility, and comfort. Note landscaping 
and site improvement work needed. Consider archeological issues and other 
compliance requirements. Consider long-term maintenance requirements.

Prepare Thumbnails
Choose a panel size and develop pencil sketches on-site. Seeing visual 
representations of interpretive ideas promotes discussion and clarifies the 
focus of each wayside. Sketches are good catalysts for refining the thinking 
and are the basis for developing a wayside layout.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 31

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Site Visit

Document wayside locations 
with GPS coordinates to 
include in-park GIS data 
resource files and wayside 
location map.

Wayside planner takes 
notes on dicussions and 
decisions, information that 
will be documented in the 
Wayside Proposal.

Take Photos
Shoot photos in the direction of view of each wayside exhibit, with a marker 
showing where the base will be installed (above). Geotag site photos to record 
and map planned waysides. Shoot additional photos to document unique or 
unusual site or resource conditions.

Choose Panel Material
Take note of potential vandalism, environmental conditions, relative 
permanence of the information, and access to the site for installation 
and maintenance. Choose the most appropriate panel material. Current 
information about materials is available on this webpage.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-product-panels.htm

Choose Base Structure
Take note of the landscape conditions and choose the best base style, color, 
and finish. Gather information needed for custom wayside base construction 
drawings. Note custom installation needs. Take any critical measurements 
and photographs, like wall dimensions. Identify existing signs to be removed 
before new waysides arrive. Current information about materials is available 
on this webpage.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-product-bases-low.htm

Document Discussions
Take notes on all team discussions reflecting possible interpretive ideas, 
relevant meanings, reasons for paths-not-taken, and decisions made. 

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 32

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Site Visit

Common Pitfalls
A common mistake 
at this early stage 
of graphics research 
is to gather images 
without proper source 
information. Also, dont 
assume that every 
graphic or resource in 
a park collection is an 
original source and in 
the public domain. 

Park and Partner Resource Review
Identify resource materials, footnotes and bibliographies, graphics, and 
artifact collections. Gather references for proposed illustrations and maps. 
Meet with local historical societies, museums, or other relevant off-site 
partners. Meet with subject-matter experts to develop and refine wayside 
exhibit content. It is helpful to dedicate at least one day to research and 
review materials during the site visit. Some of this work may be necessary 
before the site-by-site analysis. More research time may be helpful at the end, 
based on clarification of site visit discussions.

Look for Primary Sources
Examples of primary sources include quotes, diaries, letters, photos, 
drawings, or inventories from someone who was at the site, or participated 
in the event. Secondary sources include books or articles written about a site 
or event by someone who was not a participant. A subject-matter expert can 
help identify primary sources and verify their accuracy. For example, some 
of James Taylors drawings of Harpers Ferry, published in Frank Leslies, were 
drawn during the Civil War. Others were done in the 1890s from memory. 

Review Reference Material
Based on site visit discussions, identify source material relevant to the 
wayside content. Read and review material from the correct time period and 
location. Some of this work may have already been done by park staff. Look 
for material rich in meanings and site significance.

Gather Source Information
Make copies of potential resources and record enough source information so 
they can be located and properly acquired when needed. For graphics, record 
the image source, reference number or title, artist or photographer, size, and 
reproduction medium (slide, negative, digital file etc.) For written material, 
record the publication name, source, author, date, and copyright.

Close-Out Meeting
Summarize the site visit, decisions made, and any outstanding issues. Review 
thumbnails and graphic direction for the waysides. Review selected materials 
and other graphics needed. Discuss custom installation or maintenance 
issues. Review the schedule and next steps. Review any special site 
requirements with park maintenance staff. 

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 33

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Wayside Proposal

Minidoka Internment National Monument

Wayside Exhibit Proposal
Parkwide Wayside Exhibits

Prepared by
National Park Service

Planner
Terry Lindsay

Designer
Chad Beale

Minidoka Internment National Monument
Proposed Wayside Exhibits

Proposed List

Ex.

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

08

09

10

11

12

Subject

Location

Panel Material

Mount

Size

Excluded People

Warehouse Area

High Pressure Laminate

Direct Embed

36 x 48

Hunt CampMinidoka
Relocation Center

Warehouse Area

High Pressure Laminate

Direct Embed

36 x 48

Bulletin Case

Warehouse Area

Direct Embed

36 x 48

Warehouse  Area

Warehouse Area

High Pressure Laminate

Direct Embed

36 x 24

Root Cellar

Root Cellar

High Pressure Laminate

Direct Embed

36 x 24

Farm Development Program

Root Cellar

High Pressure Laminate

Direct Embed

36 x 24

Swimming Hole (Camp
Recreation)

Swimming Hole #1

High Pressure Laminate

Direct Embed

36 x 24

Anatomy of a Block

Block 22

High Pressure Laminate

Direct Embed

36 x 24

GamanPerseverance

Block 22

High Pressure Laminate

Direct Embed

36 x 24

Shikata gai naiIt Cant Be
Helped

Block 22

Creating a Community

Block 22

High Pressure Laminate

Direct Embed

36 x 24

High Pressure Laminate

Direct Embed

36 x 24

Crescent-Shaped
Camp/Camp Extent

Near Motor Pool Filling Station

High Pressure Laminate

Direct Embed

36 x 24

National Park Service | Media Services

1

This Wayside Proposal was 
prepared using the Wayside 
Exhibit Planner database.

Harpers Ferry Center | National Park Service

March 2007

Wayside Exhibit Development Process

Project 
Startup 

Site 

Analysis

Project 
Proposal 

Draft 
Plan

Final 
Plan

You are here

Project Proposal 
A Wayside Proposal defines the project scope of work. For 
each wayside exhibit there are at least 35 data points recorded 
during the site visit. Use a database to record and to efficiently 
manage the data and to prepare detailed cost estimates, base 
orders, panel orders, site maps, and installation plans.

Major Roles
Wayside Planner
writes a project 
summary, records all 
data, and prepares 
the Wayside Proposal.

Wayside Designer
refines thumbnails
and identifies what 
graphics are needed.

Data Needed for Each Wayside
Exhibit Number
Subject
Purpose
View
Comments
Potential Graphics
Potential Maps
Potential Illustrations

General Location
Specific Location
GPS Coordinates
Site Photo
Orientation
Access Issues
Site Prep Issues
Panel Size
Panel Material
Duplicates Needed

Duplicate Numbers
Installation Notes
Inventory Notes
Base Category
Base Style
Base Color
Base Material
Base Angle
Base Mount
Ancillaries

Panel Costs
Base Costs
Ancillary Costs
Graphics Costs
Illustration Costs
Map Costs

Prepare the Proposal
Gather most of this data during the site visit. In the weeks following the site 
visit, the team will review decisions, refine the data and thumbnails, make a 
wayside location map, and prepare the Wayside Proposal document for review 
and approval.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 34

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Wayside Proposal

A single page like this  
defines each proposed 
new wayside exhibit.

E X  N U M / S U B J E C T

06   Farm Development Program

P U R P O S E

Purpose and content

To describe how Minidoka internees, in just a few years, transformed thousands of
acres of sagebrush lands into productive farm lands, harvesting 7,300,000 pounds of
produce in 1944, making the camp fully sustainable. To explain how internees grew
Victory Gardens, as did millions of Americans, to ease the burden on wartime food
supplies.

Location and site data

Base and panel choices

G R A P H I C  C A T E G O R I E S
 Historic Photograph

P O S S I B L E  G R A P H I C S
Minidoka Interlude Snapshots

M A P S

None

C O M M E N T S
Exhibit touches on GMP theme categories:  People, Place, and World War II.

L O C A T I O N

East-Northeast

Root Cellar
Near the south end of the Root Cellar, facing toward the former
WRA farm fields

V I E W

Open farm lands

S I T E  P R E P A R A T I O N

P A N E L  &  B A S E

Panel Size
36 x 24

Panel Material
High Pressure Laminate

Category
Reverse Angle

Mount
Direct Embed

Base Material
Weathering Steel

Color

Ancillaries

Hardware Notes

Angle
45 degrees

National Park Service Harpers Ferry Center

Minidoka Internment National Monument

 MARCH, 2007  |  WAYSIDE EXHIBIT

06

Multiple thumbnails show 
options for the layout. They 
identify graphics needed and 
show the visual intent of 
each wayside.

What To Expect 
Depending on the 
size of the project, 
and schedules of the 
team, reviews can take 
from one week to one 
month.

Review and Approval
Ask all stakeholdersincluding park managersto review the Wayside 
Proposal. Once team members reach consensus and all changes are 
incorporated into the draft Proposal the park manager signs off, laying the 
foundation for the next stage of work, the Wayside Exhibit Plan.

Content Review: Park interpreters review the Wayside Proposal by 
focusing on the purpose of each wayside, and considering how graphics (i.e., 
photographs, illustrations, and maps) will be used to serve that purpose. 
Remember that any new graphics will require money and time to research, 
create, and review. 

Technical Review: Resource management, facilities and maintenance staff 
review the Proposal by looking at the material choices for each wayside, 
to be sure they understand the maintenance and installation requirements 
for proposed waysides. They review landscaping recommendations for 
safe access, like rerouting trails, pouring concrete pads, and clearing and 
maintaining vistas. They can begin planning installation needs for equipment, 
compliance, and labor and materials.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 35

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Wayside Proposal

What makes a good purpose statement?
Each wayside needs a straightforward purpose statement that defines the 
interpretive goal. Purpose statements describe how the wayside will connect 
visitors to the audience-relevant meanings and significance of a site. They are 
the foundation for all work that follows. A poorly focused purpose will cause 
false starts and delays during wayside development.

Focus on One Interpretive Opportunity
Waysides work best when they have a single, site-specific interpretive 
opportunity. Avoid overloading this teachable moment. Dont expect too much 
for 3045 seconds of the viewers attention. 

Visual Reference
If the purpose statement sounds more like a book or movie description, it is 
probably too complex. A good wayside purpose statement describes a goal 
that can be accomplished with a bold graphic presentation.

Not a Theme Statement
Broad park interpretive themes are not specific enough to serve as good
wayside purpose statements. Good waysides are built on stories locked to
a place with a particular view. Key park themes can be woven into most
waysides. But do not plan waysides based on interpretive themes alone.

Clear and Specific
Purpose statements should use clear, specific language in measurable 
terms. Start with infinitive action verbs like To describe..., to link..., to 
illustrate..., to reveal... Workable, practical purpose statements do not arrive 
instantaneously. Plan to invest time and thought to get them right.

Five Examples of Good Purpose Statements
Low-Profile Waysides
To show and describe how Browns Chapel [in view] was first a physical focal point, and later a 
symbolic focal point, as the headquarters and refuge for mass meetings and organizing during the 
1965 Civil Rights march demonstrations.

To reveal the tapestry of life through historic use of the site. To describe how John Herrmanns 128-
acre farm was situated on former relocation center land where one of Minidokas fire stations, a 
water tower, sewage treatment plant, Blocks 21 and 22, and parts of other blocks were located. To 
identify remaining fire station and barrack buildings [in view] that became farm outbuildings.

To illustrate how plants, animals, and humans all share the rich tidal zones of Bartlett Cove [in view], 
highlighting the harbor seal, river otter, and other animals in the intertidal environment. To explain 
how humans must be careful of their influences on the tidal environment.

Orientation Waysides
To briefly inform visitors of the significance of this area as the first federal tree reserve in the United 
States and to orient them to the facilities in the area like the visitor center, picnic pavilion, camping 
area, and trails.

To mark the trailhead and provide trail information and safety tips. To interpret the subtle changes in 
elevation and plant life along the trail so that visitors can read the landscape as they enjoy the trail.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 36

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Wayside Proposal

Wayside Exhibit Planner 
database entry screen

Wayside Exhibit Planner Database
The advantages of using a database to manage your wayside project are 
many. Input the size, style, material, location, and other information once to 
be able to quickly and accurately generate panel orders, cost estimates, or 
lists, like new illustrations or maps.

Wayside site map

Other Wayside Proposal Elements
The Wayside Exhibit Proposal should also include accessibility information and 
site-location maps.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 37

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Draft Plan

Major Roles
Researcher
researches and gathers 
reference material

Graphics Researcher
contacts outside 
sources, orders 
graphics, negotiates 
use-rights and fees, 
acquires images 
and permission 
letters, documents 
agreements, purchases 
images, and archives 
all records.

Park Interpreter
gathers park materials 

Wayside Designer
reviews the quality 
of potential graphics 
and researches other 
possible sources.

Research and Graphic Acquisition
Graphics and reference gathering is done before, during, and 
after the site visit. Upon park approval of the Wayside Proposal 
additional material is gathered. The planner and designer read 
and review these materials to develop wayside text and layouts.

Graphics
Photographs, illustrations, maps, and documents like newspapers, are 
examples of graphics that can tell a story of the landscape. Many parks have 
large collections of site-specific graphics, but most wayside projects require 
images from other sources too.

Sources
In addition to park collections, good public sources of graphics include the 
Library of Congress, National Archives, Smithsonian Institution, portrait 
galleries and museums, historical societies, and libraries. Commercial sources 
include stock houses, private collections, and professional photographers. 
International sources include museums, libraries, art galleries, historical 
institutes, and universities. 

Use-Rights
Get written permission from the owner of the graphic to use it for the life of 
the wayside and pay the negotiated fee before using it. Keep use-rights and 
image-use permission letters for the life of the wayside. Other important 
records include image orders, purchase requests, cleared checks, receipt of 
property, facsimiles of images, invoices, receipts, and license agreements. 

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 38

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Draft Plan

Image Info

6/29/2009
8:13 AM
Page  1

1/26/2007
GUIS-001-02
GUIS001
$0.00

Negative Id #
Wayside Exhibit #
Acquisition Cost

Alligator
 Image Name Alligator
Date Taken 1/1/1990
Artist Tom Gray

File name
 File path

Description Three-quarter side view of an alligator at
water's edge.
Image is currently used in the slide show
at the park visitor center.
Format 2 1/4 x 2 1/4 transparency
Collection Harpers Ferry Center Audiovisual Arts

Notes on
Availability

Size 8x7

Location Data
Source
Street P.O. Box 50

Harpers Ferry
 City, State &
Zipcode
Phone 304-535-6478
Contact Person Mary Ann Kave
 Phone 304-535-6478
 Email Mary_Ann_Kave@nps.gov

WV 25425

Maximum Time Frame
Image Is Available
Req'd Lead Time On
Image Acquisition 

As needed

Three weeks

 Dept Media

Copy of the image
Negative or identification number
Description of image
Wayside exhibit number for which the image is needed
Acquisition cost for one-time use for the life of the exhibit
Format or medium
Original size
Size of reproducible needed
Required lead time on acquisition of image
Source of the original with address and name of collection
Contact person or department
Telephone number
E-mail address
Owner of the graphic
Copyright data
Photographer or artist

What To Expect 
The average time to get 
images from sources 
inside the United 
States is at least four 
weeks, often months. 
International orders can 
take from two to six 
months. One missing 
graphic can delay a 
wayside project from 
moving into final review 
and production. 

Record Source Information
Gather image data for each graphic proposed for use on the wayside exhibits.
The example above lists the kind of data needed for each image.

Photo Release Form
Use a release form for new images that include recognizable people.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-graphics.htm

Credit Lines
To reduce clutter, avoid adding credit lines on waysides. Negotiate use-
rights agreements that do not require the use of credit lines. Archive credit 
information with project records.

Graphic Requirements
Large-format wayside graphics have different technical requirements than 
other media like the web or offset printing. A graphic must meet these 
technical quality standards to reproduce well. Refer to the following document 
to learn more about wayside graphic requirements.

Standards for Digital Image Files
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-graphics.htm

Research and References
The researcher gathers reference and source materials and organizes it by 
exhibit. With a good working knowledge of the material, the researcher sifts 
through and highlights site-specific stories and ideas guided by the Wayside 
Proposal purpose statements.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 39

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Draft Plan

Harpers Ferry Center

Kenai Fjords National Park

National Park Service
U.S. Department of the Interior

Planner
David Guiney

Designer
Betsy Ehrlich 

Writer
Amy Ireland

Exit Glacier Wayside Exhibits

Layouts are designed at actual size 
and printed at 11x17 for review.

Ten Wayside Exhibits (1-10)

April 2008

Wayside Exhibit Plan Cover

Wayside Exhibit Development Process

Project 
Startup 

Site 

Analysis

Project 
Proposal 

Draft 
Plan

Final 
Plan

You are here

Major Roles
Wayside Planner
studies text references 
and graphics, writes
draft text, and guides 
team reviews.

Wayside Designer
studies text references 
and graphics, makes 
draft layouts, and plans 
new art and maps.

Illustrator
creates new artwork.

Cartographer
creates new maps.

Graphic Sources
provides images.

Park Interpreter
consolidates park 
review comments.

Wayside Exhibit Plan
Wayside panels begin as full-size layouts with draft text and 
proposed graphics. Through a process involving many stages 
of development and review, they become final production files. 
The rest of this section describes the major stages of design 
and writing and the supporting work to create art, maps, and 
tactile elements.

Create Panel Layouts
Good writing and design are based on a clear interpretive hierarchy. Organize 
ideas and images into primary and supporting roles. For example, a wayside 
that interprets a glacial landscape might also include a preservation message. 
Those two topics, geology and preservation, should lead to a layout that 
shows one topic as primary and the other as supporting.

Design
The panel layout is based on the thumbnail rough and panel size approved in 
the Wayside Proposal. The first graphics placed in the layout may be low-
resolution, or draft illustrations. Draft text, title, captions, and labels are 
added to the layout with the appropriate typographic treatment. Even as a 
draft, the layout should present the intended style and composition. The next 
seven pages address wayside exhibit design.

Writing
Text must connect with, support, and enhance the images and landscape 
visitors will see. The first draft is based on the approved purpose statement, 
thumbnail rough, selected graphics, and site features. It can be written 
directly into the layout, or it can be written with the layout in mind. Pages 48 
through 52 address some challenges of wayside writing.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 40

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Draft Plan | Design 

Original 1991 Grid

column guides

Did You Know?
In 1990 graphic designer 
Massimo Vignelli 
developed a Guidelines 
and Standards Manual 
for National Park Service 
Wayside Exhibits. The 
Manual included a wayside 
grid based on the Unigrid 
developed for National 
Park Service publications. 
The grid was updated for 
the 2001 Graphic Identity 
Program, and the 2006 
UniGuide Sign Program. 

Did You Know?
NPS Rawlinson was 
designed in 2000 based on 
requirements established 
by the National Park 
Service.

June 2008 Grid

Paragraph Styles palette

Design with a Grid
Wayside grids are presized Adobe InDesign files with built-in type styles 
and appropriate NPS identity elements. They include the correct bleeds and 
margins for fabrication and installation in a full-frame NPS base. Go to this 
webpage to download the grids, typographic standards, and other standards, 
or see a video on using the grids.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-grids.htm

Scale and Proportion
The column guides visible inside the margins serve as reference points, not as 
the strict formatting guides that might be found in a newspaper or magazine. 
They help with text line length, inset photo dimensions, and analyzing 
proportions and spacing. Waysides are generally bigger than even the largest 
computer screens, so layouts are viewed at a smaller scale. The grid helps the 
designer achieve appropriate scale, proportion, and consistency for the typical 
two- to three-foot viewing distance of a wayside exhibit.

Architecture of the Layout
The grid rarely determines the layout of the wayside panel. Rather, the 
composition of the main image, or the focus of the largest graphic determines 
the panel layout. The title in the upper left corner of the grid is there for 
starter purposes only and is not locked in place. 

Typographic Styles in the Grid
Embedded in the National Park Service grids are typographic or paragraph 
styles (see above) that contain specifications for type size, leading, and 
hyphenation. These specifications maximize legibility and are set to the 
proportions of each grid.

Wayside Typographic Standards
Legibility is the goal of the wayside typographic standards. Point size is one 
of the many aspects of typography that the designer needs to address. The 
typographic standards are developed in concert with the wayside grids to help 
designers create legible text. Download the standards from the link above.

NPS Typefaces
Typography is an important component of the NPS graphic identity standards. 
These standards specify two typefaces: NPS Rawlinson and Adobe Frutiger. To 
learn more, visit this webpage.
http://www.graphics.nps.gov/typefaces.htm

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 41

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Draft Plan | Design 

Sequoia National Park

Mount Rainier National Park

Wayside Design: How is It Different? 
Several things make wayside design different than other media design.

Compelling Focus
Selecting and developing compelling graphics can be the biggest challenge in 
wayside design because wayside graphics must attract visitors. The graphics 
should relate directly and obviously to the landscape in view and tell a story. 
They must grab attention and spark an immediate connection. Align the title 
and main text to enhance the focus of the main image.

Designing for the Landscape
An effective wayside will lead the eyes and attention from the wayside to the 
landscape. The designer must consider the direction of the view and the fact 
that visitors cannot turn the sign around.

Visual Layering
People may look at a wayside for three seconds or three minutes. The average 
is 45 seconds. Wayside exhibit design should have a clear focus and hierarchy 
so the viewer who spends only a few seconds gets the main idea. Give those 
who take more time some details worth pondering. Many of the details should 
be in the images.

It is Outdoors. Why Does This Matter?
The designer must consider outdoor conditions like sunlight, glare, and the 
viewing distance. Large areas of white on a wayside exhibit are hard to look at 
in bright sunlight. Use neutral colors and avoid bright colors used over large 
areas. Lighting outdoors is variable. Design text with good contrast.

Designing for Large Format
Wayside exhibits are generally viewed from two to three feet away. Panel 
sizes and the scale of graphics should reflect this. Too large, and viewers feel 
like they are in the front row of a movie theater; too small, and the graphic 
impact is lost. Print layouts actual-size to check scale and proportion.

Not a Book
Waysides are more like billboards than publications. They attract attention 
quickly, with impact, and with a single memorable message. The best wayside 
exhibit facilitates a powerful and immediate connection to the landscape.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 42

Section  B

 Wayside Guide  | Draft Plan | Design 

Florissant Fossil Beds Case Study

Compelling Focus
The main graphic is the same in both panels at right. But the bottom panel 
shows how an image can be adjusted to create visual focus on the area of 
interestin this case, a fossil layer. The first and most powerful element in 
any wayside is the immediate message of the title and main graphic. In the 
top panel the message is hidden in the text and inset graphics. The bottom 
panel is more effective because the descriptive title is close to the visual 
and interpretive focus of the images. Three seconds vs. 30, billboard vs. 
publication.

Visual Layering
The top examples mix of horizontal and vertical elements in the hard- and 
soft-edged boxes creates visual noise. The boxes also obscure the main image 
and compete for attention. The bottom example emphasizes the relevant 
layer of the large graphic and makes all other elements compatible with its 
horizontal direction. 

Subject Title vs. Interpretive Title
Shale Outcrop is a subject title. It doesnt convey the intended meaning in 
Hidden Treasures. Placing the title Hidden Treasures beneath the rock layer 
of hidden treasures enhances both image and title. It is both title and image 
label.

Not a Book
In the top example the idea of hands splitting shale to reveal fossils is an inset 
with separate text, caption, and redundant photos. In the bottom example a 
single larger graphic conveys the same idea, but it also connects visually to 
the primary graphic and text. 

Starting Point
Although the top layout uses the classic location for title and text in the upper 
left corner, the result disconnects it from the visual focus. The bottom layout 
creates a clear visual starting point by bringing together the focal point of the 
main graphic with the title and main text.

Architecture of the Image
The flat architecture of the main graphic in the top example lacks dynamic 
lines of focus. In the bottom example, darkening the main image to focus on 
the fossil layer sets up a strong horizontal architecture that is supported by 
the horizontal alignment of text and inset images.

Gallery of Examples
Visit this website to see other examples of NPS wayside exhibits.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-samples.htm

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 43

Did You Know?
Minimal text and visual 
clarity are particularly 
important for visitors with 
cognitive and learning 
disabilities, as well as 
those with low vision.

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Draft Plan | Design 

Florissant Fossil Beds National Monument

National Park Service
U.S. Department of the Interior

Shale Outcrop
The hillside in front of you contains 
thousands of tiny, fragile fossils of insects 
and leaves. The fossils are hidden between  
layers of light gray rock called shale. The 
shale was formed at the bottom of an 
ancient lake that once existed in the place 

where you now stand. Plants and animals that 
died in or near the ancient lake settled to bottom 
where they were buried in layers of clay and ash. 
Eventually, the layers hardened into rock and the 
plants and animals became fossilized. 

Splitting Shale

To find fossils, scientists must carefully 
split the shale open. Sometimes it splits 
by hand and sometimes tools are used. 

Types of fossils found in the shale

Before

36 X 24 INCHES | 40% OF ACTUAL SIZE | MONTH 2001 | PARK NAME | Wayside Exhibit  00

After

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 44

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Draft Plan | Design 

Grand CanyonParashant Case Study

Compelling Focus
The main graphic in the top example (right) is the same view as the visitor 
will see from the wayside location. The main graphic in the bottom example 
shows the dramatic effect the lava had on the landscape. It adds perspective 
to the story by highlighting the visitors location (You Are Here) in an aerial 
perspective with a graphic arrow that shows the location and direction of the 
lava flow. It broadens the view

Visual Layering
In the top example, there is only one layer of information. The graphic does 
not tell a story, the story is presented only in the main text. In the bottom 
example, the title introduces the story, the main graphic suggests a dramatic 
event with the transparent arrow, two inset diagrams show geological change 
on the landscape, and labels and captions offer more supporting details about 
basalt and flooding.

Subject Title vs. Interpretive Title
The title Whitmore Canyon, a place name, doesnt express the idea of 
a changing landscape. What is it about Whitmore Canyon that warrants a 
wayside exhibit? It is the significance of massive geologic change. The title 
When Lava Choked the Colorado introduces that story.

Not a Book
The main text in the top example begins with a definition of basalt. It 
attempts to tell the whole story and uses scientific jargon. In the bottom 
example the main text is more succinct because the graphics tell much of 
the story. Rather than describe the lava dam in so many words, the bottom 
example shows the lava flow, the dam, and temporary lake. And to spark 
interest, the text begins with a powerful, site-specific, first sentence, You are 
standing on remnants of a failed 180,000-year-old dam.

Gallery of Examples
Visit this website to see other examples of NPS wayside exhibits.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-samples.htm

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 45

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Draft Plan | Design 

Grand Canyon-Parashant National Monument

U.S. Department of the Interior

Bureau of Land Management
National Park Service

Whitmore Canyon

The black jagged rock in front of you is basalt, a common 
type of volcanic rock that formed as molten lava cooled.  
At least thirteen times during the last one million years, 
lava from the Uinkaret volcanic field to the north, flowed 
down valleys and changed the flow of the Colorado River.

You are standing on a 177,000-year-old lava flow.  Molten 
lava spewed from at least two volcanic vents, which are 
now covered by cinder cones in Whitmore Wash. The lava 
flowed south down Whitmore Canyon and entered the 

Grand Canyon at this location to form a massive dam.  
Over time, water built up behind the dam, which may  
have lasted up to 20,000 years. The lava dam eventually 
failed, sending a wall of water 600 feet high down the  
river and depositing massive boulders of basalt up to  
115 feet in diameter on benches well above the modern 
Colorado River.  

Before

After

36 x 24 inches | 40% of actual size | april 2008 | Grand canyon-parashant national MonuMent | Wayside Exhibit  05

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 46

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Draft Plan | Design 

Common Pitfalls in Wayside Design 

Too Many Colors and Styles
Layouts with many elements (text, graphics, colors, typographic styles, 
decorative elements) may be fine for web pages or magazines, but not 
waysides. Visitors quickly scan waysides for information and inspiration, unlike 
book pages on which they may study the materials. Clarity and focus help 
prevent readers from rejecting a wayside.

Too Many Little Pictures
Waysides cannot replace guidebooks or field guides. Visitors cannot visually 
memorize a multitude of small images on a wayside.

Long Line Lengths and Small Text
Reading text while standing outdoors is not like sitting in a comfortable chair 
with a book. Typography for wayside exhibits requires careful attention to 
appropriate line lengths, point sizes, line spaces, and contrast to be legible 
for an audience that will vary in height, visual ability, and types of corrective 
lenses. Waysides like those shown above make reading hard work.

Trying To Tell the Whole Story
Waysides can provoke interest and help visitors make a connection to the 
landscape, but they are not a good medium for telling complex stories that 
occur in multiple stages over long periods of time.

Too Many Logos
Logos convey the authority of the message, but too many can overwhelm the 
purpose and dilute the focus and authority. Logos benefit the wayside creator 
more than the wayside user. Err on the side of helping visitors enjoy an 
experience. Use logos with restraint. Find other ways to recognize donors and 
partners. Review the NPS Partnership Identity document.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/index.htm

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 47

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Draft Plan | Writing

Writing for Wayside Exhibits 
Start with a place. Tell a short, engaging story. Leave readers wanting more. 
It sounds simple, but space is limited and the audience fleeting. Visitors may 
linger at a wayside for 45 seconds or less. Can something of value be read in 
that short time? Wayside text must connect with, support, and enhance the 
images and landscapes visitors see. 

Stay Connected with the View
Do not take it for granted that readers will automatically understand the link 
between the story and the place where they are standing. Make sure they do.
But be careful not to describe what they can see readily with their own eyes.

The Most Powerful Sentence
Many writers find they need to work up to the heart of the matter, like a diver 
bounces on a diving board. It may take one, two, or three sentences to get 
there. After writing draft wayside text, find the best sentences. Try them out 
as the first sentence instead of leaving them in the middle or at the end.

Use the Active Voice
Weed out passive voice, and use short, active verbs. Keep the story moving. 
Use common language. Look for ways to replace longer words derived from 
Latin or Greek with basic plain English. For safety rules on trailhead waysides, 
stick with direct, simple Dos and Donts. Dont dance around the subject. 

How Many Words?
There is no one right answer to this question. Raw word counts vary for the 
many different sizes of waysides. An 18x18 can support far fewer words than 
a 36x48. A better measure is to get a stopwatch and have someone read draft 
wayside text out loud. Are the key ideas conveyed in less than 45 seconds? 
Did the reader stumble on hard-to-pronounce or not widely known words? If 
so, strike them out and rewrite.

Two great American 
writers said it best.

If I had more time, I 
would have written a 
shorter letter.
T.S. Eliot

There was never a 
story so good that it 
could not be improved 
upon.
Mark Twain

Did You Know?
These guidelines for 
wayside writing are 
particularly important for 
visitors with cognitive and 
learning disabilities.

Put Text into Hierarchies
All wayside text is not created equal. Keep key thoughts in main text blocks, 
and supporting details in captions or labels. Some visitors only read the title 
and look at the main graphic. Others read the main text and some captions. A 
few read it all. Sometimes ideas that started out in the main text find a better 
fit as a sidebar or a caption. Sometimes a phrase can be cut out of main text 
and put to work as a direct label on an image. Keep each element focused.

Get Feedback and Edit, Edit, Edit
Compose the first draft. Compare it to the purpose statement. Read it in the 
context of the layout and a photo of the site. Get feedback from other writers, 
interpreters, and general-knowledge-only readers. Rigorously cut away 
everything that can be eliminated. The craft of writing good waysides depends 
as much on subtraction as on creativity. 

The So-What? Test
Good wayside writing will help people discover something meaningful and 
worth the interruption. Why should they care? Look for hidden relationships. 
Find an angle of interest, a way to help visitors see what cant be seen. Write 
for the readers benefit, not for your own pleasure or sense of what people 
ought to learn. Think about the visitors sense of place and address the 
moment of curiosity, the questions inspired by the place

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 48

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Draft Plan | Writing

Common Pitfalls in Wayside Writing

Too many words.

Common Words?
Consider word choice 
carefully. Which phrase 
would you use?

shroud of snow
blanket of snow
a foot of snow
snow cover

Avoid Subject Titles
Avoid subject titles like Geology or Plants. Write titles to reveal the 
significance of the story, like Wheels to Wings or River on the Rampage. 
An effective title linked to a compelling image can pull people into the story. 
Try a hook, a surprise, or a play on words to engage interest. Dont just label 
something, choose words that deliver meaning.

Dont Let Data Overwhelm
Conflict, mystery, and surprise keep people engaged. Too many facts or 
complicated scientific processes will turn them away. A wayside is not a book. 
Write more like haiku and less like term papers. 

Avoid Jargon and Buzzwords
Write for a general audience. Question whether words and phrases will be 
understood by people not familiar with government terms or terms used by 
subject-matter specialists. Leave out buzzwords like natural and cultural 
resources or front-country. Jargon confuses. Buzzwords become dated, 
bureaucratic, and flat. Write in plain, basic English. Avoid repeatedly referring 
to the site as the Park.

Dont State the Obvious
This happens when writers have to work up to a good idea or write the way 
they normally speak. Weed out habits of speech that creep into writing that 
may lead to redundancies. An example would be the expression for all intents 
and purposes.

It is Not a Ranger Talk
Informal conversations have conventions of speech and common courtesy. On 
a wayside with a time crunch to connect with the reader, dont waste time 
or space to say Welcome to Big Beautiful National Park. Make every phrase 
work to connect and to convey significance. Avoid clauses of casual speech. 

Avoid a Sales Pitch
Travel books and airport posters induce people to come see a site. With 
waysides the person is already there. Save limited text for revealing what 
makes this place significant and meaningful.

Information or Interpretation?
Make sure the writing style and content support the wayside exhibits purpose 
and intended outcomes. Understand the difference between presenting 
information and interpretation. For guidance on interpretation, review this 24-
page Interpretive Foundations document.
http://www.nps.gov/idp/interp/101/foundationscurriculum.pdf

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 49

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Draft Plan | Writing

Pea Ridge National Military Park

City of Soldiers

National Park Service
U.S. Department of the Interior

In early March 1862, these now quiet fields bustled 
with the clamor and constant motion of an army  
headquarters in time of battle. Soldiers drilled, cleaned 
guns, and checked ammunition. Scouts and couriers 
rode in to report. Officers convened for councils of war. 
Mules brayed and teamsters swore. Teams pulling 
wagons and artillery rattled by. 

Here, across the road from Samuel Pratts store, decisions 
were made that would determine the fate of two armies
and the state of Missouri. A temporary city of soldiers 
covered the field before you and the surrounding area. 
Here you would have seen the nerve center of the Union 
army during the two-day fight for Pea Ridge.

Pea Ridge 
National Military Park

There was heavy military traffic 
along the Telegraph Road that 
now lies in part under the battlefield 
tour road behind you.

Example of Good Wayside Writing

36 X 24 INCHES | 38% OF ACTUAL SIZE | FEBRUARY 2006 | PEA RIDGE NATIONAL MILITARY PARK | Wayside Exhibit  02

Title

City of Soldiers

Main Text

In early March 1862, these now quiet fields bustled with the clamor and 
constant motion of an army headquarters in time of battle. Soldiers drilled, 
cleaned guns, and checked ammunition. Scouts and couriers rode in to report. 
Officers convened for councils of war. Mules brayed and teamsters swore. 
Teams pulling wagons and artillery rattled by.  

Here, across the road from Samuel Pratts store, decisions were made 
that would determine the fate of two armiesand the state of Missouri. A 
temporary city of soldiers covered the field before you and the surrounding 
area. Here you would have seen the nerve center of the Union army during 
the two-day fight for Pea Ridge.

Caption

There was heavy military traffic along the Telegraph Road that now lies in part 
under the battlefield tour road behind you.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 50

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Draft Plan | Writing

Sequoia and Kings Canyon 
National Parks

Example of Good Wayside Writing

Title

Frequent Fire

Main Text

Many fires created the large scar on the sequoia in front of you. Frequent fire 
is common in good sequoia habitat, and mature trees have ways to survive. 
Most large sequoias survive fire and live well despite large scars.

Thick bark with many air pockets insulates the wood from heat. With little sap 
or pitch in it, the bark is not very flammable. High branches hold foliage well 
above most fires. With competing plants burned away, surviving trees get 
more water, nutrients, and sun.

Caption

New wood grows from either side of a fire scar, covering a little more each 
year. This healing growth leaves telltale marks on the trees annual growth 
rings. These marks reveal how many fires a tree has survived.

Caption

A fire worker examines the base of a large fire scar. A typical sequoia here 
might have survived several fires each century.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 51

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Draft Plan | Writing

Tools and Resources for Wayside Writers 

Reading Level
How challenging is it to read wayside text? Use Microsoft Word to check the 
readability of draft text. The proofing tool analyzes text and reports a level-
of-effort score (shown below). It checks for wordiness, jargon, sentence 
structure, passive sentences, and many other aspects of grammar and style. 
Wayside text should score no higher than 810 on the Flesch-Kincaid scale.

Visit the HFC web site to 
read some good examples 
of wayside writing. 
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/
products/waysides/way-
samples.htm

Editorial Style Guide

Spanish Style Guide 

 

 

 

 

February 2008 

Guidelines to help park rangers, interpreters, editors, and translators working on 
Spanish language versions of National Park Service interpretive media 
 
 

 

 

Developed during translations of park brochures (and other publications) for Biscayne, Castillo de 
San Marcos, Dry Tortugas, Everglades, Pinnacles, Saguaro, San Juan, and Whitman Mission;  
 
translations of film scripts for Cabrillo, Castillo de San Marcos, and San Juan;  
 
and translations of wayside exhibit texts for Big Bend, Biscayne, Carlsbad Caverns, Dry Tortugas, 
Everglades, Grand Canyon, Guadalupe Mountains, Indiana Dunes, Joshua Tree, Juan Bautista de 
Anza Trail, Organ Pipe, Palo Alto National Battlefield, Salinas Pueblo Missions, San Antonio 
Missions, San Juan, Sequoia-Kings Canyon, and Timpanogos Cave. 

 

 

Table of Contents: 
 
 
1. 
 
 
2. 

Capitalization  

Guiding Principles  Degree of literalness desired, dialects, and design parity 

Rules that differ between Spanish and English 

 

 

 
3. 

  

  

 
 
4. 

   

   

   

 

 

2.01  Days of the week, months - lowercase in Spanish 

2.02  River and mountain ranges names - lowercase in Spanish 

2.03  Tribal or national names  lowercase in Spanish 

2.04  Titles of books, waysides  lowercase after single initial capital 

Grammar Issues to Decide  (alphabetical listing) 

 

 

3.01  Command forms for verbs 

3.02  Formal or informal YOU, Singular or Plural 

Punctuation Rules that differ between Spanish and English 

 

 

 

4.01  Comma use in sequences of three or more 

4.02 

Initial question marks, exclamation points,  

4.03  Vowels with accents

Spanish Style Guide

Readability Levels
4 Hemingway
6 Mark Twain
8 Readers Digest
810 Most Popular Novels
10 Time, Newsweek
12 Typical Insurance Policies
1520 Academic Papers

Ideally, wayside writing  
is level 8.

Effective Interpretive Writing TEL broadcast 2008-05-09
Veteran HFC writer-editor Ed Zahniser gives a concise, hard-hitting talk on 
interpretive writing for a 2008 TEL (Technology Enhanced Learning) broadcast. 
This 20-minute video is packed with good ideas on interpretive writing.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-process-writing.htm

Editorial Style Guide
Words and how we use them change over the years. Is it better to say 

Native American or Indian? Is it buffalo or bison? This Style Guide lists 
preferred word choices for NPS media products. Use the Style Guide to speak 
with a consistent voice and help avoid reader confusion. For general writing 
reference books, see the list on the front page of the Style Guide. For park-
specific editorial style, create your own Section D of the Wayside Guide.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-process-writing.htm

Bilingual Waysides
Visit this webpage for general recommendations for bilingual waysides.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-process-language.htm

Spanish Style Guide
The Spanish language has different rules than English. Specific solutions 
used during translation and interpretive editing of many NPS sites Spanish-
language waysides and publications are listed in this document.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-process-language.htm

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 52

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Draft Plan | Review

Wayside Exhibit Plan Review and Approval
Review the plan on site and evaluate each wayside as a first-time visitor 
would see it. Formative evaluation is recommended at this stage by placing 
full-size mock-ups in their intended locations. Review for programmatic 
accessibility. All stakeholders should review the Wayside Plan, but the park 
staff is responsible for compiling and consolidating all comments.

Things To Consider
Consider the best approach to resolve differences in opinions and ideas 
between and among reviewers. In some cases, it is best for the park staff 
to come to consensus, consolidate comments, and provide clear direction to 
the planning and design team. Sometimes the planners and designers are 
included in the discussions. Either way, strike a balance between giving highly 
specific directions and asking for open-ended discussions. 

Review in the conference room or office is common (above), but ideally, 
waysides are reviewed in the setting in which they will appear (left). Though 
this may not always be possible or practical, referencing the site photos and 
original purpose statements in the approved Wayside Proposal will keep the 
review focused and prevent backtracking.

Try to keep from bogging down on matters of style or wordsmithing. Check 
to be sure the facts are correct and that the editing process has not distorted 
accuracy or meaning. Check image labels and captions for accuracy. Be sure 
the selected graphics are appropriate. Check draft maps for labels, features, 
geographic area, hierarchy, and focus. Look for consistency between map 
labels, text, and graphics on each wayside, and among all layouts in the 
project. If the text was written in-house, ask someone other than the author 
to review and edit it.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 53

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Draft Plan | Illustrations

Reference Package
Artists need details and 
direction. Organize a 
comprehensive reference 
package. Understand what 
is known and consider how 
to handle unknowns. If 
possible, the artist should 
visit the site.

Creating New Illustrations
Sometimes there are no photographs, existing illustrations, or 
other graphics that can help explain the significance of a site.  
Although a new illustration will require an investment of time 
and money, it will reveal significant meanings, relationships, 
and details to visitors, and may also help park staff gain greater 
insight into the subject. Art for waysides must be place-specific 
so visitors can easily compare it to the actual landscape.

Thumbnails show basic content, 
focus, perspective, and general 
composition within the wayside 
exhibit panel.

Richmond National Battlefi eld Park

National Park Service
U.S. Department of the Interior

Killing Fields At first light on June 3, 1864, more than half of the Army 

of the Potomac rushed forward across a wide front.  
Theirs was a high stakes gamble. The risk: a frontal 
attack against well fortified Confederate defenders. The 
reward: the potential to drive Robert E. Lee's army into 

the Chickahominy River. On the Confederate right a brief 
breakthrough produced hand-to-hand fighting. In the center 
the attackers barely left the cover of their trees. On the left 
brave soldiers charged across open ground, only to fall by the 
hundreds.  The Confederate line stood unbroken. 

The men bent down as they pushed forward, as if trying...to breast a tempest, and the files of men went down 
The men bent down as they pushed forward, as if trying...to breast a tempest, and the files of men went down 
like rows of blocks or bricks pushed over by striking against each other.
like rows of blocks or bricks pushed over by striking against each other.

John L. Piper, 12th New Hampshire Infantry

Sketches are reviewed and refined 
in multiple stages to establish 
accurate detail, exact dimensions, 
compelling composition, and a 
good fit within a wayside layout. 
The sketch leaves space for text.
The artist must take into account 
the necessary margins, bleeds, 
and frame overlap of the wayside 
hardware.

Richmond National Battlefi eld Park

National Park Service
U.S. Department of the Interior

Killing Fields At first light on June 3, 1864, more than half of the Army 

of the Potomac rushed forward across a wide front.  
Theirs was a high stakes gamble. The risk: a frontal 
attack against well fortified Confederate defenders. The 
reward: the potential to drive Robert E. Lee's army into 

the Chickahominy River. On the Confederate right a brief 
breakthrough produced hand-to-hand fighting. In the center 
the attackers barely left the cover of their trees. On the left 
brave soldiers charged across open ground, only to fall by the 
hundreds.  The Confederate line stood unbroken. 

The men bent down as they pushed forward, as if trying...to breast a tempest, and the files of men went down 
like rows of blocks or bricks pushed over by striking against each other.

John L. Piper, 12th New Hampshire Infantry

42 X 24 INCHES | 38% OF ACTUAL SIZE | DECEMBER 2008 | RICHMOND NATIONAL BATTLEFIELD PARK | Wayside Exhibit 053

Full-color rendering is developed, 
reviewed and corrected for accuracy, 
fit within the wayside layout, color 
reproduction quality, and to ensure 
consistency between text and art.

You Are Here

Richmond National Battlefield Park

National Park Service
U.S. Department of the Interior

Killing Fields At first light on June 3, 1864, more than half of the Army 

of the Potomac rushed forward across a wide front.  
Theirs was a high stakes gamble. The risk: a frontal 
attack against well fortified Confederate defenders. The 
reward: the potential to drive Robert E. Lee's army into 

the Chickahominy River. On the Confederate right a brief 
breakthrough produced hand-to-hand fighting. In the center 
the attackers barely left the cover of their trees. On the left 
brave soldiers charged across open ground, only to fall by the 
hundreds.  The Confederate line stood unbroken. 

The men bent down as they pushed forward, as if trying...to breast a tempest, and the files of men went down 
like rows of blocks or bricks pushed over by striking against each other.

John L. Piper, 12th New Hampshire Infantry

Final art is scanned at high-
resolution and placed in the 
layout with final text, labels, and 
other graphics. The final artwork 
represents the best compilation 
of knowledge at the time. Date 
the original for future reference.

You Are Here

42 x 24 inches | 38% of actual size | december 2008 | richmond national battlefield park | Wayside Exhibit 053 

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 54

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Draft Plan | Illustrations

What To Expect 
Creating new artwork 
as a part of a larger 
wayside project can 
significantly add to the 
cost and time it takes 
to complete a project. 
Begin early and develop 
art in tandem with the 
layout to avoid delays.

Selecting the Artist
Some artists are good at architectural detail, others capture people, natural 
scenes, wildlife, or scenes from specific historical time periods. It is important 
that the artist understand the subject matter to represent ideas accurately. 
An artist without subject-matter expertise may require a prohibitively large 
reference package. 

Art Review and Approval
Expect this to be a learning process for both the artist and the park staff. 
Invest time and attention during every review to correct the content along the 
way. Pay attention to the details. Dont wait until the final review! Creating 
new artwork is a learning process for subject-matter experts and artists. 
Assume additional research will be needed throughout the process.

Revisions Are Cumulative
Once a detail or direction has been decided, dont go back to change it at 
a later review stage. The biggest changes should happen in early reviews. 
Later reviews are for fine-tuning the details only. Asking for big changes in 
composition or direction late in the game means delays, cost overruns, and 
missed deadlines. 

Full-Scale Reviews
Sometimes artwork for waysides is created at the actual size of the wayside. 
This is not always practical. The artist may be working on a smaller scale. 
Print out actual-size review copies of the work-in-progress to be sure that the 
level of detail is appropriate for the size of the wayside.

On-Site Reviews
Consider reviewing the work-in-progress on site at the wayside location to 
ensure that the details match the view visitors will see.

Links and Documents
HFC Commissioned Art Collection
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/art-collection.htm
Before spending time and money to develop new art, search the Harpers 
Ferry Center Commissioned Art Collection. This archive contains over 10,000 
illustrations. Part of the collection is available online to federal employees. 
Most of the collection is owned by the National Park Service and can be freely 
reproduced. 

Acquiring New Illustrations
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/index.htm
These guidelines and worksheets state the policies and procedures for 
commissioning any new artwork for the National Park Service. This can help in 
developing the artwork Scope of Work.

NPS Art Contracts
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/acquisition/contracts.htm
Harpers Ferry Center maintains several contracts with talented artists familiar 
with National Park Service requirements. The contracts have fixed rates, 
quality standards, and detailed specifications for use-rights.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 55

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Draft Plan | Maps

Did You Know?
Harpers Ferry Center 
created Wayside Map 
Standards to establish a 
common language among 
National Park Service 
visitor-use maps.

Creating New Maps
Unlike most maps, wayside maps can only be used on-site. 
They need to be quickly understood and easily remembered. 
The wayside audience is mostly on foot. The You Are Here is 
the most important feature on orientation maps, which should 
provide only the information person needs to travel from the 
wayside (point A) to point B. 

Map Guidelines
Visitors will likely use a combination of wayside maps and brochure maps for 
orientation purposes. Consistency in the look, feel, and function of all visitor-
use maps will improve reader orientation and understanding. Map standards 
serve as a guide, not as a hard-and-fast set of rules.

Planning a Map
The installation location of a wayside affects the content of the map. Start by 
defining the purpose. A map may not be the best way to accomplish the goal!

Audience
Remember, a wayside audience is mobile. Visitors face a particular direction 
with a view of specific landscape and structural features. To work, the map 
must relate to the view.

Orientation
Wayside trailhead maps usually work best when they are oriented to match 
the direction viewers face. In contrast, most other types of maps generally 
work best when north is at the top.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 56

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Draft Plan | Maps

Size and Scale
Map size and scale is based on the purpose, geographic area, and content. 
Scale must be considered before size. Scale is the amount of geographic area 
represented in a particular physical size. Size is the physical length and width 
of the map. Figure out the scale first, mock up the map, and then develop the 
wayside layout around it. Create a map at the same size as it will appear in 
the layout. 

Content
Determine what geographical information and labels to include on the map. 
Gather resource maps to be used for base information, keeping in mind 
that these reference maps were created for different purposes. Make sure 
the map labels are consistent with park signs, wayside exhibit text, or park 
publications. Make a list of all relevant features (park areas, open water 
areas, drainages, roads, trails, etc.) and labels (spelled correctly) in order of 
importance. This helps the cartographer understand the map requirements.

Designing Tactile Wayside Maps
Tactile maps are not just regular printed maps with Braille or textures added. 
They are maps converted for low-vision users who may not be able to relate 
map features to the visible landscape. This PDF has more information.  
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/accessibility/index.htm

Common Wayside Map Pitfalls
Map Goes Here. Never create a wayside layout with a box and a map goes here note. A poorly 
scaled map can be misleading and possibly dangerous to visitors. Once a map is produced, adding 
to the map area or changing the scale means delays, cost overruns, and missed deadlines.

Too Much Detail. Remember the audience and how they use maps. Can they understand where 
they are with a single glance? How much detail can they commit to memory as they walk away? For 
trailhead maps, limit key elements to what is within range of a typical day-hiker. Provide topo maps, 
brochures, tour maps, GPS units, or trail signs for more complex wayfinding.

One Size Does Not Fit All. Existing park brochure maps and older sketch maps of trails rarely do a 
good job when inserted into a large-format wayside layout. A simple map works best.

Links and Documents
Wayside Map Standards
Use these guidelines as a tool to plan, create, and evaluate your outdoor 
orientation maps.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-process-maps.htm

Starter Map File
This Adobe Illustrator file contains tagged layers with preset features for lines, 
fonts, colors, and symbols to streamline making on-site orientation maps.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-process-maps.htm

NPS Map Resources
This webpage contains downloadable park map files, resources like NPS 
recreation symbols, and information about the design and production of 
visitor-use maps.
http://data2.itc.nps.gov/hafe/hfc/carto.cfm

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 57

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Draft Plan | Tactile Elements

What To Expect 
Tactile elements are 
custom items. They 
require additional 
planning, design, 
prototyping, testing, and 
fabrication. To ensure 
success with visually-
impaired audiences, 
consider getting input 
on design ideas at the 
outset.

Models and Tactile Elements
Wayside exhibits are a primarily visual medium. For people with 
limited or no vision, tactile elements give greater access to the 
sites significance. For fully sighted visitors, tactile elements add 
richness that two-dimensional wayside exhibits do not provide.

Design Considerations
What is the best way to communicate concepts to visitors with visual 
impairments? A raised-line map can reveal geographic relationships 
effectively, but would not be a good choice for a steam engine. Bas relief can 
reveal the texture of an alligator but would not be appropriate for a cactus. 
Braille provides access for some visitors but is not used by all people with 
visual impairments. 

A tactile element may be a single item or a combination of items on a single 
base. When planning a tactile element on a wayside think about how it will 
integrate with other graphics and text. Will it need its own text or caption? 
Will Braille labels be added? Will visitors with low vision know where to find it? 

Fabrication Guidelines
Safety
Consider the use of materials in hot or cold climates. Avoid undercuts, or 
places where thin or narrow features are unsupported. At these weak points 
breaks are more likely to happen, leaving dangerous sharp edges. Watch out 
for small spaces that trap fingers. 

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 58

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Draft Plan | Tactile Elements

Vertical Exaggeration
Items that project off the surface too far become handles for children and 
others and can break or bend a panel. A flatter tactile is less destructible. The 
more vertical exaggeration needed, the more important it is that the material 
be durable and strong.

Mounting
An important part of tactile design is the attachment method. Will it be 
surface mounted? Will fasteners hold it from behind? Will you need to drill 
holes through the panel, use security screws, or special tools for installation 
and removal? If the tactile elements are small, consider mounting them to 
a separate base. A base not only protects smaller objects from damage but 
visually sets off the object and provides a larger mounting surface.

Materials
Resin
High-impact resin plastics are available that look highly realistic when colored 
and will endure years of normal use. 

Cast Metal
If the application requires decades of durability, bronze or other cast metal 
may be the correct choice. Cost may be a factor because metal casting is 
much more involved than plastics. Metal is also difficult and costly to color if 
the base metal color is not acceptable. Metal castings in direct sunlight may 
become too hot to touch.

Plastics
Thermoformed plastics can be combined with full-color graphic layouts. This 
works well for limited-relief maps that include Braille labels.

Reference Package Requirements
Photos and Samples
A collection of pictures or samples is required to produce tactile models. 
Depending on the tactile element, a sample may be available (a natural 
specimen), but often pictures of animals, buildings, or objects may be 
necessary. Be sure to annotate the photos with a scale or dimensions.

Specifications
Clearly define the specifications in writing or in drawings to show size, scale, 
orientation, material, finish, and mounting method. Be thorough when 
specifying a tactile model; the outcome will only be as good as the directions 
are clear. 

Tactile Maps
Tactile maps are not just regular printed maps with Braille or textures added. 
They are maps converted for low-vision users who may not be able to relate 
map features to the visible landscape. This webpage has more information. 
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/accessibility/index.htm

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 59

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Final Plan

Wayside Exhibit Development Process

Project 
Startup 

Site 

Analysis

Project 
Proposal 

Draft 
Plan

Final 
Plan

You are here

Final Wayside Plan
The Final Wayside Exhibit Plan is the last step in the planning 
and design process before the exhibits move into production. 
Changes to content and layout should be minimal at this point. 
The designers and planners adjust the final text, photos, 
maps, diagrams, and art for final review and approval before 
producing wayside exhibits.

Final Text Adjustments
Final Editing
The planner or an editor works directly in the InDesign exhibit file to correct 
spelling, grammar, or punctuation errors. Confirm all dates, facts, and labels. 
Add credit lines if required, and check for accuracy.

Final Typographic Treatment
The designer makes the final adjustments to line lengths to smooth out the 
rag, look for awkward line breaks, adjust word and letter spacing (kerning), 
remove extra spaces, check alignments with other elements, and make final 
image adjustments so that any text printing over an image will be legible.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 60

Section  B

 Wayside Guide | Final Plan

Low-resolution image 
(50 dpi at actual size)

High-resolution image 
(200 dpi at actual size)

Place Final Graphics
Final Scans of Approved Art
Once the artwork is completed, reviewed, and approved, a high-resolution 
scan is made and placed in the layout file. Adjustments are made to the scan 
to improve legibility for any text or labels placed over the image.

Final Approved Maps
Final map files are placed in the layout. Map labels are cross-checked with 
the wayside panel text. For example, if the wayside text refers to the Nature 
Center, the map label should not read Visitor Center. If the text says Army 
of the Potomac, the map label should not read Union Troops. 

Final High-Resolution Photos
All low-resolution graphics selected and approved will be replaced or updated 
with high-resolution graphics, once use-rights have been secured. A high-
resolution file is at least 100200 dpi at actual size of the final reproduction.

Production Files
Assemble the final high-resolution graphic files, InDesign layout files, and 
fonts, using file naming conventions for wayside exhibits. Make sure all 
graphics meet color management requirements.

File Naming Conventions
Refer to the document on this webpage for guidance on file naming and 
archiving.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-grids.htm

Color Management for Designers and Cartographers
Managing image requirements for wayside fabrication requires a solid 
understanding of the imaging processes and how to manage color throughout 
design development and into production. Refer to the document on this 
webpage for color management.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-grids.htm

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 61

National Park Service
U.S. Department of the Interior

Section             Wayside Production

C

The Wayside Exhibit Production Process chart at the beginning of Section C 
outlines six major stages of work. This section details fabrication, installation, 
and long-term maintenance.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 62

Wayside GuideSection  C

 Wayside Guide | Wayside Production

Contents

Wayside Exhibit Production Process Chart

Production Files

Fabrication: Bases and Panels

Preparing the Site

Installation: Panels and Bases

Archive and Inventory

Maintenance

64

65

67

69

71

73

75

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 63

Wayside Exhibit Production Process

Summary Chart	(For	more	detailed	requirements	see	http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides)

Production Files

Fabrication

Preparing the Site

Installation

Archive / Inventory

Maintenance

Based on the approved Wayside 
Exhibit Plan a production-ready 
package is assembled. The 
production package includes digital 
layout files, high-resolution graphic 
and map files, fonts, color proofs, 
and production notes for the 
fabricator.

Panels are imaged from digital files. 
Fabricator provides production proofs 
for review. Once corrections are made 
the panels are produced. Bases are 
fabricated and shipped.

Park prepares wayside exhibit sites 
for installation, making certain sites 
are safe and accessible.

Park installs the exhibits according 
to installation plans and assembly 
instructions and ensures safety and 
accessibility at each site.

Production files are archived, back-up 
panels are inventoried and securely 
stored, warranty and graphics-use 
records are appropriately filed, final 
project data is input into Media 
Inventory Databse System (MIDS), 
and project accounts are closed.

The park site manager is provided 
with a wayside exhibit maintenance 
kit and informed how to properly 
clean and maintain the new exhibit 
panels and bases. The park maintains 
the exhibits and replaces as needed.

Production Files

Fabrication

Site Prep

Installation

Archive / Inventory

Maintenance

Review all layouts, printed full size
	 Take	the	time	to	check	for	hard-to-

Fabricator images production proofs
	 Production	proofs	and	samples	are	

see	errors,	and	make	final	corrections

Assemble the production package
	 Write	production	notes	to	guide	the	

fabricator

	 Print	11x17	color-correct	copies	of	all	

layouts

	 Burn	all	production	files	to	disk	
(layouts,	graphics,	maps,	fonts)

	 Prepare	base	order	form
	 Gather	custom	base	drawings
	 Define	tactile	model	specifications

inspected	and	marked	with	any	
corrections

Panels are fabricated and shipped 
	 HFC	takes	delivery	of	panels,	inspects,	

and	ships	to	the	park

Bases are fabricated and shipped to the 
park

Tactile models are fabricated and 
shipped

Secure permits and clearances

Make wayside exhibit pads accessible 
and safe

Clear the vista

Stake the sites

Remove existing signs

Print final layouts for park records

Park identifies delivery location for 
panels and bases

Park writes a work order for site 
preparation and installation

Shipping and receiving
	 Park	takes	delivery	and	inspects	

shipments	of	panels	and	bases

Install bases
	 Installation	plan	guides	location,	
direction	of	view	of	each	wayside

	 Installation	meets	accessibility	

requirements

Install panels
	 Fill	in	installation	information	on	the	

sticker	on	the	back	of	the	panel

	 After	bases	are	securely	in	place,	

panels	and	tactile	elements	are	
installed

As-built files are returned by the 
fabricator and archived
	 HFC	maintains	wayside	archive	for	

projects	done	via	HFC

Backup panels are inventoried
	 Park	keeps	backup	panel	in	safe	

convenient	location	for	easy	
replacement	as	necessary

Critical project materials are archived
	 Warranty	and	use-rights	agreements
	 Final	Wayside	Exhibit	Plan
	 Production	files	and	master	files
	 Original	source	materials	like	prints,	

negatives,	or	original	art

Prepare audio description of each 
wayside and its location

Park updates MIDS data

Conduct summative evaluation

Park enters FMSS data

Project accounts are closed

Clean panels and bases
	 Use	the	wayside	exhibit	maintenance	

kit,	which	includes	written	
instructions	and	materials	for	
maintaining	the	exhibit

	 Regularly	wax	fiberglass	panels

Touch up bases
	 Repair	scratches	and	chips

Replace deteriorated or damaged 
panels
	 Keep	a	backup	panel	in	storage
	 Replace	damaged	panels	with	the	

backup	panel	and	order	a	new	
backup

Clear the vista
	 Perform	regular	maintenance	to	

remove	or	trim	obstacles

Maintain the site
	 Ensure	site	conditions,	wayside	pad,	

entrances,	and	exit	remain	clear,	safe,	
and	accessible

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 64

Section  C

Wayside Guide  |  Production Package

Wayside Exhibit Production Process

Production

Fabrication

Files

Site Prep Installation Archive /
Inventory

Maintain

You are here

Production Files
Once the Final Wayside Exhibit Plan is approved, production 
begins with assembling the digital graphics, design files, and 
manufacturing specifications needed to fabricate the wayside 
bases and panels.  

Major Roles
Wayside Designer
reviews full-size proofs 
and makes corrections 
to files and prepares 
production-ready 
package.

Wayside Planner
reviews full-size proofs.

Park Maintenance
picks delivery location,
writes work order, 
reviews custom base 
drawings.

Start with a Final Full-Size Print Review
Up to this point in most wayside projects, panel layouts have been reviewed 
as scaled-prints, usually about 40 percent of the actual panel size. But before 
fabrication begins, it is recommended that all layouts be printed at actual size 
for a final, detailed review. Both the planner and designer review these full-
size proofs. The park staff may also review them, but this is less common.  

What To Look For
At this stage the review should not be about content. Look for things like extra 
spaces between words or letters, misalignment of elements, blemishes in 
graphics, and typographic refinements like kerning, rag, and legibility.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 65

Section  C

Wayside Guide  |  Production Package

national park Service
u.S. Department of the interior

Harpers Ferry Center
Media Development

P.O. Box 50
67 Mather Place
Harpers Ferry, WV 25425

304 535-6451 phone
304 535-6176 fax

Harpers Ferry center Production Notes Digital

potomac Heritage national Scenic Trail

10 Exhibits (101, 103, 106, 110, 125, 201, 218, 301, 309, 318) plus 17 duplicates*

 All layouts have been created in InDesign CS.3
  All photoshop images are HI-RES and in RGB color space, Adobe RGB color profile has been 

embedded in all RGB images. They have NOT been converted to CMYK

 All Adobe Illustrator files are in CMYK with U.S. Web Coated (SWOP) v2 profile embedded. 
 For best printing results from InDesign, please change the Send Data to all and Transparency 
Flattener to [High Resolution], (see figures below)

*Special Notes:
 Wayside 103 has eight exact duplicates (112, 127, 203, 219, 222, 302, 306, 311)
 Wayside 106 has four exact duplicates (118, 121, 129, 206)
 Wayside 218 has three duplicates with different You Are Here locator labels for waysides 223, 
224, and 255. To create these files, the fabricator shall turn the appropriate InDesign layer on, 
and the other three layers off.
 Wayside 301 has one duplicates with different You Are Here locator labels for waysides 304. To 
create these files, the fabricator shall turn the appropriate InDesign layer on, and the other layer 
off.
 Wayside 309 has one duplicates with different You Are Here locator labels for waysides 317. To 
create these files, the fabricator shall turn the appropriate InDesign layer on, and the other layer 
off.

E x p E r i E n c E   Y o u r   A m E r i c ATM
The National Park Service cares for special places saved by the American people so that all may experience our heritage.

Production Notes example

Portion of a full-size 
print showing corrections 
marked up during full-
size print review stage. 
This is the last round of 
corrections before the job 
is burned to a disk and 
sent to the fabricator.

Elements of the Package
Printed Production Notes
The Production Notes document is a written set of instructions that direct 
the fabrication of wayside panels. It provides specifications like file type and 
version, and color-space, and special notes like non-printing layers or project-
specific notes like duplicates with You Are Here label changes.

Color Copies of All Layouts
Final color copies of the layouts, printed at scale on 11x17 paper, are provided 
to the fabricator for cost-estimating purposes, as well as to show them what 
each panel should look like in its finished form.

Color Target Proofs
It is useful to provide the fabricator with color prints that reflect the intended 
color of the final panel. Called color target proofs, these can be generated in 
a variety of output materials. Color target proofs are less critical when a good 
color management process is in place. 

Color Management for HFC Designers and Cartographers
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/index.htm

Digital Files on Disk
Digital files provided to the fabricator include the exhibit file, linked high-
resolution graphic files, maps or other vector graphic files, and fonts.

Custom Base Drawings
Mounting wayside hardware onto existing railings, masonry structures, or 
other existing hardware will require detailed fabrication drawings. Wayside 
bases that are not standard NPS design will also require design drawings.

Installation Work Order
With the fabrication contract in place, a delivery location and date are 
established. The park writes a work order for wayside base installation and 
site preparation. 

Tactile Model Specifications
Identify the model material, color, and method of reproduction and mounting. 
Provide a reference package with samples, photographs, and drawings 
showing layouts of multiple-object models, dimensions, and other specific 
details. List shop inspections needed for adequate review and approval.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 66

Section  C

Wayside Guide  |  Fabrication

Wayside Exhibit Production Process

Production

Fabrication

Files

Site Prep Installation Archive /
Inventory

Maintain

You are here

Fabrication: Panels and Bases
Wayside exhibits are manufactured by a variety of contractors 
who specialize in panel imaging, base manufacturing, or both. 
Panels are produced from the digital files provided with the 
production-ready package. Bases are fabricated according to 
detailed shop drawings. 

Base Fabrication
Material Choices
A variety of material choices are available for the bases and panels. Current 
information about materials is available on this webpage.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-product-panels.htm

Base Fabrication Contracts
Harpers Ferry Center maintains several contracts with hardware fabricators 
for waysides and pedestrian signs. The bases are made according to NPS 
standards for design and materials. 
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/acquisition/contracts.htm

Custom Base Shop Drawing
Create new shop drawings when mounting or other requirements call for 
detailed custom hardware solutions. Fabrication drawings can be created by 
HFC staff or hardware fabricators.

Major Roles
Production Manager
directs panel and base 
fabrication contracts,
and inspects panels.

Wayside Designer
reviews production 
proofs and makes 
corrections to files.

Wayside Planner
reviews production 
proofs.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 67

Section  C

Wayside Guide  |  Fabrication

Considerations
Fabrication is not 
finished when you 
receive your shipment. 
Panels and bases 
must be inspected 
right away. Any 
unacceptable parts will 
need to be corrected 
or re-fabricated. Allow 
time for this.

Panel Fabrication
Wayside panels may be fabricated in several materials, each with different 
manufacturing processes and requirements. But all manufacturing should 
begin with a production proof and in some cases a material sample. 
Production proofs are inspected for color accuracy, print errors, and other 
flaws. Corrections are made and the panel is imaged and shipped to the 
Production Manager for final inspection. Park shipping address is confirmed 
and the park is notified when delivery will be made. The park needs a safe 
place to receive and store the panels and bases until installation is complete.

Panel Fabrication Contract
Harpers Ferry Center maintains several contracts with panel fabricators for 
wayside exhibits and pedestrian signs. They can produce a variety of panel 
types, including fiberglass, high-pressure laminate, porcelain enamel, and 
fused polycarbonate. Harpers Ferry Center staff provide final panel inspection 
for projects managed by the Center.
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/acquisition/contracts.htm

Production Proof
Different types of panels are reviewed using different types of proofs. In 
all cases a full- or half-size paper proof is obtained. It is important that the 
proofs accurately represent the final production color and material. Porcelain 
enamel and high-pressure laminate panels also require a material sample 
for accurate color proofing of certain colors. Changes are noted on the paper 
proofs along with a signature of approval, and returned to the fabricator. PDFs 
may be adequate to confirm the changes.

Inspection and Acceptance
Upon final panel inspection, the production manager will check fabrication 
quality, color accuracy, size, and overall consistency. Rejected panels are 
replaced. Panels are shipped to the park when the entire order is accepted.

Tactile Model Fabrication
Work with a skilled model maker who, in most cases, will not be the same 
vendor fabricating the panels or bases. Request a prototype or sample of 
work from the model maker and test or evaluate the sample with the target 
audience.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 68

Section  C

Wayside Guide  |  Site Preparation

Preparing railing mounts at 
Obed Wild and Scenic River

Wayside Exhibit Production Process

Production

Fabrication

Files

Site Prep Installation Archive /
Inventory

Maintain

You are here

Preparing the Site
Proper site preparation and base installation is essential to the 
success of outdoor interpretive exhibits. Wayside locations must 
be safe and should have an unrestricted view of the relevant 
landscape features. Consider the following recommendations for 
wayside installation. 

Major Roles
Park Maintenance
prepares site for safe 
installation.

Park Interpreter
reviews site locations 
with park maintenance 
to ensure proper 
placement.

Vista Clearing
Park staff (maintenance, interpretation, and resource managers) identify 
specific obstacles to be removed for the wayside exhibit to be successful. 
Refer to initial planning documents for a list of obstacles to clear and address 
compliance issues. Once cleared, include regular maintenance at the site to 
keep the vista clear. 

Custom Mounts
As shown above, waysides sometimes require custom mounting to existing 
railings, or other structures. The installation crew should have copies of 
approved base and installation drawings. The area may need to be closed to 
the public to ensure safe installation.

Permits and Clearances
Understand the necessary permits and clearances to install wayside exhibit 
bases, create paths or trails, or resurface wayside pads. Permissions and 
clearances should be secured well in advance of panel and base delivery.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 69

Section  C

Wayside Guide  |  Site Preparation

Stake the Sites
Before digging any holes or pouring concrete, refer to the approved Wayside 
Proposal, which identifies specific site locations, and stake each site with 
one flag for each wayside base leg. Have a copy of the final layouts on hand 
to ensure that the location of the base will match the intended view of the 
wayside panel.

Accessibility
Wayside exhibits must be installed at heights and angles favorable for 
viewing by everyone, including wheelchair users. For a low-profile exhibit the 
recommended height is 32 inches from the bottom of the exhibit frame to the 
finished grade. For an upright or bulletin board, the recommended height is 
between 24 and 36 inches from the bottom of the exhibit frame to the finished 
grade, depending on the panel size.

Wayside Pad
Accessibility guidelines recommend that wayside exhibits have level, firm, 
hard-surfaced, and slip-resistant exhibit pads.

This wayside is not only 
inaccessible to someone in 
a wheelchair, but people 
on foot would struggle to 
reach it and stay balanced.

Removing Existing Signs
Refer to the approved Wayside Proposal, which identifies the removal of 
any existing signs before installing new waysides. Some parks may have a 
separate installation plan or work order to remove existing signs.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 70

Section  C

Wayside Guide  |  Installation

Wayside bases  
delivered to Harpers Ferry 
National Historical Park

Wayside Exhibit Production Process

Production

Fabrication

Files

Site Prep Installation Archive /
Inventory

Maintain

You are here

Installation: Bases and Panels
Upon receipt of the panels and bases, the park directs the 
installation. The first task is to open the crates immediately and 
inspect the shipment for damage or missing items.

Shipping and Receiving
Identify a location, like a maintenance warehouse, to receive shipments. 
Inform the warehouse staff of delivery details, including the expected delivery 
date, size and type of delivery truck (to determine whether a forklift is 
needed), and size and weight of the shipment.

Major Roles
Park Maintenance
installs wayside bases 
and panels.

Inspection
Immediately upon receiving a delivery, the panels and bases must be 
inspected for damage or missing items. Uncrate the panels and bases and 
recycle the packing materials. Check the packing slip against the original 
order and check the items delivered against these lists. Contact the vendor 
and Contracting Officer or COR (Contracting Officers Representative) as soon 
as possible if items are missing. Keep small parts together with the bases. 
Make sure there is a manufacturers sticker on the back of each panel. 

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 71

Section  C

Wayside Guide  |  Installation

Wayside Base Installation
Install bases plumb and level. Follow instructions provided with each wayside 
base delivery. Refer to these written instructions for installation procedures.

Wayside Installation Video
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-service-base-install.htm

Panel Installation
Once the bases are securely installed, installation of the panels can begin. 
Before installing panels, fill in any relevant information like the installation 
date and exhibit number on the sticker on the back of the panel.

Tactile Model Installation
If tactile elements require drilling holes through the wayside, use a drill 
template for correct placement of holes. It is recommended that the fabricator 
provide security screws and the appropriate screwdriver for mounting a tactile 
model. Keep the security screwdriver with your cleaning kit (see page 75).

Bulletin Cases
After a bulletin case is installed, store the keys in a safe place. Inspect bulletin 
cases regularly for faded or out-of-date content. 
Audio Description
Once the waysides are installed, audio description of each wayside and its 
location can be done. Audio descriptions can be made available to visitors 
through a variety of new technologies.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 72

Section  C

Wayside Guide  |  Archive and Inventory

damaged wayside
Gulf Islands National Seashore

Wayside Exhibit Production Process

Production

Fabrication

Files

Site Prep Installation Archive /
Inventory

Maintain

You are here

Major Roles
Production Manager
archives product 
warrantees, production 
files, original graphics, 
and graphic use-rights 
agreements.

Did You Know?
Panels last 225 years 
averaging about 5 years 
before replacement is 
necessary.

Archive and Inventory
After installation several tasks must be completed to close out 
the project successfully. These are listed on the Wayside Exhibit 
Production Process chart. The most important is to archive the 
production files. The cost of replacing a wayside from archived 
files is a fraction of the cost of starting over. If your project 
is managed by Harpers Ferry Center, archived records are 
maintained at the Center. Otherwise you will need to archive the 
following: 

As-Built Files
During the production process, an error may be corrected or a change made. 
Changes made during production are often made by the fabricator. Make sure 
the files archived for future replacement are the most recent.

Warranty
Manufacturing companies often provide a written warranty for their products. 
Harpers Ferry Center maintains all warranty information for panels and bases 
produced under its contracts. 

Master Files
Keep all layered master graphic files with the production files for each 
wayside. These are Photoshop files that contain original unedited images. 
Often these files are flattened for production, but the layers of information 
should be kept in case future changes are needed.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 73

Section  C

Wayside Guide  |  Archive and Inventory

All waysides produced by 
Harpers Ferry Center are 
maintained in green three-
ring binders organized by 
park name.

Did You Know?
Harpers Ferry Center has 
digital archives for wayside 
projects for 212 parks.

14,000 waysides are listed 
in the MIDS database. 
March 2009

Keep Final Copies
Keep a printed copy of the final wayside panels or an archived PDF file to 
easily identify the number, date, content, and size of each of your wayside 
exhibits.

Use-Rights Agreements
All images not in the public domain must have a use-rights agreement 
that documents the payment and terms or conditions of the use. Keep this 
document in a safe, accessible, place with a printed copy of the final waysides.

Source Materials
All scans, prints, slides, negatives, and large-format color transparencies are 
returned to the sources. Duplicates are stored with the projects production-
ready package for future updates or replacement. 

MIDS
The NPS Media Inventory Database System (MIDS) contains data on the 
content and condition of National Park Service interpretive media, including 
wayside exhibits. MIDS permits parks to add new media inventory records, 
update existing records, or delete obsolete records. All of these steps should 
be taken to keep the MIDS database up-to-date.

FMSS
Waysides are entered into the NPS Facility Management Software System 
(FMSS) as an interpretive media asset. Refer to interpretive media business 
practices and inspection guidance documents for specific information.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 74

Section  C

Wayside Guide  |  Maintenance

Create a wayside 
cleaning kit:
backpack,
paper towels,
graffiti remover,
window cleaner,
fiberglass wax,
polishing cloth,
 written instructions 
for panel replacement, 
and a copy of the 
manufacturers 
information.

Wayside Exhibit Production Process

Production

Fabrication

Files

Site Prep Installation Archive /
Inventory

Maintain

You are here

Maintenance
Wayside exhibits are among the most durable of all interpretive 
media, usually requiring little maintenance, but their usefulness 
can be enhanced and extended by periodic inspection and care. 
We recommend that each wayside exhibit be examined and 
cleaned twice each year.

Major Roles
Park Staff
performs routine 
inspection and cleaning.

Cleaning
Regular cleaning of wayside panels, bases, and tactile models with mild 
soap and water will maintain the general appearance of the wayside and will 
remove dirt and debris that can cause more damage. Keep a well-stocked 
cleaning kit (shown above), including any special instructions and tools for 
removing or replacing panels or tactile models.

FMSS
Follow regular maintenance procedures as required according to the Facility 
Management Software System.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 75

Section  C

Wayside Guide  |  Maintenance

This panel at Canaveral 
National Seashore 
is showing extreme 
deterioration from 
weathering and should be 
replaced.

Wayside Panel Maintenance
Cleaning each exhibit with mild soap and water before inspection can reveal 
hidden damage, remove dirt or debris that may cause more damage, and 
improve the general appearance of the exhibit.

Porcelain

Problem

Solution

Common surface dirt, including  Wash with mild soap or use window 
bird droppings

cleaner

Spray paint (all types) or 
permanent markers

Apply graffiti remover

Small Chips

Wash area and apply auto touch-up 
paint

Extreme deterioration, like large  Replace panel
chips, rust spots, sharp edges, 
faded text or graphics

Digital Products (HPL, Fiberglass, Fused Polycarbonate)

Problem

Solution

Common surface dirt

Wash with mild soap and water, then apply                                                                             
marine wax or fiberglass wax
 

Spray paint (all types) or 
permanent markers

Apply graffiti remover

Extreme deterioration, like 
weathering, vandalism, faded 
text or graphics, delaminating

Replace panel

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 76

Section  C

Wayside Guide  |  Maintenance

This wayside base at 
Canaveral National 
Seashore is showing 
extreme deterioration from 
weathering and should be 
refinished.

Wayside Base Maintenance
Cleaning each exhibit base with mild soap and water before inspection can 
reveal hidden damage, remove dirt or debris that may cause more damage, 
and improve the general appearance of the exhibit.

Touch Up Painted Aluminum Bases
Minor scratches and paint chips can be repaired by applying small amounts of 
paint according to the following procedures:

Sand Area
By hand or orbital sander, first use 80-grit sandpaper, then smooth with 100-
grit sandpaper.

Clean
Wipe with a lint-free rag, using a solvent like enamel thinner or lacquer 
thinner. Wipe solvent off immediately. Do not touch the surface after cleaning.

Mix Catalyst and Paint
Mix catalyst and paint following manufacturers specifications. Paint will 
become too glossy and brittle with too much catalyst. With too little catalyst 
the paint will not cure properly and will fade quickly. Mix only what you can 
use in two hours.

Apply Paint
Depending on the amount of surface to cover, use a disposable artists brush, 
roller, or sprayer (spraying requires reducer and thinner). Stipple the fresh 
paint using a pipe cleaner folded in half to simulate the original textured 
finish. Air temperature at time of application should be from 65 to 85 degrees 
Fahrenheit. Paint dries to the touch in 3 hours, is workable in 810 hours, and 
cures in 23 days under normal conditions.

Refinishing 
If the surface of the wayside exhibit base has suffered extensive damage, the 
entire base can be repainted. Contact Harpers Ferry Center for a video guide 
to refinishing NPS wayside hardware in the field.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 77

Section  C

Wayside Guide  |  Maintenance and Rehab

Replacement
Time, budget, logistical, and environmental considerations associated with 
refinishing wayside exhibit bases in the field may suggest that replacing bases 
is a better alternative than repairing them. New bases typically cost under 
$1,000. Take the old bases to your local metal recycling center.

Vista Clearing and Site Maintenance
Park staff (maintenance, interpretation, and resource management) work 
together to inspect wayside vistas routinely to identify specific obstacles that 
may need to be removed or trimmed. Perform regular maintenance on the site 
to keep the vista clear.

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 78

Index

 Wayside Guide

A

E

Accessibility   24, 27, 29, 31, 37, 53, 64, 70 

Evaluation   10, 24, 27, 29, 53, 64, 68

 

See also Audio

See also Braille

See also Tactile

See also tactile

F

FMSS   64, 7475

G

GPS   22, 32, 34, 57

Archive   24, 3839, 55, 64, 7374

Graphics   1113, 17, 29, 7374

Audience   5, 7, 10, 14, 18, 29, 36, 4749, 5658, 

H

68

Audio   9, 10, 22

B

High-resolution   27, 54, 61, 64, 6567 

See also Production files

 

I

Base   10, 19, 24, 27, 30, 32, 3435, 41, 5759, 64, 

Illustrator   40, 5455, 57

65, 6673, 75, 77, 82 

Inspection   9, 6568, 71, 7577 

 

See also Low-profile

See also Upright

Braille   9, 22, 5759

C

 

See also Review and Approval

Installation   10, 24, 32, 33, 6872

Interpretation   710, 17, 2324, 29, 36, 49 

 

See also Park Interpreter

Cartographer   24, 40, 57, 61, 66, 83

Inventory   7374

Case Study   4346

Cleaning   9, 24, 64, 72, 7577

K

Kiosks   20

Color   32, 34, 42, 47, 5455, 57, 59, 61, 64, 66, 68 

L

 

See also Color Management

Landscape   715, 17, 30, 32, 38, 40, 42, 45, 

Color Management   61, 83

4748, 54, 5657, 59, 6970

Common Pitfalls   22, 33, 36, 47, 49, 57

Layout   12, 24, 27, 31, 35, 38, 4043, 4748, 

Contracts   2324, 28, 55, 6768, 71, 73, 83

5355, 57, 5961, 6566, 70

Credits   39, 60  See also Use-Rights

Low-profile   7, 1117, 70, 78

Custom   20, 24, 3233, 58, 64, 6567, 69

M

D

Maintenance   7, 9, 10, 24, 3133, 35, 62, 64, 69, 

Data   24, 27, 32, 3435, 37, 39, 57, 64, 74, 83

7578

Designer   27, 3034, 3847, 53, 60, 61, 6567

Map   1819, 2224, 27, 3035, 3738, 40, 53, 

Did You Know?   12, 41, 43, 48, 56, 73, 74

5661, 64, 66, 73

Digital Files   27, 33, 39, 64, 6567, 74 

MIDS   64, 73, 74

 

See also High-resolution

See also Production files

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 79

Index

 Wayside Guide

O

T

Orientation   10, 1719, 22, 27, 29, 34, 36, 5657, 

Tactile   9, 15, 27, 40, 5759, 64, 66, 68, 72, 75, 

59

P

8384

Team   2324, 27, 28, 30, 32, 34, 35, 40, 53

Panel   1518, 20, 32, 3435, 4143, 5961, 82

Text   1112, 14, 16, 18, 2122, 24, 27, 4054, 

Park Interpreter   30, 3536, 38, 40, 48, 69, 78

5758, 6061, 76

Park Maintenance (staff)   23, 24, 27, 35, 6566, 

Things To Consider   53

69, 71

Park Manager   2324, 35 

 

See also Superintendent

Permits   64, 69, 74

Tools   52, 59, 75

Typography   41, 47

U

Upright   7, 1722, 70

Planner   30, 32, 3438, 40, 53, 60, 65, 67

Use-Rights   27, 3839, 55, 61, 73

Production files   40, 61, 64, 6567, 73

V

Production Manager   6768, 73

Vista Clearing   9, 24, 35, 64, 69, 78

Project Lead   2324, 27, 28

W

R

Wayfinding   17, 22, 57

Reference   23, 27, 33, 3840, 52, 5455, 59, 66, 

What to Expect   31, 35, 39, 55, 58

73

Research   29, 33, 3839

Writer   4852

Resources   22, 24, 27, 2830, 33, 52, 57, 83

Review and Approval   2324, 27, 3435, 3840, 

5355, 60, 64, 6568 

 

See also Inspection

Roles   27, 2930, 34, 38, 40, 65, 67, 69, 71, 73, 75

S

Safety   9, 1718, 2022, 31, 48, 58, 64

Shipping   64, 68, 71

Sign Program   22, 41, 81

Site-specific   710, 22, 27, 29, 36, 3839, 45

Specifications   41, 55, 59, 64, 6566

Superintendent   2324 

 

See also Park Manager

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 80

Appendix

 Wayside Guide

The following Web addresses for in-depth webpages are listed in the order in 
which they appear in the Guide. 

Section A Site-Specific Media and Wayfinding 

Interpretive Media Selection
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/ip-media-select.htm

Evaluations and Visitor Use Studies
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/evaluate.htm

Foundations of Interpretation
http://www.eppley.org/index.php?main_page=index&cPath=40

National Park Service Sign Program
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/uniguide.htm

Park Publications and Trail Guides
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/pubs/

National Park Service Maps
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/carto/index.htm

Section B

Wayside Exhibit Development Process chart

General Information
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/ 

Project Startup

Long Range Interpretive Plans
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/ip-lrip.htm

Developing a Wayside Exhibit Team
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-team.htm

Interpretive Media Selection
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/ip-media-select.htm

Checklist To Evaluate Your Wayside Exhibits
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-process-evaluate.htm

Accessibility Rules and Recommendations
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/accessibility/index.htm

Evaluations and Visitor Use Studies
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/evaluate.htm

Wayside Exhibit Cost Estimating
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-cost-estimating.htm

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 81

Appendix

 Wayside Guide

Section B
continued

Site Analysis

Choose Panel Material
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-product-panels.htm

Choose Base Structure
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-product-bases-low.htm

Research and Graphic Acquisition

Photo Release Form
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-graphics.htm

Standards for Digital Image Files
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-graphics.htm

Design

NPS Wayside Grids
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-grids.htm

NPS Typefaces
http://www.graphics.nps.gov/typefaces.htm

Writing

Examples of Wayside Writing
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-samples.htm 

Interpretive Foundations
http://www.nps.gov/idp/interp/101/foundationscurriculum.pdf 

Effective Interpretive Writing Tel broadcast 2008-05-09
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-process-writing.htm

Bilingual Waysides
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-process-language.htm

Editorial Style Guide
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-process-writing.htm

Spanish Style Guide
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-process-language.htm

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 82

Appendix

 Wayside Guide

Section B
continued

Creating New Illustrations

HFC Commissioned Art Collection
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/art-collection.htm

Acquiring New Illustrations
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/index.htm

NPS Art Contracts
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/acquisition/contracts.htm

Creating New Maps

Designing Tactile Wayside Maps
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/accessibility/index.htm

Wayside Map Standards
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-process-maps.htm

Starter Map File
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-process-maps.htm

NPS Map Resources
http://data2.itc.nps.gov/hafe/hfc/carto.cfm

Tactile Elements

Designing Tactile Wayside Maps
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/accessibility/index.htm

Production Files

File Naming Conventions
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-grids.htm

Color Management for Designers and Cartographers
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/index.htm

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 83

Appendix

 Wayside Guide

Section C Wayside Exhibit Production Process chart

General Information
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/index.htm 

Base and Panel Fabrication

Material Choices
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-product-panels.htm

Base Fabrication Contracts
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/acquisition/contracts.htm

Panel Fabrication Contract
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/acquisition/contracts.htm

Installation

Wayside Installation Video
http://www.nps.gov/hfc/products/waysides/way-service-base-install.htm

HARPERS FERRY CENTER | NATIONAL PARK SERVICE | 1ST EDITION | OCTOBER 2009 | PAGE 84

