What is
sustainability?
Sustainability means meeting our own needs without
compromising the ability of future generations to meet their
own needs. In addition to natural resources, we also need social
and economic resources. Sustainability is not just environmentalism. Embedded in most definitions of sustainability we also find
concerns for social equity and economic development.

Where does the term come from?
While the concept of sustainability is a relatively new idea, the
movement as a whole has roots in social justice, conservationism,
internationalism and other past movements with rich histories.
By the end of the twentieth centuries, many of these ideas had
come together in the call for ‘sustainable development.’

The Bruntdland Commission

Did you know?
Adopting sustainable
practices, whether large or
small, can have significant
impacts in the long run.
If every office worker in the
United Kingdom used one
less staple a day by using
a reusable paper clip, 120
tonnes of steel would be
saved in one year.2

In 1983, the United Nations tapped former Norwegian prime
minister Gro Harlem Brundtland to run the new World Commission
on Environment and Development1. After decades of effort to raise
living standards through industrialization, many countries were
still dealing with extreme poverty. It seemed that economic
development at the cost of ecological health and social equity
did not lead to long-lasting prosperity. It was clear that the
world needed to find a way to harmonize ecology with prosperity.
After four years, the “Brundtland Commission” released its
final report, Our Common Future. It famously defines sustainable
development as:

development that meets the needs of the
present without compromising the ability
of future generations to meet their own needs.1
The Commission successfully unified environmentalism with
social and economic concerns on the world’s development agenda.
Sustainability is a holistic approach that considers ecological,
social and economic dimensions, recognizing that all must be
considered together to find lasting prosperity.
–1–

Brought to you by:

Three pillars of sustainability3
What would a sustainable world look like?
The world community
adopts sustainable
development
1979
First World Climate
Conference opens up the
science of climate change
1987
Brundtland Report
consolidates decades
of work on sustainable
development
1992
Rio Earth Summit rallies
the world to take action
and adopt Agenda 21

Environmental Sustainability
Ecological integrity is maintained, all of earth’s environmental
systems are kept in balance while natural resources within
them are consumed by humans at a rate where they are able
to replenish themselves.
Economic Sustainability
Human communities across the globe are able to maintain
their independence and have access to the resources that they
require, financial and other, to meet their needs. Economic
systems are intact and activities are available to everyone,
such as secure sources of livelihood.
Social Sustainability
Universal human rights and basic necessities are attainable
by all people, who have access to enough resources in order
to keep their families and communities healthy and secure.
Healthy communities have just leaders who ensure personal,
labour and cultural rights are respected and all people are
protected from discrimination.
–2–

1993
Convention on Biological
Diversity puts the precautionary principle to work
1997
Kyoto Protocol takes the
first step toward stopping
dangerous climate change
2000
With Millennium Development Goals, social justice
meets public health &
environmentalism
2006
Al Gore brings climate
change to the mainstream
with An Inconvenient Truth
2012
Rio+20 takes stock on
2+ decades of efforts at
sustainable development

Sustainability at the University of Alberta
The definition of sustainability is broad, and the world is a big,
diverse places. For sustainability to remain a relevant, useful
tool, it is important that it adapt to the local context. In 2010,
the Academic Advisory Committee for the Office of Sustainability
at the University of Alberta put together a working definition
of sustainability for our institution.
Sustainability is the process of living within the limits of available
physical, natural and social resources in ways that allow the living
systems in which humans are embedded to thrive in perpetuity.
The University of Alberta is committed to a continuous effort to
instill sustainability into the many aspects of university life, on
our campuses, in our institutions, and in the larger community
of which we are part. Sustainability is rapidly making its way
into teaching and learning, research, outreach, and the operations
that support them.

UAlberta’s Sustainability Plan
In 2012, the university crossed a major milestone by approving
its first Sustainability Plan. It collates the many strategic goals,
initiatives and practices that will guide the university toward
sustainability leadership. A variety of different processes plans
and people contributed to the development of the Sustainability
Plan, including student, staff and faculty engagement at many
levels. For example, the plan followed an award-winning
student-initiated public deliberation with all stakeholders on
campus called Deliberation on Campus Sustainability. The
document itself is a comprehensive guide, but also an engine
for discussion to drive sustainability forward into the future.

Why sustainability?
The motivations behind sustainability are often complex,
personal and diverse. It is unrealistic to create a list of reasons
why so many individuals, groups and communities are working
towards this goal. Yet, for most people, sustainability comes
down to the kind of future we are leaving for the next generation.
Sustainability as a value is shared by many individuals and
organizations who demonstrate this value in their policies,
everyday activities and behaviours. Individuals have played
a major role in developing our current environmental and
social circumstances. The people of today along with future
generations must create solutions and adapt.
–3–

“ Never doubt

that a small
group of
thoughtful,
committed
people can
change the
world. Indeed,
it is the only
thing that
ever has.”
– Margaret Mead

Sources:
1.	

“Our Common Future: Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development”. UN Documents. n.d. Web. Retriev ed 27 June 2013. < http://www.un-documents.
net/ocf-02.htm>

2.	

Horton, Jocelyn ed. “Mad About ... Tropical Rainforests.” Friends of the Earth. Jan 2003.
Web. Retrieved 27 June 2013. < http://www.foe.co.uk/resource/factsheets/rainforest_mad_
about.pdf>

3.	

United Nations General Assembly “48. Sustainable development: managing and protecting our common environment “2005 World Summit Outcome. 24 October 2005. Web.
Retrieved 27 June 2013. < http://daccess-dds-ny.un.org/doc/UNDOC/GEN/N05/487/60/
PDF/N0548760.pdf?OpenElement>

–4–

