Frequently Asked Questions

Frequently Asked Question 1.3

What is the Greenhouse Effect?
The Sun powers Earth’s climate, radiating energy at very short
wavelengths, predominately in the visible or near-visible (e.g., ultraviolet) part of the spectrum. Roughly one-third of the solar
energy that reaches the top of Earth’s atmosphere is reflected directly back to space. The remaining two-thirds is absorbed by the
surface and, to a lesser extent, by the atmosphere. To balance the
absorbed incoming energy, the Earth must, on average, radiate the
same amount of energy back to space. Because the Earth is much
colder than the Sun, it radiates at much longer wavelengths, primarily in the infrared part of the spectrum (see Figure 1). Much
of this thermal radiation emitted by the land and ocean is absorbed by the atmosphere, including clouds, and reradiated back
to Earth. This is called the greenhouse effect. The glass walls in
a greenhouse reduce airflow and increase the temperature of the
air inside. Analogously, but through a different physical process,
the Earth’s greenhouse effect warms the surface of the planet.
Without the natural greenhouse effect, the average temperature at
Earth’s surface would be below the freezing point of water. Thus,

Earth’s natural greenhouse effect makes life as we know it possible. However, human activities, primarily the burning of fossil
fuels and clearing of forests, have greatly intensified the natural
greenhouse effect, causing global warming.
The two most abundant gases in the atmosphere, nitrogen
(comprising 78% of the dry atmosphere) and oxygen (comprising
21%), exert almost no greenhouse effect. Instead, the greenhouse
effect comes from molecules that are more complex and much less
common. Water vapour is the most important greenhouse gas, and
carbon dioxide (CO2) is the second-most important one. Methane,
nitrous oxide, ozone and several other gases present in the atmosphere in small amounts also contribute to the greenhouse effect.
In the humid equatorial regions, where there is so much water
vapour in the air that the greenhouse effect is very large, adding a small additional amount of CO2 or water vapour has only a
small direct impact on downward infrared radiation. However, in
the cold, dry polar regions, the effect of a small ­increase in CO2 or
(continued)

FAQ 1.3, Figure 1. An idealised model of the natural greenhouse effect. See text for explanation.

	

water vapour is much greater. The same is true for the cold, dry
upper atmosphere where a small increase in water vapour has a
greater influence on the greenhouse effect than the same change
in water vapour would have near the surface.
Several components of the climate system, notably the oceans
and living things, affect atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases. A prime example of this is plants taking CO2 out of
the atmosphere and converting it (and water) into carbohydrates
via photosynthesis. In the industrial era, human activities have
added greenhouse gases to the atmosphere, primarily through the
burning of fossil fuels and clearing of forests.
Adding more of a greenhouse gas, such as CO2, to the atmosphere intensifies the greenhouse effect, thus warming Earth’s
climate. The amount of warming depends on various feedback
mechanisms. For example, as the atmosphere warms due to ­rising
levels of greenhouse gases, its concentration of water vapour

Frequently Asked Questions

i­ncreases, further intensifying the greenhouse effect. This in turn
causes more warming, which causes an additional increase in
­water vapour, in a self-reinforcing cycle. This water vapour feedback may be strong enough to approximately double the increase
in the greenhouse effect due to the added CO2 alone.
Additional important feedback mechanisms involve clouds.
Clouds are effective at absorbing infrared radiation and therefore
exert a large greenhouse effect, thus warming the Earth. Clouds
are also effective at reflecting away incoming solar radiation, thus
cooling the Earth. A change in almost any aspect of clouds, such
as their type, location, water content, cloud altitude, particle size
and shape, or lifetimes, affects the degree to which clouds warm
or cool the Earth. Some changes amplify warming while others
diminish it. Much research is in progress to better understand how
clouds change in response to climate warming, and how these
changes affect climate through various feedback mechanisms.

From the report accepted by Working Group I
of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
but not approved in detail

Frequently Asked Questions

FAQ Citation:
These Frequently Asked Questions have been taken directly from the chapters of the underlying report and are collected here.
When referencing specific FAQs, please reference the corresponding chapter in the report from whence the FAQ originated.

When referencing the group of FAQs, please cite as:
IPCC, 2007: Climate Change 2007: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fourth Assessment
Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Solomon, S., D. Qin, M. Manning, Z. Chen, M. Marquis, K.B. Averyt,
M.Tignor and H.L. Miller (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA.

