 
 

There are a number of different ways that winter storms can impact a region and the 

Dangers of 

Winter Weather 

people who live there.  Winter storms are considered deceptive killers because most deaths are 
not directly related to the storm itself.  People could get in an automobile accident on icy roads, 
have a heart attack while shoveling snow, or suffer frostbite or hypothermia from prolonged 
exposure to the cold.   
  
Wind - Some winter storms have extremely strong winds that can create blizzard conditions 
with blinding, wind driven snow, drifting, and dangerous wind chills.  These intense winds can 
bring down trees and poles, and can also cause damage to homes and other buildings. 
  
Snow - Heavy snow accumulations can immobilize a region and paralyze a city, strand 
motorists, stop the flow of supplies, and disrupt emergency services.  Buildings may collapse, 
and trees and power lines can be destroyed from heavy snow.  In rural regions,  
homes and farms may be isolated for days, and livestock could be lost.  
  
Ice - Heavy ice accumulations can bring down objects like trees, utility poles and lines, and 
communication towers.  Power can be disrupted or lost for days while utility companies repair 
the damage.  Even a small amount of ice can cause hazardous conditions for motorists and 
pedestrians.  
 
Cold - Extremely cold temperatures can accompany winter storms and be left in their wake.  
Infants and the elderly are most susceptible to prolonged exposure to the cold, which can cause 
potentially life-threatening conditions such as hypothermia and frostbite.  Below freezing 
temperatures can damage vegetation and cause pipes to freeze and burst inside homes.   
  

Exposure to cold can cause frostbite or hypothermia and become life-threatening.  What 
constitutes extreme cold varies in different parts of the country.  In the South, near freezing 
temperatures are considered extreme cold.  In the North, extreme cold means temperatures 
well below zero.  Freezing temperatures can cause severe damage to citrus fruit crops and 
other vegetation.  Pipes may freeze and burst in homes that are poorly insulated or without 
heat.   
 

 
 

Wind Chill is not the actual temperature, but rather how wind and cold actually feel on 
exposed skin.  As the wind increases, heat is carried away from the body at an accelerated rate, 
driving down the body temperature.  Animals are also affected by wind chill; however, cars, 
plants and other objects are not. 
    

 

 

Frostbite is damage to body tissue caused by extreme cold.  A wind chill of -20 

Fahrenheit (F) with light winds will cause frostbite in just 30 minutes.  Frostbite causes a loss 
of feeling and a white or pale appearance in extremities, such as fingers, toes, ear lobes or the 
tip of the nose. If symptoms are detected, get medical help immediately!  If you must wait for 
help, slowly re-warm affected areas.  However, if the person is also showing signs of 
hypothermia, warm the body core before the extremities. 
 

Hypothermia is a condition brought on when the body temperature drops to less than 
95F, and it can kill.  For those who survive, there is likely to be lasting damage to the kidneys, 
liver and pancreas.  Warning signs include uncontrollable shivering, memory loss, disorientation, 
incoherence, slurred speech, drowsiness and apparent exhaustion.  Take the persons 
temperature. If below 95F, seek medical care immediately! 
 

If Medical Care is Not Available, warm the person slowly, starting with the body 
core.  Warming the arms and legs first drives cold blood toward the heart and can lead to heart 
failure.  If necessary, use your body heat to help.  Get the person into dry clothing and wrap 
them in a warm blanket, covering the head and neck.  Do not give the person alcohol, drugs, 
coffee, or any hot beverage or food.  Warm broth is an excellent choice.  

