Mixed Curbside  

Residential Recycling  

 

Myth Busters

To Learn More Visit: 
RecycleOftenRecycleRight.com
#RORR

1.   RECYCLE ALL 

BOTTLES, CANS 
AND PAPER

2.  KEEP ITEMS  
CLEAN AND 
DRY

3.  NO 

PLASTIC 
BAGS

Always recycle:

Plastic Bottles  
& Containers

Plastic bottles, jars, jugs  
and tubs 

Food & Beverage 
Cans
Tin, aluminum, steel food 
and beverage cans

Paper
Cardboard, paper, 
newspaper, paperboard, 
magazines

Flattened Cardboard  
& Paperboard
Flatten all boxes  
(do not bundle/tie up)

Do NOT include in your mixed recycling cart: 

NO Food Waste
(Compost instead!)

NO Plastic Bags  
& Film
(Find a recycling site at 
plasticfilmrecycling.org.)

NO Foam Cups  
& Containers
(Check Earth911.org for options.)

NO Needles
(Keep medical waste out 
of recycling. Place in safe 
disposal containers like 
Waste Managements 
MedWaste Tracker box.)

1

 2014 Waste Management, Inc.MYTH: Most Americans recycle all they can 
ANSWER: False
Research shows convenience and 
commitment are required for maximum 
recycling. For instance, is there more 
than one location in a household to store 
recyclables? If not, recyclables in areas 
other than the kitchen get thrown away. 

Additionally, is there only one committed 
recycler in a household (usually the person 
who picks up after everyone)? If so, studies 
indicate making this a family/partner affair 
where everyone participates, allows the most 
recycling of the right materials. 

MYTH: The recycling arrows (Mobius) on a container 
means it is recyclable at a Material Recovery Facility 
(MRF) 
ANSWER: Only in some cases
Manufacturers strive to get eco-friendly 
information on their product labels. It sells. 
The FTC requires that a product have at 
least 60% access to local programs (like 
Material Recovery Facility processing) 
across the U.S. to include the Mobius on 
their products. However, the Mobius is not 

a reliable indicator of whether something 
gets recycled. There are thousands of plastic 
products and packaging, and each one has its 
own unique chemical recipe. Many plastics 
cannot be made into new products at this 
time. Recycle plastics by shape: bottles, jars, 
jugs and tabs.

MYTH: It doesnt matter if something belongs in the 
recycling cart, the hauler will sort everything anyway 
ANSWER: False
There are increasing amounts of non-
recyclables sent to Material Recovery 
Facilities, and every single one of them 
must be removed by hand by trained staff 
and/or mechanically sorted, or they end up 
contaminating high value recyclables. Non-
recyclable garbage placed into recycling 
containers increases the cost of the recycling 
process and will increase the cost of garbage 
and recycling collection service. 

Similarly, recyclable items placed into garbage 
containers are usually hauled to a landfill. 
Recyclables in a landfill cannot be recovered 
effectively. Even if further processing takes 
place, the full value is lost. The right thing  
to do is to put the all the right recyclables in 
the recycling container and non-recyclables 
into the garbage containers. Recyclables  
with the greatest impact are bottles, cans, 
and paper.

2

 2014 Waste Management, Inc.Plastic FAQs.  
Are these items recyclable in my curbside 
mixed recycling program?

ITEM

Plastic bottle caps/lids 

Plastic bags

Plastic film

3

ANSWER

Yes. After 
bottles are 
empty, 
plastic caps 
should be 
placed back 
on bottles.

No. Do not 
put loose 
plastic bags 
or bagged 
recyclables 
into cart 
 empty 
recyclables 
into cart.

No

MORE INFO

Until recently the plastics recycling industry was not able to 
effectively recycle bottles with caps on so the message to remove 
the cap was created. But recycling collection and processing 
technology have improved and demand for the recyclable material 
has increased and this allows for the updated caps-on recycling 
message and process. Association of Post Consumer Plastic 
Recyclers: http://www.plasticsrecycling.org/faqs/caps-on-faqs

Plastic bags are not accepted in most curbside recycling 
programs (they get tangled in the MRF equipment, breaking or 
stopping machinery.) (See KAB Sept 15, 2014 campaign). Empty 
plastic bags should go back to a participating retail outlet or 
grocery store for recycling. For more information, visit: http://
recycleyourplastics.org/Main/Plastic-bags-film.html.olc OR http://
www.plasticfilmrecycling.org/s01/s01dropoff.html

Plastic stretch wrap, bubble wrap, and other plastic films get 
tangled in the MRF equipment, breaking or stopping machinery 
(See KAB Sept 15, 2014 campaign). There are also different types 
of plastic film that are not compatible with each other and hard 
to tell apart for Material Recovery Facility workers, and even 
harder to sell if mixed together. Plastic film should go back to a 
participating retail outlet or grocery store for recycling. For more 
information, visit: http://recycleyourplastics.org/Main/Plastic-
bags-film.html OR http://www.plasticfilmrecycling.org/s01/
s01dropoff.html

 2014 Waste Management, Inc.MYTH: All plastics can be recycled.
ANSWER: False

Not all plastics can be successfully recycled. At this time, only some plastics can be made into 
new things. Recycle plastics by shape: bottles, jars, jugs and tubs.

ITEM

ANSWER

MORE INFO

Clamshell Packaging

No

Plastic eatery:  
utensils, plates and cups

No

Chip bags, nutritional bar or candy 
wrappers 

No

The plastic to go containers or containers holding berries, 
apples, bakery items, etc., are not consistently made of high-
value plastic, are difficult to recycle and are usually contaminated 
with food when disposed. See more at: http://oregonstate.edu/
sustainability/blog/2014/01/recycling-mythbusters-plastic-
recyclables

Plastic straws, utensils, including compostable utensils, plastic 
plates and plastic cups come in such a wide variety of non-
usable, low-grade plastics that it is impossible to identify and 
separate the recyclables from the non-recyclable look-alikes 
(same as the clamshells). Fast food packaging, like utensils, are 
complicated and are not readily recovered through modern 
Material Recovery Facilities (MRFs), or by secondary processors 
who buy MRF bales. 

There is no real end market for this, often hybrid material. In 
fact, there are only a few niche markets for it. Please consult 
your local municipality to discover any specialty recycling 
opportunities.

4

 2014 Waste Management, Inc.Paper/Cardboard FAQs.  
Are these items recyclable in my curbside 
mixed recycling program?

ITEM

ANSWER

MORE INFO

Cartons

Varies by 
jurisdiction

Juice boxes (no pouches), milk and juice cartons (emptied and 
rinsed, no pouches or straws) are recyclable in some areas.

Pizza boxes  
(without food  
or paper  
liners/doilies)

Yes

Clean pizza boxes (without food or paper liners/doilies) are 
acceptable. At one point, pizza boxes were made with a wax 
coating that made them not acceptable. The new pizza boxes 
(often with a paper doily serving as a moisture barrier) are high-
potential recyclables and should be included in curbside recycling 
materials. 

Single serve hot beverage cups

No

Hot paper cups and have a plastic or waxed coating that does 
not break down during the re-pulping process at paper mills. The 
plastic lids typically used on these cups are not recyclable either 
(even if they have the recycling symbol on them).

5

 2014 Waste Management, Inc.ITEM

ANSWER

MORE INFO

Napkins,  
paper towels,  
tissues

Shredded paper

No

No

Paper cups, plates

No

Napkins, paper towels and tissues are made of low-grade fiber, 
and are usually soiled when disposed. They are not recyclable in 
single stream residential Material Recovery Facilities (MRFs). The 
cardboard tube in the middle of the roll of paper towels or toilet 
tissue can be recycled.

Shredded paper is recyclable when there are large source 
separated quantities of the material, directly baled, and not 
run over a sorting system. This is an option for commercial 
customers and mobile shredding companies, but does not work 
well for residential single-stream Material Recovery Facilities 
(MRFs). Because of its size and elasticity, it does not separate 
easily from other materials, i.e. it cross-contaminates bottles 
and cans. It also blinds many of the technologies from working 
correctly in a MRF and lessens glass quality. Many municipal 
programs require its inclusion, but a small amount of shredded 
paper actually makes it back to market through MRFs.

Paper cups and plates have a plastic or waxed coating that does 
not break down during the re-pulping process at paper mills. The 
plastic lids typically used on these cups are not recyclable either 
(even if they have the recycling symbol on them).

6

 2014 Waste Management, Inc.Glass FAQs.  
Is glass recyclable in my curbside mixed 
recycling program?

ITEM

Glass Bottles & Jars

ANSWER

Varies by 
jurisdiction

MORE INFO

Glass recycling varies by jurisdiction. Glass collection varies widely 
in communities across the U.S. Some communities collect glass at 
drop off locations only, some collect glass separately at the curb 
or with other containers, and many include glass with all other 
recyclables. Bottle bill laws in CA, CT, OR, IA, MI, ME, VT, MA, 
NY allow for the return of a per-bottle deposit when bottles are 
returned to return-centers or retailers for recycling. Please refer 
to your communitys website for information on glass recycling in 
your local community.

Aerosol Can FAQs. 

ITEM

Aerosol Cans

ANSWER

Varies by 
jurisdiction

7

MORE INFO

Most of recycling programs accept empty/dry aerosol cans. 
Aerosol cans without the caps are recyclable if they are empty/
dry. If they are not, then they could be dangerous. Some fires are 
caused in baler chambers from trace amounts of can chemicals, 
and cans have been known to become projectiles when densified/
baled if propellant is still present. WM facilities and commodity 
vendors accept steel, mixed metal, and aluminum aerosol 
packages. Multi-material aerosol packages are not recyclable. 
There is no gray area here from a processor standpoint. However, 
some cities still list aerosols on their no-recycle lists. Check with 
your local municipality for further information. 

 2014 Waste Management, Inc.General FAQs. 

1. How clean is clean? 
Use a spatula to scrape cans and jars, e.g., 
peanut butter, syrup, salad dressing, oil, etc., 
or jugs, e.g., bleach, household non-toxic 
chemical cleaners, etc. 

There is no need to rinse - just empty and 
clean. With some of our severe drought 
areas, rinsing makes no sense at all.

2.  What about hoses, tanks, shower curtains, 

swing sets and everything else? 

If its not bottles, cans or paper it probably 
doesnt belong in your curbside mixed 
recycling cart and may even require  
special handling. 

There are other resources (e.g., Earth911.org) 
that can help answer questions about what 
to do with non-recyclables or household 
hazardous waste.

 2014 Waste Management, Inc. The Recycle Often. Recycle Right.SM recycling education program was developed based upon national best 
practices. Please consult your local municipality for their acceptable materials and additional details of local programs, which may differ slightly.

8

