ericsson White paper
Uen 284 23-3245 | October 2014

Measuring  
and improving 
network 
performance 

AN ANALYSIS OF NETWORK AND APPLICATION RESEARCH, TESTING AND OPTIMIZATION
As part of Internet.orgs mission to bring affordable internet access to the two-thirds of the world 
not yet connected, Facebook and Ericsson, in conjunction with XL Axiata, created a new 
methodology to measure and improve end-to-end network performance using Facebook 
application use cases. Previously, networks have been tuned to improve voice services using 
traditional network KPIs, and for large video/data downloads. This approach does not address 
mobile application performance, as the data and network signaling needs are different. Ericsson 
and Facebook were able to correlate user-centric KPIs from the Facebook application with 
network KPIs to show the links between user experience and network performance.

Making app 
coverage  
a reality 

The rise of data traffic in mobile networks has been rapid and overwhelming. Data surpassed 
voice traffic globally in 2009 and is now more than 10 times greater, while the mass adoption of 
smartphones and the data-centric applications that run on them has sparked a revolution in user 
behavior and expectations, not to mention the transformation of entire industries.

Todays users want their apps to work anywhere, anytime and at top speed, and this means 

that network performance in terms of data 
 what we call app coverage  has never 
been  more  important.  Simply  put,  app 
coverage looks at the network from a user 
perspective  and  allows  operators  to 
evaluate whether a user will be satisfied 
with their experience of a specific app in 
a  given  location  at  a  given  time.  App 
coverage brings together all aspects of 
network  performance    such  as  radio 
network throughput (see Figure 1), latency 
and capacity, as well as the performance 
of the backhaul, packet core and content 
delivery networks (CDNs), and performance 
variations  between  high-  and  low-end 
devices.

Ultimately, app coverage can be used 
as one way to judge the performance of a 
mobile operators network. App coverage 
 or a lack of it  also impacts how users 
evaluate individual apps and shapes the 
ability of app developers to provide a high-
quality user experience. Conversely, the 
way that developers design apps to relate 
to the network is also a key consideration 
in optimizing the mobile user experience.

10Mbps

1Mbps

0.1Mbps

Figure 1: App coverage (network performance from the user perspective)  
can be impacted by radio network throughput variances within a cell site.

So, the app coverage approach is important for users, developers and operators alike. But it 
turns out that it is not easy to measure quality of experience (QoE) for users within data-centric 
applications. And if you cant measure it, how do you improve it?

With this in mind, Facebook and Ericsson, together with XL Axiata, engaged in a joint project 
in the first half of 2014 to monitor, analyze and improve the user experience of Facebook  one 
of the worlds most widely used mobile apps  in a live environment in XL Axiatas network in 
Indonesia.

Ericsson developed a series of metrics on end-to-end network experience as it impacts app 
coverage. Then, using a test agent developed by Facebook, typical Facebook interactions were 
triggered and measured on different mobile devices in urban, suburban and rural regions across 
the XL Axiata coverage area.

At the same time, Ericsson and XL Axiata collected network metrics in the areas where the 
test agents were deployed. Using this data, engineers correlated both the network data and the 
end-to-end metrics and were able to develop a methodology to identify bottlenecks in the  

MEASURING AND IMPROVING NETWORK PERFORMANCE    MAKING APP COVERAGE A REALITY  

2

end-to-end setup. This resulted in substantial improvements in the radio access network (RAN), 
the core network and the CDN. Results showed app coverage improvements of 20 to 70 percent, 
defined as the number of transactions that finished within three seconds. Within that scope, time 
to content improved up to 70 percent, while upload time improved up to 50 percent.

The results show that it is possible to increase app coverage using existing network resources. 
This has the potential to benefit existing users globally and is also key to helping the next 4 billion 
internet users get online  especially in rural areas with little to no data coverage  allowing them 
to reap the benefits of a connected world: what we call the Networked Society.

MEASURING AND IMPROVING NETWORK PERFORMANCE    MAKING APP COVERAGE A REALITY   

3

How to measure 
app coverage 

In  advanced  mobile 
markets,  data  traffic  has 
long  replaced  voice  and 
SMS as the primary driver 
of  network  traffic.  In  Q1, 
2014,  mobile  data  traffic 
exceeded the total mobile 
data traffic for the whole of 
2011,  and  by  2019,  data 
traffic is now projected to 
grow  more  than  tenfold 
from its current level [1].

Devices

Apps

Smart device
ecosystem

Mobile network

Apps, smart devices and 
mobile networks  as well 
as  the  companies  and 
developers that make them 
  together  form  a  single 
ecosystem that drives most 
of this growth (see Figure 2) 
[2]. Within this ecosystem, 
apps and smart devices are continuously evolving and being upgraded, and this places high 
demands on operator networks in terms of both network coverage and network load. At the 
same  time,  each  specific  app  puts  its  own  requirements  on  the  network,  including  data 
requirements, its optimization level and impacts from its data fetch strategy. Taken together, this 
necessitates an end-to-end network view, as traditional network statistics alone may not reflect 
the actual user experience.

Figure 2: The smart device ecosystem is  
interdependent and constantly evolving.

For operators, app coverage  which can be defined as the area within a mobile networks 
coverage area that can deliver sufficient performance to run an application at an acceptable 
quality level  influences everything from brand reputation and customer loyalty to the ability to 
generate a sufficient return on investment. Expanding app coverage is also central to helping 
billions of people get connected to the internet for the first time.  

Social media apps generally require a low data throughput despite the fact that people spend 
significant time with social media apps. In the US, for instance, Nielsen found in December, 2013 
that users spent 29 percent of their mobile app time on social media [3]. 

However, while people love their apps, the apps often dont work well. Smartphone users 
commonly report slow browsing and content download speeds, as well as a lack of internet 
coverage and a high rate of app crashes. In an Ericsson ConsumerLab study, 15-20 percent of 
respondents said they experience trouble with apps very often, and a further 45-50 percent said 
they experience them on occasion [4].  These complaints can have substantial consequences: 
A 2012 study from the University of Massachusetts Amherst, in the US, and Akamai Technologies 
found that internet users start abandoning attempts to view online videos if they do not load 
properly within two seconds. As time goes on, the rate at which viewers give up on a given video 
increases [5]. 

 This is a particular issue in many Southeast Asian markets, including Indonesia, where an 
influx of cheaper smartphones  increasingly costing less than USD 100  has given people by 
the millions the chance to join social media networks. Mobile data traffic for the region is projected 
to grow by more than 10 times between 2013 and 2019, reaching 2 exabytes by 2019 [6]. In a 
new report, McKinsey has also identified Indonesia as a market well positioned for fast mobile 
internet growth due to a relatively young, literate and well-off population [7], and the country 
already has the fourth-largest Facebook user base in the world. 

MEASURING AND IMPROVING NETWORK PERFORMANCE    HOW TO MEASURE APP COVERAGE  

4

The Indonesian operator XL Axiata provides a good example of changing market and network 
realities. In 2013, its data revenue grew by 16 percent with data traffic rising by 142 percent. Of 
the companys 62.9 million subscribers, more than half of the total base is made up of data 
users, with  a majority of those using Facebook, according to XL Axiata estimates. XL Axiata 
also launched business collaborations with several social media and chat applications in 2013, 
including Facebook, in order to strengthen its position as a market leader in mobile data [8].

But transmitting data requires bandwidth, which can be scarce in many parts of the world. In 
its report, McKinsey identified infrastructure  including underdeveloped national core network, 
backhaul, and access infrastructure  as one of the four primary global barriers to connection 
[7]. For example, in Indonesia as a whole, 75 percent of users are on older 2G, or GSM/EDGE, 
networks [6], and the nations geography (it is made up of thousands of islands) presents additional 
challenges. In the ConsumerLab study, more than half of Indonesian smartphone users said they 
experienced network problems daily [4]. This can test application developers like Facebook, 
given that they often provide a visually oriented experience with constantly updated content and 
large-scale photos. 

But while there is a clear need for widespread app coverage, todays measurement tools 
provide relatively poor visibility of the true user QoE. For voice and SMS services, there have 
long existed well-known, static network KPIs, but these do not exist yet for packet data, which 
cant be effectively measured using the voice-related KPIs. Within a network, a data packet 
doesnt act like a voice call, which disappears if dropped. Instead, a packet  which can come 
from a variety of far-flung sources  remains present even if slowed by a bottleneck.

Data in a mobile network also originates from a wide spectrum of fast-evolving apps, both 
local and global, and this requires operators to make continuously updated decisions about 
service levels. On the other end, app developers face a similar uncertainty, as they must design 
their applications with myriad devices, platforms and network types  as well as performance 
levels  in mind. 

Specifically, some of the limitations impacting the ability of operators and app developers to 

actively measure user QoE include: 

 > the scarcity of samples in both space and time
 > results bias depending on when, where and how an app is used
 > the difficulty of emulating over-the-top apps and associated content. 

Both independently and as members of the Internet.org organization, Facebook and Ericsson 
have made it a priority to help operators tune and optimize their networks for better app coverage 
and more efficient data delivery, as well as to provide scaled-down apps that work well in network-
constrained and price-sensitive environments. Examples of their common efforts include the 
founding of Internet.org, with other partners, in 2013, and a related Innovation Lab, scheduled 
to open in 2014, as well as a series of hackathons aimed at improving app performance in network 
conditions found in many emerging markets [9] [10] [11]. 

But only so much can be achieved under laboratory conditions. Measuring app coverage 
effectively requires seeing how apps work on real devices in real networks in a variety of real-time 
conditions. It was with this in mind that Facebook, XL Axiata and Ericsson agreed on a joint 
project to provide visibility of both the real user QoE across the mobile subscriber base, as well 
as any associated network limitations wherever and whenever these occurred.

MEASURING AND IMPROVING NETWORK PERFORMANCE    HOW TO MEASURE APP COVERAGE   

5

Developing a 
methodology 

In this section, we will provide an overview of the objectives, methodologies, tests, measurements 
and resultant improvements and optimizations that were undertaken to better understand and 
ultimately improve the Facebook experience in XL Axiatas live commercial network. Within the 
scope of the project, Ericsson and Facebook also aimed to develop efficient tools for targeted 
drill-downs into mobile networks, as well as to enable quantification of the value of network 
optimizations in terms of real user QoE.  

Within this framework, the primary practical objectives were to:

 > build a methodology to monitor Facebook user KPIs, correlate with network statistics and 

identify bottlenecks

 > analyze and improve the Facebook experience in three clusters of XL Axiatas network
 > enable a network-wide view of Facebook application coverage in XL Axiatas network.

Starting in December, 2013, Ericsson developed a series of metrics that considered the end-to-
end network experience impacting app coverage, or, in other words, the key measurable aspects 
that could go right or wrong in the network when a user is using an app.

These metrics were then measured and gathered in a live network environment in the XL Axiata 
network during the first six months of 2014. This was done by triggering typical Facebook 
interactions  using a Facebook-developed test agent and test accounts created for this purpose 
 on different mobile devices in different regions throughout the XL coverage area. The results 
were then used to develop new strategies to improve the metrics.

DESIGNING AND PERFORMING THE TESTS
As seen in Figure 3, the methodology developed by Ericsson focused on the following:
1. defining KPIs, test cases (based on typical Facebook use cases)  

and test tools

2. making preparations for measurements
3. executing the test case
4. analyzing and defining an improvement plan, including analysis  

of end-to-end bottlenecks and proposed improvement areas

5. executing the improvement plan in a small area of the operator network
6. repeating test cases
7.  analyzing improvements.

Specifically  for  this  project,  engineers  at 
Facebook developed a custom test agent that 
was designed for extreme stability and that 
used  the  same  networking  stack  as  the 
commercial  Facebook  app. The  Android-
based test agent triggered typical Facebook 
use cases (test cases) by communicating with 
Facebook content servers in the same ways 
as the commercial app, and reported user-
centric KPIs for a better understanding of the 
Facebook user experience. The test agent 
also generated additional data that could be 
correlated with XL Axiata network statistics 
in order to determine the link between user 
experience and network performance.

Define KPIs,
test cases
and test tools

Execute test
cases

Execute
improvement
plan

Analyze
improvements

Preparations
for measure-
ments

Analysis and
definition of
improvement
plan

Repeat test
cases

Prepare final
report

Figure 3: Methodology used to improve app coverage in the XL Axiata mobile network.

MEASURING AND IMPROVING NETWORK PERFORMANCE    DEVELOPING A METHODOLOGY  

6

The  use  cases,  illustrated  in  Figure  4,  included  feed 
template download, single and multipicture download and 
single picture upload  all actions that are performed on the 
commercial app hundreds of millions of times a day.

The  test  agent  was  then  loaded  onto  two  types  of 
smartphones  a higher-end model and a lower-end one. Both 
featured  enough  compute  power  to  eliminate  device 
limitations as a factor in the testing, while still enabling clear 
identification  of  any  device-driven  differences  in  user 
experience.

Simultaneously with the development of the test agent, 
Ericsson and XL Axiata prepared the network with tracing in 
the RAN nodes and with network probes for analysis of user 
plane behavior, among other actions. In addition, for each 
network measurement, the data was tagged with a number 
of parameters including time, device and which cell it used. 
It was also necessary to define thresholds on how to define 
app  coverage  within  the  XL  Axiata  network. The  rough 
parameter for a download was three seconds.  

A total of six devices were then distributed in three clusters 
 urban, suburban and rural  within the XL Axiata network: 
Gambir in central Jakarta, Bintaro in suburban Jakarta and 
Tigaraksa outside Jakarta.  

During four measurement rounds between January and 

XL Axiata

mobile network

Figure 4: Typical Facebook use cases (feed template download, 
single and multipicture download and single picture upload) 
were used as test cases and triggered by the test agent.

June, 2014, the test agent anonymously triggered typical Facebook user interactions in three 
types of week-long test sessions: stationary tests with the agent running 24/7; drive tests twice 
a day at high and low traffic times; and hotspot stationary tests for three hours per day. The 
tests resulted in hundreds of thousands of measurement samples.

When the test agent showed a poor user experience, it was then possible to analyze the bad 
sample and identify where in the network the issues seemed to occur (such as in the RAN, core 
or CDN) and then dig deeper based on that information. 

With this in place, Ericsson and Facebook were able to correlate user-centric KPIs reported 
by the test agent with network KPIs. This allowed them to develop an outside-in troubleshooting 
approach, working from actual user experience, not just network data.  

The approach can be summarized with the following points:

 > understand the user experience  compare Facebook user data from different devices, 
geographical locations and time of day in order to understand good and bad user experience
 > drill down on bad samples  analysis of probe data to understand where in the network 
problems occur, plus analysis of agent data to understand which types of transactions go 
wrong, for example, Transport Layer Security setup or object transfers

 > drill down on network elements  detailed analysis of statistics and configurations of network 

nodes and elements to pinpoint bottlenecks and issues

 > identification of key bottlenecks  define which key bottlenecks and improvement areas have 

the highest impact on user experience.

MEASURING AND IMPROVING NETWORK PERFORMANCE    DEVELOPING A METHODOLOGY  

7

Results and 
improvements 

Results from the tests illustrated the impact of device selection and traffic patterns, as well as 
the correlation between Facebook experience and mobile network traffic load. System-wide 
bottlenecks and other issues in the RAN, domain name system (DNS) servers and CDN were 
also identified.

RAN
Issue: In the RAN, problems were found with parameter settings and capacity bottlenecks, as 
well as due to a lack of features. For example, the higher-end smartphone took significantly 
longer than the lower-end smartphone to upload photographs, which was due to a parameter 
settings issue.

Response: Ericsson and XL Axiata performed optimizations of coverage, uplink performance 
parameters and RAN capacity parameters.

DNS SERVERS
Issue: DNS servers take the domain names of websites and apps and translate them into IP 
addresses, in order for connected devices to identify each other over the internet. XL Axiatas 
DNS servers experienced a high processing load, and measurements from the test agent revealed  
that this had a significant impact on user QoE. Results showed that objects, such as photographs, 
might download in 0.5 to 3 seconds, while DNS resolution could skyrocket to 10 to 35 seconds. 
This delay would render the user experience so bad that the app would appear to be not working.

Response: XL Axiata performed a series of reconfigurations, parameter tunings and capacity 
upgrades, which have the potential to improve QoE over its entire network.

CDN
Issue: CDNs are used by content providers  including app developers such as Facebook  to 
deliver content, and they are usually distributed globally. Data in one action can potentially come 
from multiple locations, and the Facebook test agent recorded content coming to the test devices 
from as near as Jakarta and as far away as the US, Europe and South America.

This geographic spread had a real impact on QoE. Looking at the worst 10 percent of samples, 
the local servers, which processed 16 percent of data, had a time to content of three seconds, 
while more distant servers had a time to content of up to 20 seconds.  

Response: In response, Facebook redirected traffic to different servers that were closer and had 
better connectivity to XL Axiatas network. 

IMPROVEMENTS
After the RAN, DNS and CDN adjustments were performed, there were dramatic improvements 
in performance on the Facebook test agent. 

In order to have the greatest possible impact on user experience, many improvements were 
focused on fixing the worst performing scenarios. So, for instance, in stationary rural tests on 
the worst 10 percent of scenarios, time to content was lowered from 9 seconds to 2.8 seconds 
on the lower-end smartphone. 

The final results of the combined changes to the RAN, DNS and CDN showed app coverage 
improvements  of  40  to  70  percent. Within  that  scope,  time  to  content  improved  by  up  to  
80 percent, while upload time improved by up to 50 percent.  

MEASURING AND IMPROVING NETWORK PERFORMANCE    RESULTS AND IMPROVEMENTS 

8

Conclusion

Mobile networks were first dimensioned 
primarily to serve voice traffic, but data 
has decisively overtaken voice and SMS 
as the primary driver of network traffic. 
With this in mind, the concept of app 
coverage should play a central role for 
operators and app developers alike, as 
it offers an integrated view of network 
coverage, capacity and quality relative 
to a specific app.

However, to date, there have not been 
adequate KPIs for measuring user QoE 
on  data-centric  applications.  At  the 
same  time,  networks  in  fast-growing 
emerging markets are often particularly 
challenged  when  it  comes  to  data 
performance. 

Mobile network metrics

App metrics

Improved

app coverage

Figure 5: Correlating user-centric KPIs and network KPIs is key to improving app coverage.

Ericsson, Facebook and XL Axiata came together to increase the visibility of real user experience 
and its relation to network capabilities. Facebook and Ericsson together created an innovative 
methodology and app test agent that  combined with extensive network preparations and 
monitoring of the XL Axiata network  helped to identify key issues and bottlenecks that affect 
user metrics, such as time to content within the Facebook app.

These bottlenecks in the RAN, core and CDN were identified by correlating user-centric KPIs 
with network KPIs (Figure 5). This kind of intelligent correlation and end-to-end understanding 
of the network then made it possible to understand the user experience in various network 
conditions.

By addressing these issues, the user experience on the Facebook app in the XL Axiata network 
was improved substantially, with app coverage rising by 40 to 70 percent. Many of the changes 
 particularly in the DNS and CDN  have systemic applications that could improve performance 
across the entire XL Axiata network and for all of Facebooks mobile users, respectively. 

XL Axiata now has the ability to focus network improvements on the areas that impact its users 
most, and this cost-effective approach to improving network performance positions the company 
as a data leader within its market. Facebook was able to better understand the many network 
variables that can impact user adoption, which is especially critical as Facebook and Ericsson 
work to connect hundreds of millions, if not billions, of unconnected people to the internet.

Finally, Ericsson has developed a replicable model for monitoring, analyzing, measuring and 
improving app coverage. This model can now be applied to any mobile network to help operators 
cost-effectively target network improvements in the areas that will have the most impact on user 
satisfaction, loyalty and retention.

This white paper has been developed in collaboration with Facebook, Inc., and PT XL Axiata 
Tbk.

ABOUT INTERNET.ORG
Internet.org is a global partnership between technology leaders, nonprofits, local communities 
and experts, who are working together to bring the internet to the two-thirds of the worlds 
population that doesnt have it. 

This effort will require two key innovations:
1. bringing down the underlying costs of delivering data 
2. using less data by building more efficient apps.

MEASURING AND IMPROVING NETWORK PERFORMANCE    CONCLUSION 

9

If the industry can achieve a tenfold improvement in each of these areas  delivering data 
and building more efficient apps  then it becomes economically reasonable to offer free 
basic services to those who cannot afford them, and to begin sustainable delivery on the 
promise of connectivity as a human right.

To make this a reality, Internet.org partners, as well as the rest of the industry, need to 
work together to drive efficiency gains across platforms, devices and operating systems. 
By creating more efficient technologies, we will be able to speed up the rollout of more 
sophisticated technologies that provide higher-quality experiences to more people in 
developing countries, while also enabling the industry to continue growing and investing 
in infrastructure development. As we work together toward this common goal, we aim to 
achieve shared learnings and advances that move the industry and society forward.

MEASURING AND IMPROVING NETWORK PERFORMANCE    CONCLUSION 

10

 GLOSSARY

CDN 
DNS 
KPI 
RAN 
QoE 

 
 
 
 
 

content delivery network
domain name system
key performance indicator
radio access network
quality of experience 

MEASURING AND IMPROVING NETWORK PERFORMANCE    GLOSSARY 

11

 References

1.  Ericsson, June 2014, Ericsson Mobility Report. Available at:  

http://www.ericsson.com/res/docs/2014/ericsson-mobility-report-june-2014.pdf

2.  Ericsson, September 2013, App coverage  rethinking network performance for smartphones. 

Available at:  
http://www.ericsson.com/res/docs/whitepapers/wp-app-coverage.pdf

3.  Nielsen, February 2014, How Smartphones are Changing Consumers Daily Routines Around 
the Globe. Available at: http://www.nielsen.com/content/corporate/us/en/insights/news/2014/
how-smartphones-are-changing-consumers-daily-routines-around-the-globe.html

4.  Ericsson ConsumerLab, June 2013, Keeping Smartphone Users Loyal. Available at:  

http://www.ericsson.com/res/docs/2013/consumerlab/keeping-smartphone-users-loyal.pdf

5.  Krishnan, S. Shunmuga and Sitaraman, Ramesh K., 2012. University of Massachusetts, 

Amherst and Akamai Technologies. Video Stream Quality Impacts Viewer Behavior: Inferring 
Causality Using Quasi-Experimental Designs. Available at:  
http://www.akamai.com/dl/technical_publications/video_stream_quality_study.pdf

6.  Ericsson, June 2014, South East Asia and Oceania  Ericsson Mobility Report Appendix.  

Available at: http://www.ericsson.com/res/docs/2014/regional-appendices-sea-final-screen.pdf

7.  McKinsey & Company, September 2014, Offline and falling behind: Barriers to Internet 

adoption. Available at: http://www.mckinsey.com/Insights/High_Tech_Telecoms_Internet/
Offline_and_falling_behind_Barriers_to_Internet_adoption

8.  XL Axiata, February 2014, Strong Data Momentum Continues. Available at: 

http://www.xl.co.id/corporate/en/investor/informationi/strong-data-momentum-continues

9.  Facebook, August 2013, Technology Leaders Launch Partnership to Make Internet Access 
Available to All. Available at: https://newsroom.fb.com/news/2013/08/technology-leaders-
launch-partnership-to-make-internet-access-available-to-all/

10. Ericsson, February 2014, Ericsson and Facebook create Innovation Lab for Internet.org.

Available at: http://www.ericsson.com/news/1763215

11. Internet.org, January 2014, Internet.org Efficiency Hackathon [video]. Available at:  

http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_detailpage&v=7RirBDXGz_w

MEASURING AND IMPROVING NETWORK PERFORMANCE    REFERENCES 

12

